4. Fa UE IEERE os a ee 2. + EEE EN en either Bu hen ee: Eee GS oe ¢ sty Sa Vane a Sarat re ore a= ie fhe Ee eee a ES =; see = 3! “el EEE who EEE, Banh ha £17, Tetum aerate 8 22a re ~ pe aD ar TEL ts nen WE) : An III Bb CORNELL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY GIFT OF Coolidge Otis Chapman (Cornell, PhD 1927) Cornell University The original of this book is in the Cornell University Library. There are no known copyright restrictions in the United States on the use of the text. http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924059937 726 SYR GAWAYNE; A COLLECTION oF ANCIENT ROMANCE-POEMS, BY SCOTISH AND ENGLISH AUTHORS, is RELATING TO THAT CELEBRATED KNLGHT OF THE ROUND TABLE, WITH AN INTRODUCTION, NOTES, AND A GLOSSARY. By SIR FREDERIC MADDEN, K.H., F.R.S., F.S.A., M.R.LA., Corr. F.S.A.E., &c. KEEPER OF THE MSS. IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM. LONDON: PRINTED BY RICHARD AND JOHN E. TAYLOR. M.DCCC.XXXIX. AT a MEgTiNG OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE BANNATYNE * CLus, held at Edinburgh in the Hall of the Antiquarian Society, on Monday the 29th of August, 1836 : RESOLVED, That a Volume intitled Spr Gawapne, A Correction or Ancient RomancsE-Porems BY SCOTISH AND ENGLISH AUTHORS, RELATING TO THAT CELEBRATED KNIGHT OF THE RounpD TaBLE, be printed at London, for the use of the Members, under the superintendence of Str Freperic Mappen, K.H. DAVID LAING, Secretary. THE BANNATYNE CLUB. AUGUST, M.DCCC.XXXIX. THOMAS THOMSON, ESQ. PRESIDENT. THE EARL OF ABERDEEN. & THE EARL OF ASHBURNHAM. THE DUKE OF BEDFORD. LORD BELHAVEN AND HAMILTON. ROBERT BELL, ESQ. WILLIAM BELL, ESQ. WILLIAM BLAIR, ESQ. THE REV. PHILIP BLISS, D.C.L. 10 JOHN BORTHWICK, ESQ. Me BERIAH BOTFIELD, ESQ. THE MARQUIS OF BREADALBANE. GEORGE BRODIE, ESQ. CHARLES DASHWOOD BRUCE, ESQ. O. TYNDALL BRUCE, ESQ. THE DUKE OF BUCCLEUGH AND QUEENSBERRY. JAMES CAMPBELL, ESQ. WILLIAM CLERK, ESQ. HON. HENRY COCKBURN, LORD COCKBURN, VICEPRESIDENT. THE BANNATYNE CLUB. * DAVID CONSTABLE, ESQ. ANDREW COVENTRY, ESQ. JAMES T. GIBSON-CRAIG, ESQ., TREASURER. WILLIAM GIBSON-CRAIG, ESQ. GEORGE CRANSTOUN, ESQ. JAMES DENNISTOUN, ESQ. GEORGE DUNDAS, ESQ. RIGHT HON. W. DUNDAS, LORD CLERK REGISTER. LORD DUNFERMLINE. LORD FRANCIS EGERTON. SIR CHARLES DALRYMPLE FERGUSON, BART. ROBERT FERGUSON, ESQ. GENERAL SIR RONALD C. FERGUSON. COUNT MERCER DE FLAHAULT. HON. JOHN FULLERTON, LORD FULLERTON. WILLIAM GOTT, ESQ. ROBERT GRAHAM, ESQ. LORD GRAY. RIGHT HON. THOMAS GRENVILLE. THE EARL OF HADDINGTON. 40 THE DUKE OF HAMILTON AND BRANDON. ED. W. A. DRUMMOND HAY, ESQ. SIR THOMAS BUCHAN HEPBURN, BART. JAMES MAITLAND HOG, ESQ. LORD HOLLAND. JOHN HOPE, ESQ., DEAN OF FACULTY. COSMO INNES, ESQ. DAVID IRVING, LL.D. THE BANNATYNE CLUB. JAMES IVORY, ESQ., SOLICITOR-GENERAL. SIR HENRY JARDINE, KT, 50 HON. FRANCIS JEFFREY, LORD JEFFREY. JOHN GARDINER KINNEAR, ESQ. THE EARL OF KINNOULL. DAVID LAING, ESQ., SECRETARY. THE EARL OF LAUDERDALE. REV. JOHN LEE, D.D. ALEXANDER WELLESLEY LEITH, ESQ. LORD LINDSAY. . JAMES LOCH, ESQ. LORD LOVAT. 60 THE MARQUIS OF LOTHIAN. ALEXANDER MACDONALD, ESQ. WILLIAM M’DOWALL, ESQ. HON. J. H. MAGKENZIE, LORD MACKENZIE. JAMES MACKENZIE, ESQ. JOHN WHITEFOORD MACKENZIE, ESQ. WILLIAM FORBES MACKENZIE, ESQ. JAMES MAIDMENT, ESQ. THOMAS MAITLAND, ESQ. VISCOUNT MELVILLE. 70 WILLIAM HENRY MILLER, ESQ. THE EARL OF MINTO. HON. SIR J. W. MONCRIEFF, LORD MONCRIEFF. HON. SIR JOHN A. MURRAY, LORD MURRAY. WILLIAM MURRAY, ESQ. MACVEY NAPIER, ESQ, THE BANNATYNE CLUB. SIR FRANCIS PALGRAVE. LORD PANMURE. HENRY PETRIE, ESQ, SIR THOMAS PHILLIPPS, BART. 80 EDWARD PIPER, ESQ. ROBERT PITCAIRN, ESQ. ALEXANDER, PRINGLE, ESQ. JOHN RICHARDSON, ESQ. THE EARL OF ROSEBERY. RIGHT HON. A. RUTHERFURD, LORD ADVOCATE. THE EARL OF SELKIRK. JAMES SKENE, ESQ. WILLIAM SMYTHE, ESQ. THE EARL SPENCER. 90 JOHN SPOTTISWOODE, ESQ. EDWARD STANLEY, ESQ. a MAJOR-GENERAL SIR JOSEPH STRATON. THE HON. CHARLES FRANCIS STUART. THE DUKE OF SUTHERLAND. ALEXANDER THOMSON, ESQ. WALTER C. TREVELYAN, ESQ. DAWSON TURNER, ESQ. ADAM URQUHART, ESQ. RIGHT HON. SIR GEORGE WARRENDER, BART. 100 THE VEN. ARCHDEACON WRANGHAM. INTRODUCTION, In collecting for the first time the various Scotish and English poems relating to one of the most celebrated Knights of the Round Table, it might seem desirable to examine critically the sources whence the history of his exploits has been derived. But the subject is of such vast extent, is involved in so much obscurity, and, moreover, has been discussed with such conflicting theories and assertions, that the limits I here propose to myself will only allow me to state in succinct terms the conclusions which, after a long course of reading, I have arrived at. The inquiry divides itself into two branches, closely connected together ; the first of which embraces the question of the antiquity of Welsh or Armorican traditions, and the share of Geoffrey of Monmouth in the compilation of the far-famed Brut; the second includes the history of the ponderous French prose Romances of the Round Table, their authors, and the period of their composition. With regard to the former, it is impossible, I think, for any one, who is not prejudiced, to read the arguments of Ellis, Price, De la Rue, and the Author of © Britannia after the Romans,” with the testimonies produced, and not to admit, that previous to the time of Geoffrey a mass of popular traditions relating to Arthur and his chivalry must have existed, and was circulated first by the native bards, and afterwards by the Anglo-Norman minstrels. b X INTRODUCTION. On these traditions the earliest Prose Romances appear to have been subsequently based, the materials for which were arranged, embellished, and enlarged by the imagination and invention of the various compilers. It is true that these writers are unanimous in referring to a Latin original, from which they profess to translate; and although the existence of such a work is called in question by Ritson, Scott, and Southey, yet I am not prepared altogether to deny it*. But setting this aside, it appears to me, after a somewhat laborious perusal of the printed editions of these works, compared with existing manuscripts, that they must have been compiled in the following order.—1. The Roman du Saint Graal, sometimes intitled the Roman de Joseph d’ Arimathie, composed by Robert de Borron. In the printed editions this is called the first part of the Saint Graal. 2. The Roman de Merlin, by the same. 3. The Roman de Lancelot du Lac, composed by Walter Mapf. 4. The Roman du Quéte du Saint Graal, by the same. In the editions this forms the second part. 5. The Roman de la Mort Artus, by the same, and originally distinct, but in the printed editions united to the Lancelot. 6. The first portion of the Roman de Tristan, by Luces, Seigneur de Gast. 7. The conclusion of Tristan, by Helie de Borron; and 8. The Roman de Gyron le Courtois, by the same. Of these the first six were written in the * Southey writes, © I do not believe that any of these Romances ever existed in Latin.— By whom or for whom could they have been written in that language?” Pref. to Morte @’ Arthur, p. xvi. I merely stop to reply, that it is not more unreasonable to suppose a Latin work should have existed on the exploits of Arthur than on those of Charlemagne. I may also add, for the information of those whom it may concern, that I have myself read no less than five Latin romances still existing in manuscript, some of which are of considerable length. Three of these relate to Arthur, Meriadoe, Gawayne, and other British heroes; the fourth is the original of Chaucer’s Tale of Constance ; and the fifth is the Knight of the Swan. + This is the mode in which his name is spelt in the ancient MSS. of the Romances, and it thus appears in an original charter preserved in the Cotton collection, by which he grants to Aunfelisa and her son John twelve acres of land in Wilesdune, part of his prebend of Mapesbury, co. Middlesex. Among the witnesses to this charter is © Filippo Map, nepote meo.” INTRODUCTION. xi latter half of the twelfth century, and the remainder in the first half of the thirteenth. To these must be added the metrical romances composed by Chrestien de Troyes, between the years 1170 and 1195, as also the later prose compilations of Rusticien de Pise and his followers, in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. Having thus, I trust, successfully pointed out a clue to the labyrinth in which all our writers on early poetry have lost themselves, I shall proceed to consider the history, character, and exploits assigned to our Hero Spr Gawapne in this phalanx of romance authorities ; the utility of which in illustrating the Arthurian cycle of fiction will be admitted, perhaps, as a sufficient excuse for the space it may occupy. Our attention is naturally directed in the first place to the remains of the Welsh bards, but from those at present extant we learn but little. In the Triads we find Gwalchmai, the son of Gwyar, (who is identified with the Walwainus or Galwanus of Geoffrey and the Gauvain of the Anglo-Norman romancers,) recorded as one of the three golden-tongued or eloquent chiefs, whose persuasion none could resist ; and in another passage, he is named as one of the three chiefs most courteous to strangers and guests*, There is extant also a dialogue between Gwalchmai and Trystant, and some of his adventures are preserved in the Red Book of Hergest, in Jesus College, Oxford, but I should apprehend that all of these have been borrowed from the Anglo-Norman romance-writers{. Certain it is, that the stories in the Ma- * Thus also in the Roman de Meliadus, when Arthur and his knights are out riding, a stranger comes up, and inquires for the king. —‘ Et messire Gauvain, qui estoit nouvel chevalier & celluy temps, qui estoit si debonaire et si courtois © toutes choses, que de sa courtoisie alloient parlant les estranges et les privez, respondit, ‘Ouy, sire, veez le la;” et luy monstra le roy Artus.” f. xv», fol. ed. 1528. + Printed at length in Lady C. Guest’s edition of the Mabinogion, pt. i. p. 118, 8vo, 1839. { Leland says in his Assertio Arthuri, © Melchinus, vates Britannicus, Gallovini celebrat nomen.” Collectan., v. 24 ; and Bale adds, that this Melchin wrote De Arthuri mensa rotunda. b2 Xli INTRODUCTION. binogion referred to by Owen and others as proofs of the antiquity of the British traditions respecting Gawayne, are only translations of the Chevalier au Lion and the Perceval le Gallois. Turning therefore to Geoffrey of Monmouth, whose history was finished about the year 1138*, and, consequently, at least twenty years earlier than the presumed date of any Anglo-Norman romance on the Round Table, we collect the following particulars. Walwainus was the eldest son of Loth, sovereign of the province of Lothian and the adjacent territories, including the Orkneys, by Annat, half-sister of Arthur. At the age of twelve years he was sent by his uncle to Rome, and delivered to the charge of Pope Sulpicius, from whom he received knighthood{. The next mention of him occurs as one of the chiefs who accompanied Arthur to France, to encounter the Romans. He is sent§ with two others to treat with the emperor Lucius Tiberius, and purposely, to provoke a war, he cuts off the head of the emperor’s nephew. In the decisive battle which shortly afterwards took place near Langres, he held with Hoel the joint command of the fourth division of Arthur’s forces, and his prowess contributed See what is said of his work on Glastonbury by the former, De Scriptt. Britannicis, vol. i. P- 41 ; and compare Collectanea, iv. 153, with the work of John of Glastonbury, published by Hearne, 8vo, 1726, vol. i. pp. 30, 55. * See Dr. Lloyd’s letter to Price, in Owen’s British Remains, 8vo, 1777. The author of « Britannia after the Romans,” never could have read this, although he refers to it, and he is much mistaken, p. 21, in asserting that Sigebert of Gemblou, who died in 1112, was acquainted with Geoffrey’s History, and thus confounding Sigebert with his interpolator. For Sigebert's genuine text see the edition of Mirzus, 4to, Antv. 1608. + Ellis says, that according to the chronicles of Brittany, Anna was married to Budic, king of Armorica, and her sister united to Loth. Metr. Rom. i. 59, ed. 1811. In the English metrical Arthour and Merlin Gawayne’s mother is named Belisent, p. 97, 4to, 1838, and in Malory’s Morte d’ Arthur, she is called Margawse, i. 4. 4to, 1817.° + This passage is singularly misunderstood by Fordun, lib. 3, c. 25. § Wace, Lazamon, and Robert of Brunne add, that the cause of his being selected was that from his education at Rome he understood both the Latin and the British tongues. INTRODUCTION. X1ll mainly to the victory. He fights with the emperor single-handed, but they are separated by the surrounding combatants, and in the melee the latter is slain. After this succeeds the history of Mordred’s treason, the return of Arthur, and the destruction of his Round Table. _ The translators and imitators of Geoffrey have altered and amplified the above outline, but the general features remain the same. Wace has mistaken one passage in Geoffrey, and says that Gawayne arrived from Rome to assist Arthur in his expedition to Norway*; and this interpretation is followed by Lazamon and Robert of Brunne. The passage in the latter is hitherto inedited, and may therefore be quoted here. Loth sone, Syr Wawan, Had bene at Rome to lere Romayn, W' Supplice the pape to wonne, Honour to lere, langage to konne. Ther was he dubbid knyght, And holden hardy, strong and wight. Syr Supplice had don his ende, To Bretayn home Wawan gan wende. Noble he was and curteis, Honour of him men rede and seis ; He lufed mesure and fair beryng, Pride ne boste lufed he no thing ; Fals and fikele lesyng he hated, Auauntour alle suilk he bated ; More he gaf than he hette, More he did than terme of-sette. MS. Inner Temple, No. 511, 7. f. 63, e. 2. Throughout the Brut, Gawayne is uniformly eulogised in similar terms, and placed first on the list of the Round Table,—a su- * Roman du Brut, ii. 79, 8vo, Rouen, 1839. Ellis also commits the same error, and increases it by saying, that Gawayne was invested with arms by Arthur. Metr, Rom, i. 65. xiv INTRODUCTION. periority indeed which in that work there were no Lancelots or Tristans to dispute. His adventures are, however, confined to the circle already described, and contain so small a share of the marvellous, that they might easily have been accepted as grave matter of history. It is to the authors, therefore, of the prose legends of the Round Table we must look for the invention or preservation of those numerous romantic narratives which record the exploits of Gawayne and his fellows on a more ample canvass, and clothe them with a character purely imaginative. In the earliest of these, the Roman du Saint Graal, sometimes called the Roman de Joseph d’ Arimathie, the knights of the Round Table are not commemorated, since it relates more particularly to the history of the Holy Vessel, and to the fabulous descendants of Joseph, in whose hands the miraculous relique remained, until its arrival in Britain. The second on the list is Merlin, which perhaps is the most curious of the series, and best intitled to be considered a compilation founded on Armorican or Welsh traditions. In this we recognise the Gawayne of Geoffrey, but with such additions to his history, and such a marvellous character given to his exploits, as to render him the chief personage in the romance. The writer exhausts all his powers of language in praise of the valor, courtesy, and knightly bearing of the prince of Orkney :—‘ Car le compte dit, que ce fut le plus saige chevalier en toutes choses qui fust au siecle, et le mieulx aprins, et le plus courtois, et le moins mesdisant @ aultruy*.” At the period of his birth Merlin pronounces his eulogium to Arthur, as destined to be one of the best and most loyal knights in the world. At an early age he comes with his three brothers to assist the British monarch in his war against the * Vol. ii. f. 51°, ed. 1498, 4to. INTRODUCTION. Xv Saxons, who were then ravaging the kingdom, and after a series of sanguinary battles succeeds in expelling them. On account of his prowess he is made a knight of the Round Table, and appointed by Arthur constable* of his household, and the next of rank to himself. After this he is employed in an expedition against king Claudas of Gaul and his Roman allies, whom he defeats with immense slaughter. At a later period of the history he is employed against the Roman emperor, and the narrative here is nearly similar to that of Geoffrey. In one MS. I have consulted, it is stated that Gawayne slew the emperor with his own handf, and it is singular, that Peter de Langtoft should preserve this tradition, as expressed by his translator, Robert of Brunne, I kan not say who did him falle, Bot Syr Wawayn said thei alle.—f. 80°. The most surprising adventure of our hero in this romance is related at the close, in which he goes in search of his friend Merlin to the forest of Broceliande, which is cited at length by Southey, in his Notes to the Preface of Morte d’ Arthur, p. xlvi. It is in this work we also find the first mention of the supernatural strength of Gawayne, which augmented and diminished at different hours of the day. In the English metrical translation it is thus described : For of his strengthe the maner Sumdel ye may lern and here. ' Bituen auen-song and night He no hadde bot o mannes might, * MS. Add. 10, 292, f. 151». The printed edd. for connestablie read moictie. + Ibid. f. 209. The printed ed. vol. ii. f. 154, follows the account of Geoffrey, but in a previous passage, vol. ii. f. 24, names the emperor Julius Cesar, and says he was slain by Gawayne. This, however, is not in the MS., and seems to be an interpolation. + See the original French text, MS, Cott. Jul. D. V. f. 39. XV1 INTRODUCTION. And that strengthe him last Fort arnemorwe, bi the last ; And fram arnemorowe to the midday He had strengthe of knightes tuay ; Fram midday fort after-none He nadde strengthe bot of one ; Fram afternone to euensong So to knightes he was strong *. In the Lancelot du Lac, the next of the series, we are introduced to another race of heroes and a different set of adventures, connected only with the Merlin by the history of the war undertaken against King Claudas, and an incidental notice of the Saxons, as enemies of Arthur. Of course Lancelot is here the principal personage, and his intrigue with Queen Guenever the main-spring of the story, yet we find Sir Gawayne only inferior to Lancelot himself, and on some occasions the writer seems to have balanced between the two. Throughout the greater part of the romance they are represented as being the most intimate friends, and it is only after the blind fury of Lancelot has sacrificed three of Gawayne’s brothers, that the latter entertains sentiments of hostility against their destroyer. He vows vengeance, and the result is the war undertaken by Arthur against the * Romance of Arthour and Merlin, 4to, 1838, p. 178, printed for the Maitland Club. I am sorry to perceive the text of this edition abound with so many errors. It is in general closely translated from the French romance, and concludes imperfectly at fol. cc. of vol. i. of the edition of 1498. In the original the above passage appears thus, * Quant il se levoit au matin, il avoit la force al millor chevalier del monde ; et quant vint @ eure de prime, si li doubloit, et & eure de tierce ausi ; et quant ce vint & eure de midi, si revenoit © sa premiere force, ou il avoit esté au matin ; et quant vint & eure de nonne, et & toutes les eures de la nuit, estoit il toudis en sa premiere force.” MS. Add. 10,292, f. 113% Compare this passage in the printed edition, vol. i. f. cxiv. and corresponding passages in the Roman de Lancelot, vol. i. f. xciii®., vol. ii. f. lxix., vol. iii. f. clxxxvii., ed. 1513., (where there is a fable introduced to account for the miraculous gift) ; Roman de Perceval, ff. liii®., Ix’. ed. 1530; Malory’s Morte d’ Arthur, vol. i. p. 114, and the English metrical version, MS. Harl,, 2252, f. 120°, INTRODUCTION. XVII knight of the Joyeuse Garde*, which ends in the discomfiture of Gawayne, and ultimately in his death. The quest of the Saint Graal by Arthur's knights forms a novel incident in the narrative, and connects the story with Robert du Borron's first work. Among those whose exploits are recorded in this quest, Sir Gawayne's name is one of the most prominent, and although, like Lancelot, he is not destined to achieve the adventure, yet he succeeds in reaching the magic castle of the guardian of the Holy Vessel, and witnesses the marvels which ensue on his resting upon the lit adventureuwt. His deeds of valor against King Gallehault's forces and elsewhere are so extraordinary, that Arthur orders them first to be recorded by his four veracious chroniclers, among whom Arrodian of Cologne is mentioned}. The estimation also in which he was held at the court is shewn by his being elected unanimously king in the place of Arthur, on the disappearance and supposed death of that monarch. Of the episodes relating to him, those of his adventure with his amie, the daughter of the king of North Wales, and the history of his captivity in the prison of the giant Karados, are perhaps the most interesting. In the former we are told that the lady’s chamber was guarded by twenty armed knights. These however at night fall asleep very opportunely, and Gawayne is enabled without resistance to reach his mistress's apartment. He takes * On the subject of this castle (placed by English poetical antiquaries at Berwick) see a curious paper in the Mémoires de la Société des Antiquaires de France, vol. x. p. 237, 8vo, 1834, intitled, © Mémoire sur le Chateau de la Joyeuse Garde, sur la riviere d’Elorn, pres Landerneau, Department du Finistére. Par le Chevalier de Freminville.” + In the Roman de Perceval, f. xxxixÞ, the incident of the enchanted bed is repeated, but under different circumstances. It forms the subject of an ivory carving engraved in the Mem. de Þ dead. des Inscriptions, vol. xviii. p. 322, 4to, 1753, and in Ferrario, Analisi degli Romanzi di Cavalleria, vol. ii. p. 101, which is unintelligible to the writers. + Vol. i. f. exliii?. One might forgive the writer in the Bibliotheque des Romans for believing in the historical reality of these personages (See Dunlop’s Hist. of Fiction, i. 295) ; but it is matter of sincere regret to find so gross a blunder sanctioned by the name of Daunou, in the Hist. Litt. de la France, tome xvi. p. 177. Cc xvi INTRODUCTION. off his helmet and ventaille, and approaching the bed where the beauty lay asleep, begins to kiss her. She awakes, and exclaims, © Saincte Marie! qui est ce?” He replies, “ Taisez vous, belle doulce amye, c’est la chose au monde que vous dimes mieulx.” The lovers speedily contrive to make themselves happy, but the old king and queen are on the watch, and by means of a window that faces the chamber, perceive Gawayne lying in their daughter’s arms. They determine to kill him, and call two chamberlains, who arm themselves with a sword and mace, and come to the bed. The first makes a stab at the knight under the counterpane, but the cold steel only grazing his arm, he is aroused to a sense of his danger. The other intending to demolish him at once, strikes a blow with the mace so violently, that although it misses its object, it penetrates half a foot into the wall, and shivers in pieces! Gawayne now loses no time, but jumping out of bed, rewards the two assailants by knocking out their brains, and then throwing their bodies out of the room, quietly locks the door, which he seems to have before forgotten to do. He then puts on his armour, and, encouraged by his mie, awaits the attack of the twenty guards, who come to the door and kick at it, whilst the old queen stands aloof, and cries out to them, ‘“‘ Assaillez, fils de putains, que faictes vous, que ne occies le traystre qui leans est!” Gawayne, however, escapes, leaving behind him many dead bodies as testimonies of his prowess! In the course of this romance the author presents us with a portrait of Gawayne, which I quote from an early MS. in the Royal Library, 19 B. vir. f. 246, as being fuller than the edition. * Messire G. avoit la chere simple & debonaire, et la regardure pitouse. HK il fust voirs, que messire G. estoit li plus beus de tous ses freres en graundure de cors.—Il est voirs, que mesire G. fuist Ii emplius* de tous ses freres, & fuist beu chevalier de son grant, & bien tailles de totes * The corresponding passage in MS. Add. 10, 293, f. 250, col. i. reads li mieldres. INTRODUCTION. xix membres ; ne se fu trop grant ne trop petis, mes de bele stature ; st Fu li plus chevaleros de son age que nus de se[s] freres ; & nepurquant li estoire dit, que Gaheries se[s] frere souffrit bien pres ausi grant fes des armes come il fist, mes il ne s’en mist oncques si grant cure com messire G. fist tous jours, & purce ne fuist pas si renomes. Et noepurquant la chose qu'il plus mist monseignor G. en remenbraunce, si fu qu'il ama povre gent, & lor fu dols & pitous*.” We next come to the Quéte du Saint Graal, often confounded with the History of the Graal. It is intended as a continuation of the Lancelot, and was certainly composed subsequently to that romance, as the internal evidence demonstrates. The persons here celebrated are Perceval, Gawayne, Lancelot, and his son Galaad, by the last of whom the adventure is finally brought to an end. The exploits of Gawayne in pursuing the grand object of their search are marked, as in the two preceding romances, by a singular love of peril, determined valor, generosity, and courtesy. He is on all occasions the most amiable personage of the Round Table. His adherence to the laws of knighthood is tried severely more than once, and particularly at a tournament against Nabigan de la Roche, where in consequence of a vow taken to grant the first request made of him, he is enjoined to act the part of a coward, and sustains unmoved the jeers of the assembly. The following day, however, makes amends for this act of self-abasement, for he then nobly sustains his own character, and carries off the prize of the golden circlett. The most chi- * In a MS. compilation of the 15th century, I have read a similar description, with the addition: ‘ Il n’eust les chevaule blancs ne rous, mais entredeux ; le visaige eust aucques brun ; les yeux eust vers et moult actrayens ; barbe eust & planté; les espaules belles et larges, et les bras et les poings gros et carrez, et fors a desmesure. Courtois et gracieux estoit plus que chevalier du monde.” I have mislaid the reference, but believe it to have been a MS, in Broadley's sale, 1832, intitled, “ Les noms, armes et blasons des Chevaliers de la Table Ronde, ou sont escripz les granz faiz de tous les Chevaliers.” + Vol. ii. f. 183, ed. 1516. c2 XX INTRODUCTION. valrous of his undertakings is the acquisition of the famous sword with which St. John was beheaded, in the course of which he slays a monstrous giant on the top of a hill; much after the fashion in which Arthur killed the giant Dinabuc on the Mont St. Michel. We have also a narrative, as in the Lancelot, but differing much in the circumstances, of Gawayne’s arrival in the palace of King Pescheur, and the marvels of the Graal. Map’s series of romances is closed by the Mort Artus, which is generally confounded with the Lancelot. The queen’s amour with the latter here leads to the disunion and destruction of the Round Table. The war undertaken by Arthur against the violator of his honor, proves his ruin. A furious battle takes place, in which Gawayne singly kills thirty knights, but his valor avails not, for in a second encounter Arthur’s forces are worsted. The Pope interferes, and Lancelot gives up the queen, and retires to his paternal dominions. Arthur follows him, at the instigation of Gawayne, and a combat takes place between Gawayne and Lancelot. The victory is long doubtful, but at length is given to the more youthful opponent, and Gawayne is left on the field, severely wounded in the head. After this follows the conflict between the forces of Arthur and the Roman emperor, and the return of Arthur to Britain on account of Mordred’s treason, all of which is founded on the narrative of Geoffrey, but told with the usual license of the romance-writers. The part which relates to Gawayne’s death has some pathos and interest, and will bear an abridgment. Arthur and his fleet arrive at Dover, where he is joyfully received at the castle. At vesper-time he is sent for by his nephew, and on coming to him, finds Gawayne so weak, as scarcely to be able to speak. On hearing the king’s sorrow he opened his eyes, and said, * Sire, I am dying, and I pray you in God's name to refrain from a battle with Mordred, for T tell you truly he is INTRODUCTION. XX1 the man who will cause your death.” He then desires to be remembered to Lancelot, whose pardon he asks, and requests him to visit his tomb.—© And I pray you, Sire, that you cause me to be interred at Kamalot, with my brothers ; and I wish to be laid in the tomb wherein my brother Gaheriet lies, for him I loved most, and this inscription to be placed above, Cy GisENnT LES DEUX FRERES GAHERIET ET GAUVAIN, QUE LANCELOT OCCIST PAR L’OULTRAIGE DE Gavvain.” Arthur asks if he believes -Lancelot to have been the cause of his death, which he answers in the affirmative, on account of the wound he had received in his head, which was renewed in the battle with the Romans. ‘* Ft a tant se teust messire G. que plus ne parla, fors au derrenier qu'il dist, Jesu Crist, pere debonnaire, ne me juge pas selon mes mesfaitz!”’ Arthur swoons several times with grief, and exclaims, «* Ha! Ha! mort villaine, comment as tu esté si hardye d’assaillir ung tel homme comme estoit mon nepveu, qui de bonté passoit tout le monde !” On the mournful news arriving at the castle, the lamentation is so excessive, that you could not have heard God thunder*. They enveloped the corpse in silk, and surrounded it with so many lighted tapers, that the castle seemed on fire. In the morning Arthur caused a bierre chevaleresse to be brought, and Gawayne’s body placed therein, which he gave in charge to one hundred men to convey to Kamalot. Every eye is moistened, and the people cry out, ‘‘ O preudhomme courtois, et bon chevalier sur tous aultres, mauldicte soit la morte qui de toy nous a oste la compaignie !” The corpse is carried to the castle of Belloc, the lady of which, on hearing whose it is, loudly deplores his fate, and avows she had never loved any one but Gawayne. Her husband requites this declaration with a stroke of his sword, which cuts off her * This phrase is found in Benoit de St. More and other French writers of the twelfth century. It passed thence into the English romance of Alexander. See Weber, Metr. Rom. Introd., p. xxxiv. xxii INTRODUCTION. shoulder, and penetrates deeply into the dead body of the knight. The lady expires, and requests to be buried by his side. Her death is revenged by the attendants, who then proceed with the body to Kamalot, and bury it in the tomb of Gaheriet, in the middle of the monastery. The remains of the lady of Belloc are also interred close by, with an inscription stating that she had been killed for her love of Gawayne*. The substance of this romance, but much abridged, is to be found in Malory’s Morte d’ Arthur, books 18, 20, and 21, and the latter text was versified in the reign of Henry the Seventh by an anonymous English author, who follows it in some instances verbally f. The account of Gawayne’s death differs considerably in the various versions of the story, nor is the place of his sepulture less a subject of disagreement. In Geoffrey, Arthur lands at the Portus Rutupi, rendered Richborough by Thompson, and Sandwich by Ellis} and others, where a battle takes place, in which Gawayne and his companions are slain. Wace, Lazamon$, and Robert of Brunne copy this narrative, but fix the spot at Romney. The Cotton MS. of Wace, Vitell. A. x., reads Toteneis (Totnes), while the Welsh (Tysilio) translation of Geoffrey and the alliterative poem in the Lincoln MS. place the locality at Southampton. Malory and * Vol. iii. ff. 1915, 192%, ed. 1513, + This metrical version is preserved in MS. Harl. 2252, and was printed in 1819 for the Roxburghe Club. Ellis is in error in stating that it was translated immediately from the French text, Metr. Rom. i. 324, (copied by Dunlop, Hist. of Fiction, i.244.) Had he taken the trouble of comparing them together, he would not have hazarded such an assertion. } Ellis probably followed the general stream of the chroniclers who borrow from the English prose Brut, subsequently known under the title of Caxton’s Chronicle and Fructus Temporum. In this and in its French prose MS. original, the place of landing is called Sandwich. See also a ballad printed in Percy, vol. iii. p. 40, ed. 1794. § But in another passage Lazamon writes, that Gawayne was killed © suth in Cornwale.” vol. ii. p. 546, INTRODUCTION. xxiii his metrical translator follow the romance of Lancelot, in assigning the locality to Dover*, but they vary in the detail. The latter says of our hero: Syr Gawayne armyd hyme in that stounde, Allas ! to longe hys hede was bare, He was seke, and sore vnsond, Hys woundis greuyd hym fulle sare. One hytte hym vpon the olde wounde, Wi a tronchon of an ore ; There is good Gawayne gone to grounde, That speche spake he neuyr more. MS. Harl. 2252, fol. 123°. Malory follows the French text more closely, but inserts a letter, supposed to be written by the dying knight to Sir Lancelot, and concludes,—‘‘ And so at the houre of none Syr Gawayn yelded up the spyryte ; and thenne the kynge lete entiere hym in a chappel within Douer Castel ; and there yet alle men maye see the sculle of hym, and the same wound is sene that Syr Launcelot gaf hym in bataill.” vol. ii. p. 435. Caxton, in his Preface, alleges the last mentioned circumstance as a proof of the reality of the fact; and Leland quotes the authority of the Chronicon Dovarensis monasteri for the existence of Gawayne's bones in the same place, which were shewn to himself on his visit theret. Leland therefore rejects the statement of William of Malmesbury, who says, that in the reign of William the Conqueror, the sepulchre of Gawayne was discovered on the sea-shore of a province of Wales, named Ross, [in Pembrokeshire,] fourteen feet in length, “‘ubt, & quibusdam ut asseritur, ab hostibus vulneratus, et naufragio * Ellis must have read the passage carelessly, or he would not have transferred the place of sepulture to the Cathedral of Canterbury. See Metr. Rom. i. 392. + Collectanea, vol. iii. p. 50; also in his Codrus, ib. vol. v. p. 7; and in Assertio Arthuri, ib. vol. v. p. 25. : XXIV INTRODUCTION. ejectus, & quibusdam dicitur @ civibus in publico epulo interfectus*.” Leland acknowledges, however, that the remains of a castle called by Gawayne’s name were still extant in his time near the shore, and at the present day, on the southernmost point of Pembrokeshire, called St. Gowen's head, stands a small chapel formed out of the rock, named after the same personage, which the traditionary voice of the neighbourhood assigns as the burial place of Arthur's nephewt. Wace was ignorant of these statements, for he expressly writes, Grans fu li dols de son neveu, Le cors fist metre ne sai u, Aine hom ne sot u il fu mis, Ne qui locist, ce m’est avis. Vol. ii. p. 225, ed. 1839t. Lazamon says nothing of the sepulture, but tells us that Gawayne previous to his death made great slaughter, and killed the son of Childric with his own hand, but at length was slain * thurh an eorle Sexisce,—seri wurthe his saule!”” Peter Langtoft and his translator add to the confusion, by stating that the body of Gawayne was interred at Wybre or Wibire, © en la Walescherye,” —* that is, in Wales$,” —by which I presume is intended Webbery, * Scriptores post Bedam, lib. ii. p. 64, edit. 1596. Malmesbury adds, that Gawayne reigned in that part of Britain called Waluuithia (Galloway), but was expelled from his kingdom by the brother and nephew of Hengist. We here may, perhaps, trace the historical incident which gave rise to the account in the romance of Merlin and elsewhere of Gawayne’s battles with the Saxons. The above passage in Malmesbury is copied by many succeeding chroniclers, down to the time of Stowe and Baker. + See a description in Fenton’s Pembrokeshire, p. 414, 4to, 1811: but he knows nothing of the legend, and talks of some Irish hermit being buried there. + From MS. de la Bibl. du Roi, No. 751534, The Royal MS. 13, A. xxi. Brit, Mus. and Cott. Vit. A. x. read the same, except that the latter has en sarcu, instead of ne sai u. § MS. Cott. Jul. A, v.f. 40., MS. Reg. 20, D. ii. f. 31; Robert of Brunne’s MS, Chron. f. 81, ¢. 2. INTRODUCTION. XXV not far from Bideford, in Devonshire. Lastly, in the prose French and English Brut, whether manuscript or printed, and in the romance of Arthur in the Red Book of Bath, Arthur is said to cause the bodies of Gawayne and Augusel to be taken to Scotland, their native country. The alliterative Scotish romance of Morte Arthure, in the library of Lincoln Cathedral, marked A. 1. 17, is very much amplified in its account of the destruction of the Round Table, and does not agree with any other authority I have consulted*. The British forces enter the harbour of Southampton, and Gawayne jumps into the water, ** in alle his gylte wedys,” attacks the Danish auxiliaries, and kills their leader, the king of Gothland. He then with a small band of followers advances against Mordred, and fights with his usual impetuosity. In to p® hale bataile hedlynges he rynnys, And hurtes of p® hardieste pat one the erthe lenges, Letande alles a lyone, he lawnches theme thorowe, Lordes and ledars that one the launde houes.— And for wondsome and wille alle his wit failede, That wode alles a wylde beste he wente at p* gayneste, Alle walewede one blode, thare he a-waye passede.—fol. 93. At length he encounters the traitor chief, and wounds him severely, but in the act of finishing the contest with a ‘‘ shorte knyfe,” the weapon slips on the mail, and his adversary instantly takes advantage of the accident, and strikes him through the helm to the brain. And thus Syr Gawayne es gone, the gude man of armes, Withe owttyne reschewe of renke, and rewghe es þ* more! Thus Syr Gawayne es gone, that gyede many othire ; Fro Gowere to Gernesay, alle p* gret lordys, * It is a singular circumstance that it often coincides verbally with Malory’s prose version, and the episode of Gawayne and Priamus is found in both, and no where else. d XXv1 INTRODUCTION. Of Glamour, of Galys londe, pis galyarde knyghtes, For glent of gloppyngnyng glade be they neuer !—fol. 93°. King * Froderike of Fres” comes up, and inquires of Mordred who the knight was that had felled 80 many of his men, and now lay deprived of life? The reply is worthy of transcription, as a summary of the knightly qualities for which our Hero was distinguished. Than Syr Modrede wt mouthe melis fulle faire :— “He was makles one molde, mane, be my trowhe ! This was Syr Gawayne the gude, the gladdeste of othire, And the graciouseste gome that vndire God lyffede ; Mane hardyeste of hande, happyeste in armes, And the hendeste in hawle vndire heuene-riche ; The lordelieste of ledynge, qwhylles he lyffe myghte, Fore he was lyone allossede in londes inewe. Had thou knawene hym, syr kynge, in kythe thare he lengede, His konynge, his knyghthode, his kyndly werkes, His doyng, his doughtynesse, his dedis of armes, Thow wolde hafe dole for his dede the dayes of thy lyfe !”—fol. 93>. Mordred having thus borne testimony to the worth of his fallen foe and brother, sheds tears, and moves away, cursing the time his fate was shaped to work such unhappiness. Arthur afterwards causes the body of Gawayne to be honorably conveyed to Winchester, where it is received by a procession of the prior and monks, and they are charged by the king to observe every funereal solemnity ,— - Lokis it be clanly kepyd, he said, and in the kirke holdene, Done for dergese, as to the ded fallys ; Menskede wt messes, for mede of the saule. Loke it wante no waxe, ne no wirchipe elles, And at the body be baarmede, and one erthe holdene.—fol. 95. I have now traced the history of Sir Gawayne from his birth to his burial-place, and might gladly have wished to let him rest INTRODUCTION. XXVii in peace, but this is forbidden. Subsequently to the completion of the romances by Robert de Borron and Map appeared a new work, the object of which was to introduce a knight of the Round Table, unknown and unnoticed by the preceding writers on the subject*. This was the famous Tristan, whose amour with the fair Iseult and feats of arms, told as they were in the inimitable style of the bon vieux Francois, found subsequently such favor with the world, as completely to eclipse the earlier romance compositions. The first portion of this work was written by Luces de Gastf, in the time of Henry the Second, and the concluding part by Helie de Borron, in the reign of Henry the Third. Both are animated by the same spirit,—that of vilifying the lineage of king Loth, and more particularly the fame and deeds of Gawayne. Among other fictions unknown to previous writers, they feign a hostility between the sons of king Pellinor and the children of Loth, and take every opportunity of praising the latter at the expense of the former{. Pellinor is said to have put king Loth to death, and is killed in return by Gawayne. Lamorat de Galles, the eldest son of Pellinor, and brother of * The fact of the more recent composition of the Tristan is, I think, indisputable. It is perfectly incredible, had he been previously celebrated, that no mention should be made of him by Robert de Borron and Map. These were also the sentiments of my learned friend M. Paulin Paris, in the first volume of his interesting work, Les Manuscrits Francois de la Bibliotheque du Roi, pp. 194-198, but in his second volume, p. 352, he retracts this opinion, and says he founded his arguments on the second portion of Tristan, composed at a later epoch. But the same conclusions may equally be drawn from the first part, in which the direct allusions to the Roman de Lancelot are frequent. To give a single instance. In the Lancelot, vol. i. f. clxxvi., is an account of Gawayne being carried off by a giant named Karados ; and in the Tristan the same event is noticed as having previously occurred, vol. i. f. xlv. (MS. Harl. 49, fol. 105>.) + The Abbé de la Rue conjectures that he possessed the seignory of the territory of Gast, in the canton of St. Severe, department of Calvados. Essais sur les Bardes, ii. 231. This requires confirmation, but merits inquiry. + See the indignant remarks of Southey on the Tristan, in his Preface to Morte d' Arthur, p. xvi. d2 XXVIli INTRODUCTION. Perceval, intrigues with the Lady of Orkney, the mother of our hero, and is slain by her sons, for which act of retributive justice Gawayne is severely censured. Indeed whenever Gawayne is mentioned, it is only to represent him under circumstances of defeat and disgrace, or to calumniate him. The manuscripts of this work are fuller, by one half, than the printed editions, and contain an additional quantity of misrepresentation*. To the same author who completed the Tristan we are indebted for a huge compilation intitled Gyron le Courtois, in which the exploits of Gyron, Meliadus, Branor le Brun, the Chevalier sans Peur, and a fresh race of worthies are commemorated, to whom even the Lancelots and Tristans are represented as inferior. Of course Sir Gawayne occupies here a very inferior grade, and is so changed from the all-conquering hero of the Merlin, as scarcely to be recognised. From this compilation, as well as from the prior works of Robert de Borron and Map, was formed the abridgment made by Rusticien de Pise in the reign of Edward the First ; and in the course of the succeeding two centuries other compilers arose, who selected what portions they pleased, and formed them into distinct bodies of romance. These more recent compilations must be regarded as the immediate originals of the romances printed under the titles of Gyron le Courtois and Meliadus de Léonnois. The former of these first issued from the press of Verard, and represents with tolerable accuracy a portion of Rusticien’s work. In this Sir Gawayne is only mentioned on two occasions, and in both passages as a vanquished knight. In the MeliadusF he is oftener introduced, but without a much greater * MSS. of the prose Tristan are rare in the libraries of Great Britain. In the British Museum are only three copies of portions of the first part, and two copies of the second part. The complete text, I believe, is in the collection of Sir Thomas Phillipps, Bart. + The author of this romance frequently refers to the Tristan, the Lancelot, the Perceval, and the Gyron. M. Paris is inclined to refer its compilation to the commencement of the INTRODUCTION. XXIX degree of praise. His character for courtesy is indeed acknowledged, and an awkward fiction is alleged to account for his inferior powers, by stating that in the tournament of Galles, maintained between Arthur and the Seigneur des Loingtains Isles, (Gallehault,) he received such hurts as to deprive him of his previous force, so that afterwards he never recovered it.—** Ft du grant dueil qu'il en eut, il fist depuis moult de felonies, que la Table Ronde achepta moult durement.” From the work of Rusticien de Pise it is probable that Sir Thomas Malory compiled the English prose Morte d’ Arthur in the year 1469, in which, as Scott and Southey have remarked, the character of Gawayne is traduced, and his history misrepresented. There are a few adventures of Gawayne in this work which I have not found elsewhere, but they were doubtless furnished by the French manuscript originals, which I have had no opportunity of consulting®. The metrical romances composed by Chrestien de Troyes require next to be noticed. They all appear to have been borrowed from the prose romances, but contain also incidents derived from other sources. The longest and best known of these is the Perceval le Gallois, so large a portion of which relates to the exploits of sir Gawayne, that, as a French writer has already observed, it sixteenth century, shortly before it was printed, but in Sir Thomas Phillipps’s possession is a MS. of the fourteenth century, agreeing generally with the printed text, and containing the preface of Helie de Borron to his Gyron le Courtois, which in the printed edition of Me- liadus is erroneously attributed to Rusticien. From this cause have sprung innumerable misstatements on the subject of these works, and the age of the composers. * There are no copies in the British Museum or Bodleian Library of the compilations of Helie de Borron and Rusticien. In Sir Thomas Phillipps’s Library is a recension of Helie's work by Jehan le Vaillant, made in the year 1391, which was formerly in the La Valliere collection. I find also that a prose work intitled Roman du Roi Artus was printed at Paris in 1488, but is so scarce, that I do not know if a copy is to be found in England. It is evidently a late compilation, chiefly taken from the Merlin, but with variations. It is here stated, that at Loth’s death Mordred disputes the right of Gawayne to his father’s throne, and on Arthur taking the part of the latter, the catastrophe is brought on which ends in the monarch’s destruction. This is quite a new version of the story. XXX INTRODUCTION. might with equal propriety have been named after both these heroes. I have already spoken of this romance in my Notes, (p. 305,) and its popularity in Scotland and England must have been great, since no less than three of the poems printed in the present volume are founded on episodes in it. - Here, as in the second part of the Saint Graal, the adventures of Gawayne in search of the Mysterious Vessel and the palace of king Pescheur, occupy a prominent place. His character for valor and courtesy re-appears in its original lustre, and is praised with the same warmth as in the romance of Merlin.—** Sire,” says an esquire to Arthur, after relating the feats of Gawayne at the enchanted castle of queen Yguerne, ** en ma puissance Gauvain assez suffisaument louer n'est pas possible ; le propoz assez aorne ne la langue diserte ne ay-je elegante ne propice @ ce faire, pource que, comme Je croy, de toute chevallerie est la perle ; c’est celluy qui de tout vice est nect, innocent, et immaculle ; c’ est celluy qui ne pourroit endurer felonnie ne mechancete ; c’est le consolateur des desolles, le pere des orphelins, Vabresse et la reconfort des femmes vefues.” fol. xlvii. We are also in this romance introduced to Giglan, the son of Gawayne by the sister of Brandelis, of whom mention only previously occurs in the first part of the prose Tristan. The remaining romances by Chrestien, are the Tristan, apparently now lost; the Chevalier au Lion, which is known as the original of the English Ywaine and Gawin; the Roman d’ Erec et Enide, in which Gawayne is assigned the first station among the _ knights of the Round Table* ; the Roman de Fregus, a narrative in many respects resembling that of Perceval, and the hero of which * Devant toz les bons chevaliers Doit estre Gauvains li premiers, Li seconz Erec, li filz Lac, Et li tierz Lanceloz dou Lac. MS. de la Bibl. du Roi, No. 74984, f. 13, INTRODUCTION. XXX1 is a native of Scotland; the Roman de la Charrette, which is an episode taken from Lancelot ; and the Roman de Cliges. The last four still remain in manuscript, in the Bibliothéque du Roi at Paris, but analyses of them are given in the Bibliothéque des Romans and the Histoire Litteraire de la France. In all of them we find Gawayne very honorably noticed. Besides the longer romances several shorter poems of the same chivalrous character exist, in which Syr Gawayne’s adventures are commemorated. One of these is the Chevalier a Þ Epée*, the author of which blames Chrestien de Troyes for omitting to celebrate Gawayne in a distinct poem, and says he will narrate one out of his numerous exploits. The subject connects it with the English tale of Syr Gawene and the Carle of Carlyle, as I have pointed out in the Notes, (p. 345.) Here too we meet with the amusing incident of the greyhoundsf, which seems to have been borrowed from the metrical Perceval. Another is the fabliau of La Mule sans Freint; in which Gawayne undertakes for a lady the adventure of the bridle, and after many hazardous conflicts, succeeds in gaining it. A prosaical episode also is preserved, intitled the Conte de I’ Atre Perilleux, containing an interesting account of Gawayne’s encounter with a formidable magician or semi-deemon, whom he destroys amidst flashes of lightning, and afterwards rescues a damsel from the power of a redoubtable knight named Ersanors de la Montagne}. In all probability other narratives remain in manuscript relating to the same personage, and some may have been lost. In the * Printed in Meon’s Recueil de Fabliaux, vol. i. p. 127, and analysed by Le Grand. + See Dunlop’s Hist. of Fiction, i. 272- - : t Printed, 2b. vol. i. p. 1. See Notes, p. 306. § Analysed in the Bibl. des Romans, Juillet, 1777, p. 70. It is mentioned in the Inventaire des livres de Pancienne Bibliotheque du Louvre, fait en Pannte 1373, p. 75, 8vo, 1836; edited by M. Van Praet. XXX1 INTRODUCTION. Reductorium Morale of Pierre Bercheur, Prior of St. Eloi, at Paris, better known by his Latin name of Berchorius, who is supposed by Warton to have been the author of the Gesta Romanorum®, at the end of his Prologue to book 14, De Nature Mirabilibus, speaking of the wonderful relations extant of Britain, he writes, ‘‘ What shall I say of the marvels which occur in the histories of Gawayne (Galvayni), and Arthur? Of which I will mention only one, namely, of the palace under the water, which Gawayne accidentally discovered, where he found a table spread with eatables, and a chair placed ready for him, but was not able to find the door by which he might go out; but being hungry, and about to eat, suddenly the head of a dead man appeared in the dish, and a giant, who lay on a bier near the fire, rising up, and striking the roof with his head, and the head calling out and forbidding the repast, he never dared touch the viands, and after witnessing many wonders, got away he knew not howt!’ Berchorius here evidently refers to the prodigies seen by Gawayne at the palace of the Graal, but the manuscripts used by him must have differed greatly from those now extant, or he must have quoted from memory, and much misrepresented the story{. The former conjecture seems the most probable. So also in a copy of the Merlin, No. 6958 of the Bibliothéque du Roi, we meet with an episode not in the usual text of this romance. Gawayne rescues a lady by force of arms from Oriol, King of the Saxons, and to his great * See my Preface to the Old English Versions of the Gesta Romanorum, printed for the Roxburghe Club, 4to, 1838. Bercheur died in 1362. + Edit. fol. Col. Agr. 1631, tom. ii, p. 901. He adds, © Melius ergo arbitror de istis tacere, quam de ipsis aliqua narrative asserere, ne forte videar fabulas hominum vel etiam opera demonum pro naturali veritate narrare. Ista ergo ad presens omittam, nisi forte quando de fabulis poetarum tractabo, inseram aliquid de premissis.” This work, which was to have formed the fifteenth book, is unfortunately lost, or was never completed. + Compare the Roman de Perceval, ff, cxxi—cxxiii. INTRODUCTION. XXXill delight recognises her as his mie, the Countess of Limos.—** Si saut jus du cheval, et embrace, et baise en la face, et ele lui, que onques dangier nul ne Ven fait ; et Ii dist, © Certes, sire, bien me devez baisier et accoler, que onques mais baisier n’eustes, au mien escient, que vous autretant chierement eussiez acheté.’ * Dame,” fait a, © de tant suis-je plus liez*.’”’ Our hero seems to have been famed more for his various intrigues than his constancy. At the trial of the ivory horn sent by Morgain to Arthur’s court, he is the first to raise it to his lips, but no sooner does he touch the wine than it runs over the enchanted rim, for © Ja nul chevallier n’y bevra qui aura triché son amye, ou que sa mie Pait triche, que le vin sur lui ne respandet.”’ In the Jeaste of Gawayne we have one of his affairs of gallantry narrated, copied from the Perceval, and in the same romance we have a similar account of his amour with the daughter of the king of Escallon, with whom being surprised, he defends himself with a chess-board. A third affair of the same kind takes place with Taurée, sister of the Little Knight of the Great Forest, and in the Lancelot and Malory’s Morte d’ Arthur we have additional narratives of his influence with the fair sex; so that we can readily understand why he is addressed by the lady in the Scotish romance of the Grene Kny3t as a master and pattern not only of courtesy but of the art of love. One more romantic composition relative to Gawayne remains to be noticed, which is the more remarkable from its being quite distinct from the established fictions of the Round Table. This composition may be assigned to the early part of the fourteenth century, and is written in Latin; but whether derived from © floating Celtic traditions,” or from an Anglo-Norman original, must be left * P. Paris, Manuscrits Francois, ii. 344. + Roman de Perceval, f. cb. Comp. Rom, de Tristan, i. f. liii. In the similar fabliau of the Manteau mal taillé it is Genelas, the mie of Gawayne, who fails in the trial, e XXXIV INTRODUCTION. to conjecture. It is intitled De Ortu Waluuanii, nepotis Arturi, and is a strange tissue of romantic fiction, embellished with many rhetorical flourishes. In it Gawayne is represented as the result of 2 secret intrigue between king Loth and Anna, the daughter of Uter Pendragon, and to conceal his birth his mother delivers him to some foreign merchants, who carry him to the coast of France, not far from Narbonne. They leave the ship and the infant in the care of a boy, who falls asleep ; and in their absence a fisherman carries the child off, together with a casket, containing testimonials of his birth, and a vast quantity of treasure. He afterwards proceeds to Rome, where giving himself out to be a descendant of a noble Roman family, he is received most honorably by the emperor, and assigned as a residence the marble palace of Scipio Africanus. The boy grows up, and is beloved by all for his courteous demeanour and surprising boldness. At the age of twelve years his reputed father dies, but on his death-bed reveals the secret of Gawayne’s birth to the emperor and the pope Sulpicius, but charges them not to reveal it until he should be restored to his parents. The youth is brought up under the emperor’s protection, receives knighthood from his hands, and distinguishes himself by his prowess so greatly, that he is sent for by the christians living at Jerusalem to fight in single combat, as a champion in their behalf, against the champion of the king of Persia, who had made war on them. In his way to the east he lands on an island ruled by king Milocrates, an enemy of the Romans, whom he kills, and afterwards encounters the hostile fleet of the king’s brother, whose ships are sunk or captured. He at length reaches Jerusalem, and fights on foot with the pagan giant Gormundus, the Persian champion, for the space of three days, but at last cleaves him asunder with his sword from the head downwards, —‘‘non optabile stomacho antidotum,” —as thewriter oddly remarks. He afterwards returns triumphantly to Rome, and thence, hearing INTRODUCTION. XXXV of the fame of Arthur, to Britain, where he establishes his claim as nephew of the British monarch. Such is the brief outline of this singular story, in which we can clearly trace some few particulars referable to Geoffrey of Monmouth, but worked up in a manner that would bear comparison with the extravagant fictions of a much later era. The popularity of Gawayne, in spite of the calumny contained in the Tristan and Gyron, must have been great, but was necessarily joined with that of other heroes of the Round Table. His adventures are referred to by several Provencal poets previous to the close of the twelfth century, and often subsequently*. In the poems of the Anglo-Norman trouveurs his name very frequently occurs, and always in terms of respect. It would occupy too much space to specify the passages, but I have indicated the principal in a note belowt. The author of a manuscript Latin trans- * See the Journal des Savans, p. 521, Sept., 1833; and Raynouard’s Choix des Poesies des Troubadours, vol. ii. pp. 288, 295, 296, 298. By the author of the romance of Jaufré and Elias Cairel, his feats of arms are placed on the same scale with the wisdom of Merlin or the love-passion of Tristan. + A poem is quoted by the Abbé de la Rue, and assigned to king Henry the First, intitled Le dictie d' Urbain, in which it is said,— Plus estre corteis et sein Que ne fut Sire Gauvein, but I should doubt both the authorship and antiquity claimed for it. See Essais sur les Bardes, vol. ii. p. 38, 8vo, 1834. In the same volume, p. 63, the Abbé states that Turold, the author of a romance on the battle of Roncevaux, places Gawayne among the paladins by the name of Gautier. This is a silly blunder, arising out of a passage in a more recent copy of the poem, analysed by M. Monin, in which the words Ui nies Artus do not refer to Gautiers, but to Malarsus, and the name of Artus itself is a mischievous variation from the original text, which reads Drown. Compare M. Michel's valuable edition of the Chanson de Rolland, 8vo, 1837, p. 79, and Monin’s Dissertation, pp. 26,32. Consult also the Lai de Lanval, by Marie de France, vol. i. p. 220, 8vo, 1820; Le Couronnement de Renart, vol. iv. pp. 3, 5, 8vo, 1826; Lai del’ Ombre, p. 43, of Lais Inedits, par Fr. Michel, 8vo, 1836; Lai de Melion, p. 57, 8vo, 1832; the metrical Livre de Oger de Dannemarche, MS, Reg. 15 E. vi. f. 81°, col. 2; the Roman de la Rose, vol. iii. p. 211, 8vo, 1814; and the Roman du e2 XXXV1L INTRODUCTION, lation of the celebrated Calilah u Dimnah, made in the year 1313, complains in his preface of the avidity with which the romances of Gawayne and others were read*. But we are not hence to infer that there was originally any large distinct romance which passed by his name, but that allusion is made to one of those in which his exploits are prominently recorded. In this manner the romance of Gawayne might mean either the Merlin or the Perceval or the Lancelot, as in similar cases we read of the romances of Gallehault, Agravain, and La Charrette, all of which are only portions or branches of the Lancelot. Thus too in the Inventory of Guillaume d’ Orange, quoted by M. Michel in the Glossary to the Chanson du Rolland, p. 209. In the last of these passages Gawayne is placed in fairy-land with many other heroes of the cycles of Arthur and Charlemagne. The British sovereign thus addresses Renouart,— Je sui Artus, dont Ven a tant parle, Renouart, frére, ce sont la gent faé, Qui sont du siécle venus et trespassé. Vez-la Rollant, ce vermeill coulouré, Et c'est Gauvain, & ce poile roé, Et puis Yvain, un sien compaing privé ; Et cele bele au vis enluminé, Icele est Morgue, ou tant a de biauté. Hence may be explained the lines of Chaucer,— That Syr Gawayne with his old curtesie, Although he come agen out of Fairie, He could him nought amendin in no worde. Lydgate also, in his Fall of Princes, B. viii. ch. 25, speaks of Arthur’s court in Fairie. * “Vos igitur regalem curiam frequentes, qui tempus vestrum consumitis in narrationibus anbagicis,—verbi gracia, Lanceloti, Galvani, consimilibusque,—libros in quibus nulla consistit sciencia vel modica viget utilitas, crebrius intendentes, abjecta vanitatis palea, librum istum regium virtutum perlegatis,” ete. The writer was a physician, named Raymond de Biterris, and he translated the work from the Spanish at the request of Joan, queen of Navarre. It is altogether different from the version of John of Capua, printed under the title of the Directorium Humane Vite. A beautiful copy of the work is preserved in the Bibl. du Roi at Paris, No. 8504. INTRODUCTION. XXXVIL the Library in the Louvre, in 1373, we find notices of volumes described, as, ‘‘ No. 287. De Merlin, et des fais de Lancelot du Lac et de Gauvin, em prose,” and again, ‘‘ No. 302. Du Saint Graal, de Lancelot, de Gauvain, en grant volume plat, em prose.” In the same manner must the passage of Caxton be understood, where he speaks of © the grete and many volumes of Seint Graal, Ghalehot, and Launcelotte de Lake, Gawayne, Perceval, Lyonel, and Tristram*,” which renders Southey’s conjecture as to their separate form of no force. If we now turn to our English writers, we shall find the fame of Gawayne in full vigor from the thirteenth to the sixteenth century. The stream of romance which brought down the name of Arthur, invariably joined to it that of his courteous and valiant nephew ; and his reputation in the popular estimation continued to retain its hold, in spite of the misrepresentations of the authors of the Tristan and the Gyron. John Hautville, author of the Archithrenius, written previous to the year 1207, places the following noble sentiments in our Hero’s mouth,— Et Walganus ego, qui nil reminiscor avara Tlloculasse manu; non hee mea fulgurat auro Sed gladio dextraf ———— In some prefatory lines to the collection of Metrical Legends of the Saints, written shortly before the year 1300}, we read, — * Proheme to Godefrey of Boloyne, fol. 1481. Compare his Preface to the Book of the Ordre of Chyvalry, fol. no date, but about 1484. + MS. Cott. Vesp. B. xxiii. f. 30, and MS. Harl. 4066, 2, f. 30. The knight previously says of himself,— Et genus et gentem tribuit Lodonesia nutrix, Prebuit irriguam morum Cornubia mammam. 4 Warton, in Hist. Engl. Poetr. says 1200, vol. i. pp. 14, 126, and is incautiously followed by Ritson, Metr. Rom. p.civ. I am surprised to find the same error repeated in Mr. Guest’s valuable work on English Rhythms, vol. ii. p. 220. The same writer persists, p. XXXVU1 INTRODUCTION. Men wilnethe more yhere of batayle of kyngis And of knyztis hardy, that mochel is lesyngis, Of Roulond and of Olyuere, and Gy of Warwyk, Of Wawayne and Tristram, that ne founde here ylike. MS. Bodl. 779, ap. Warton, vol. i. p. 126. Again, in the romance of Richard Ceur de Lion, composed probably within ten years of the same period, Many romances men make newe, Of good knyghtes, strong and trewe ; Off theyr dedes men rede romance, Bothe in Engeland and in France ; Off Roweland and of Olyuer, And of euery doseper ; Of Alisandre and Charlemain, Off kyng Arthour and off Gawayn ; How they were knyghtes good and curteys, Off Turpyn, and of Ogier Daneys*. In a curious poem in the Digby MS. No. 86, intitled ‘‘ Le Cuntent parentre le Mauvis et la Russinole, written in the reign of Edward the First, is the following stanza: Nizttingale, thou hauest wrong, Wolt thou me senden of this lond, For ich holde with the riztte ; I take witnesse of Sire Wawain, That Ihesu Crist 3af mizt and main, And strengthe for to fiztte.—fol. 137 +. 412, in assigning the year 1278 to Robert of Gloucester’s Chronicle, although in my Preface to Havelok I have pointed out a passage in it which proves it not to have been completed till after 1297. * Weber's Metr. Rom. ii. 4; see also ii, 261. He is greatly mistaken in supposing the romance of Ywaine and Gawin to be here alluded to. + A fragment of the same poem, written thirty years later, is preserved in the Auchinleck MS,, and is thence quoted by Leyden, in Complaynte of Scotland, p. 159. INTRODUCTION. XXXIX Chaucer's lines in reference to our hero are well known*, and so are the passages in the romance of Ywaine and Gawin}, composed nearly at the same period. In a legendary MS. work, intitled Cursor Mundi, of the same age, we read in the prologue, — Man yhernes rimes for to here, And romans red on manere sere,— O kyng Arthour, that was so rike, Quam non in hys tim was like; O ferlys that hys knythes fell, That aunters sere I here of tell ; As Wawan, Cai, and other stabell, For to were the Ronde Tabell. MS. Cott. Vesp. A. 111. fol. 14. In the fifteenth century there are numerous allusions to Sir Gawayne, and the vernacular translations of the Saint Graal and Merlin§, Mort Artus||, Perceval], Launfal**, the Squyr of Lowe DegrefF, and other romances, united with the publication of Malory’s diffuse work towards the close of this period, must have powerfully operated in diffusing a knowledge of his romantic career. In a metrical version of Guido de Colonna’s War of Troy, which has erroneously been attributed to Lydgate, the writer thus enumerates the popular fictions of the day,— * Canterbury Tales, 1. 10,409, and Rom. of the Rose, 1. 2209, Tyrwhitt's Glossary, in v. Gawain. + L. 1419, ap. Ritson, Metr. Rom., vol. i. 4 This copy of the poem is written in the northern dialect. See the same passage, with numerous variations, quoted from the Laud MSS., No. 416, Bodl. Library, in Warton, Hist. E. P., i. 127. § Preserved in Corpus Chr. Coll. Cambr., No. 80, and hitherto unpublished. Thetrans- . lator names himself Herry Lonelich: see Nasmyth’s Catalogue, p. 55, 4to, 1777. || MS. Harl. 2252. Printed for the Roxburghe Club, 4to. 1819. © MS. Eccles. Lincoln., A. 1. 17. ** Ritson’s Metr. Rom., vol. i. ++ Ibid., vol. iii. xl INTRODUCTION. Off Bevis, Gy, and of Gawayn, Off kyng Richard, and of Owayn, Of Tristram, and of Percyvale, Off Rouland Ris and Aglavale. MS. Laud. 595, fol. 1. Bodl. Libr. And in the inedited romance of Syr Degrevante, a composition of much merit, we are told,— W' kyng Arthure, I wene, And dame Gaynore, the quene, He was knawene for kene This comly knyghte ; In haythynnes and in Spayne, In France and in Britayne, W' Perceuelle and Gawayne, For hardy and wyghte. MS. Line. A.1.17. In the reign of Henry the Eighth we learn from a curious passage in Skelton's Litle Boke of Phillip Sparow, what were the principal romance-stories then in vogue, and among them is * Gawen and Syr Guy,” as well as Lancelot, Tristan, and Libs Diosconius, Gawayne’sson. The repeated editions of such romances in the course of the sixteenth century must have rendered the name of Gawayne familiar to all, and at length, by the natural course of all popular literature, the ballad-makers succeeded the minstrels in the commemoration of his exploits. Perhaps one of the latest passages in which his name is used as a bye-word occurs in Laneham’s amusing account of the actors in the Coventry pageant before Queen Elizabeth at Kenilworth :—‘‘ But aware! keep bak, make room noow, heer they cum! And fyrst captin Cox,—an od man, I promiz yoo,—by profession a mason, and that right skilfull ; very cunning in fens, and handy as Gawin, for hiz tonsword hangs yen ye (ege x pe allant Yay Ce(ed at trope Noo Pe wy vrittened xbrent to bronde; x atkes o pe tulk pat ye trames of trebu p Yrost | —Gxh tried tothns tricherie pe treed onerthe x) 3 htt Yaty Gunias pe athel his hgh Ryn a | i, pat pen &preced prices x wtrotes bucone Canes ofal pe Yele Tpe vest les _ LD & fro ride romulns torome rrcthis hy (vype CNet gret whbaitce pat vure he biges vpn Eprii AVX nenenes hit his awne nome as hit noÞ hat hems to tnctkan + teltes biugynes = : lang aber T alardie lyCtes A homes || Gyth Yfne er on pe Erench lod Fey brut? on mony honkkes ful brote bre tayn he Cette; Yhere Gerre « Grake x Gonder bilypeshat, ont p ine oft bope blysse ‘~ blater fnllkete hats (kyfted cone Ant qnen yig bretayn Wats bigged tn prs burn ryeh bol& breden perine baret pat loten mM mony turned tyme tene pat Grozten mo ferlyegon pig fol& han Fallen here oft if perm any op pat qSot (yn pat alk tyme bot of alle pat here built of bretaygne pes ay Gay arthur pe hendelt as phat herd telle tes Moray 44, 3h thngton st 3 bat M.S. Cott. Nero. A.x.fol. 91. INTRODUCTION. xl at his tablz eend*.” And a little further on, among the books which the same worthy had “at hiz fingers endz,” he mentions ** Syr Isenbras, Syr Gawyn, and Olyver of the Castl.” Indeed there can be little doubt that Sir Gawayne was the prototype which furnished to Spenser the character of his Sir Calidore, In whom it seemes that gentleness of spright And manners mylde were planted naturall, To which he adding comely guize withall, And gracious speach, did steale mens hearts away ; Nathlesse thereto he was full stout and tall, And well approv'd in batteilous affray, That him did much renowme, and far his fame display. Faerie Queene, B. vi. c.1. st.2. Having dwelt so long on the subject of our Hero's fame in England, it is scarcely necessary to add, that in southern Scotland the popularity of his exploits could not have been less, since he there was claimed as one of their own chieftains, the Lord of Galloway. The Scotish poems published in the present volume will best show how he was regarded by the writers of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, but they also prove, that these writers were indebted to Anglo-Norman romance-literature for nearly all that they knew of him. This is an important fact in the history of Scotish literature, and hitherto has not received the attention it deserves. The same remark may extend to Wales, as proved by the publication of the Mabinogion. If we now look towards Germany, we shall find at an early period the romances of the Round Table received there, as borrowed from the French originals. Hartman von Owe translated the Chevalier au Lion at the commencement of the thirteenth centuryf, * Letter on the entertainment of the Queen at Kenilworth, p. 34, 1575. 12mo. Oliver of the Castle is a mistake for, or corruption of, Oliver of Castille. + Printed in Miiller’s Sammlung, vol. ii. 4to, 1785. f xlil INTRODUCTION. and at the same period Wolfram von Eschenbach composed his romances of Parzival and Titurel from the authority of Kyot of Provence*, The proper names in these are very much altered, and other liberties taken, but in the German Parzival, as in the French text, Sir Gawayne occupies the larger share of the poem. Goldast in his Parenetica, p. 377, quotes a distich from a German poem intitled by him Historia Gewani, but in all probability it is taken from the Parzivalt. In the © Altdeutsche Bliitter ” are also printed three fragments of old German romances from MSS. of the 13th, 14th, and 15th centuries, relating to Gawayne, but it is doubtful to what works they belong}. The same personage is mentioned in the romance of Lohengrin, which belongs to the same cycle§, as well as in the romance of Wigolais, by Wirnt von Gravenberg, of which I have spoken in my Notes, (p. 347.) Towards the end of the fifteenth century a cyclic compilation from the Round Table narratives was made by Ulrich Firterer, a poet of Bavaria, and the work is still preserved in manuscript at Munich and Vienna|. Among the Flemish poets the adventures of Gawayne were equally well known, and at as early a period. They are referred to by Jacob von Maerlant, (who died about the year 1300,) in his Alezandreis, and also by Jan de Helu, who was his contemporary, and by Jan de Clerk, who died in 13504. Besides these inci- * Printed in the edition of Eschenbach’s works by Lachmann, 8vo, Ber]. 1833, The Parzival consists of 24,678 lines. + See Vonder Hagen’s Grundriss zur Geschichte der Deutschen Poesie, p. 122, 8vo, Berl. 1812. t Vol. ii. pp. 148—159, 8vo, Leipz. 1838. § Edited by J. Gorres, from a MS. in the Vatican, 8vo, Heidelb. 1813. In this, Sygelint, daughter of Gawayne, is noticed, || Von der Hagen Grundy. etc., p. 153. See also Altdeutsche Gedichte aus den Zeiten der Tafelrunde, v. F. F. Hofstater, 2 Thi. 12mo, Wien, 1811. { See Hoffman's Horae Belgicae, pt. i. pp. 48, 52, 8vo, 1830; and Mone's Ubersicht der Niederlindischen Volks- Literatur, p. 38, 8vo, Tiib. 1838. INTRODUCTION. xliii dental passages, a poem consisting of 11,300 lines is extant, composed by Penninc and Peter Vostaert in the fourteenth century, in which the exploits of Gawayne are principally narrated, and which is, doubtless, a translation of the French Perceval*. Even in the remoter regions of the North, the romances of Perceval, Ywaine, Erec and Enide, Tristan, and many more of French origin, found their way, and Icelandic versions of them are still preserved in the libraries of Stockholm, Copenhagen, and the British Museum. In the list given by Muller in his Sagabibliothek, vol. iii. p. 484, I find ‘‘ Valvent, Artus Kappa, Saga,” or Romance of Gawayne, Arthur’s knight, and in the Additional MSS. in the British Museum, No. 4859, is preserved a transcript, with the title, ©** Nu byriast Valvers [Valvens] pattur, sem var eirn af Artus Kauppum.” It consists only of five chapters, and is evidently a short compilation from the Perceval. In the southern countries of Europe the Round Table romances seem, comparatively speaking, to have been in far less repute. The Italians, indeed, had translations of the Merlin, the Lancelot, and the Tristan, but, with the exception of the last, they were never generally read, but gave way to the more popular romances of Charlemagne and his Douze Pairst. Ariosto, however, takes occasion to eulogise the chivalry of Britain :— Gran cose in essa gia fece Tristano, Lancilotto, Galasso [Galeotto,] Artu, e Galvano. Orlando Furioso, Canto iv. st. 52. And another writer of more recent date, Brusantino, in his Angelica Innamorata, also says,— * Consult the last cited works. Vostaert seems to have completed the poem in the year 1350. + See Panizzi's Boiardo ed Ariosto, Essay, p. 151, 12mo, 1830. f 2 xliv INTRODUCTION. E tra i pregiati Arti gia fu e Tristano, E Bando, e Lancilotto, e '] buen Galvano*. But it was resefved for a native of Cremona, at the request of the Loredani family of Venice, to celebrate Arthur's courteous nephew in a distinct work. It is written in oftava rima, and was printed without date at Milan by Peter Martir and his associates, and intitled, ‘‘ Libro novo de lo Inamoramento de Galvano, etc., composto da il laureato poeta Fossa da Cremona.” By Ferrario it is assigned to Evangelista Fossa, but Count Melzi seems inclined to give it to Matteo Fossa, who died in 1516+. Both agree in stating that it is of extreme rarity, and extremely worthless. Lastly, among the Greeks of the Eastern Empire we meet with the heroes of the Round Table, whose exploits must have been communicated to them in their intercourse with the Franks. This curious fact is proved by the fragment of a romance written in Greek political verses, a private impression of which was printed at Breslau in 1821, by Von der Hagen, and subsequently reprinted at the end of M. Michel’s edition of Tristan, in 1835. Neither of these editors was aware of the fact, that the poem in question is only a portion of a longer romance, translated closely from the Gyron le Courtois of Helie de Borron or Rusticien de Pise, and consequently its composition cannot be assigned to so early a period as the twelfth century, but to the latter half of the thirteenth. I have now only to add a few words respecting the execution of the present volume. The Glossary has cost considerable labor, and will, I trust, be considered of value, but to those who know * Cant. ili. st. 1, edit. 8vo, Vineg. 1553. No such personage as Bando occurs in the Arthurian romances. + See Storia degli antichi Romanzi di Cavalleria, vol. ii. P- 330, 8vo, 1828; and Melzi's Bibliografia de’ Romanci, p. 320, 8vo, 1838. oj om - (iis on ani pig ugh AL hore 09 8 he iy Wee - 14? o L2 INTRODUCTION. xlv the difficulties which attend the explanation of the Northern alliterative poems, its imperfections will not prove matter of surprise. I hope the time may arrive, when the whole of these poems still remaining in manuscript will be published, and I am confident, that until this preliminary step is accomplished, no complete Dictionary of the Northern English can be made. Jamieson’s is, indeed, a work of great industry, and his collection of modern Scoticisms intitled to considerable praise ; but as a critical or etymological guide to the Scotish and Northern dialect of the thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth centuries, it is miserably imperfect and inaccurate. A vicious theory pervades it throughout, which a more extensive acquaintance with the mass of vernacular literature still remaining inedited would, I am convinced, have excluded. The poems here taken from original manuscripts are printed with a scrupulous regard to accuracy, and the abbreviations left as written, but, for the convenience of the reader, a list of these is annexed, and the words are written at length in the Glossary and Notes. The truth is, that editors of our old poetry have, with few exceptions, paid too little attention to the system of writing used by the early scribes, and the consequence is, that but a small portion of all that has been published will bear collation with the originals. I say this advisedly, having myself compared most of the poems edited by Ritson, Pinkerton, Weber, Percy, Ellis, Hartshorne, and others. It is time this were remedied. I have added to the present Introduction, according to the excellent plan adopted by recent French writers, a description of the Manuscripts used by me, which may not be altogether devoid of interest. For three of the transcripts from the Percy MS., my thanks are due in an especial manner to George Baker, Esq., the Historian xIvi INTRODUCTION. of Northamptonshire, who most kindly undertook to make them for me, which he was enabled to do by the liberal permission of the present possessor of the Manuscript, Ambrose Isted, Esq., of Ecton Hall. FREDERIC MADDEN. British Museum, 9th August, 1839. DESCRIPTION OF THE MANUSCRIPTS USED IN THE PRESENT VOLUME. I. Cotton MS. Nero A. x. A small quarto volume, consisting of three different MSS. bound together, which originally had no connection with each other. Prefixed is an imperfect list of contents, in the hand-writing of James, the Bodley Librarian. The first portion consists of a panegyrical oration in Latin by Justus de Justis, on John Chedworth, archdeacon of Lincoln, dated at Verona, 16 July, 1468. It occupies thirty-six folios, written on vellum, and is the original copy presented by the author. The second portion is that we are more immediately concerned with. It is described by James as “ Vetus poema Anglicanum, in quo sub insomnii figmento multa ad religionem et mores spectantia explicantur,” and this account with some slight changes is adopted by Smith and Planta, in their catalogues ; both of whom assign it to the fifteenth century. It will appear, by what follows, that no less than four distinct poems have been confounded together by these writers. This portion of the volume extends from fol.37 to fol.126, inclusive, and is written by one and the same hand, in a small, sharp, irregular character, which is often, from the paleness of the ink, and the contractions used, difficult to read. There are no titles or rubrics, but the divisions are marked by large initial letters of. blue, florished with red, and several illuminations, coarsely executed, serve by way of illustration, each of which occupies a page. 1. Four of these are prefixed to the first poem. In the first the Author is represented slumbering in a meadow, by the side of a streamlet, clad in a long red gown, having falling sleeves, turned up with white, and a blue hood xviii attached round the neck. In the second the same person appears, drawn on a larger scale, and standing by the stream. In the third he occurs nearly in the same position, with his hands raised, and on the opposite side a lady dressed in white, in the costume of Richard the Second’s and Henry the Fourth’s time, buttoned tight up to the neck, with long hanging sleeves. Her hair is plaited on each side, and on her head is a crown. In the fourth we see the author kneeling by the water, and beyond the stream is depicted a castle, or palace, on the imbattled wall of which appears the same lady, with her arm extended towards him. . The poem commences on fol. 39, and consists of one hundred twelve-line stanzas, every five of which conclude with the same line, and are connected by the itera- tion of a leading expression. It commences thus :— Perle plesaunte to prynces paye, To clanly clos in golde so clere, Oute of oryente I hardely saye Ne proued I neuer her precios pere ; So rounde, so reken in vche araye, So smal, so smothe her syde3 were, Quere so euer I iugged gemme3 gaye I sette hyr sengeley in synglure. Allas! I lefte hyr in on erbere, Pur; gresse to grounde hit fro me got ; I dewyne for dowed of luf daungere, Of pat pryuy perle wfouten spot. The writer represents himself as going in the month of August to seek his pearl or mistress, and falling asleep in a flowery arbour. He is carried in his vision to a stream near a forest, which flows over pebbles of emeralds and sapphires. On the other side he perceives a chrystal cliff, and “a mayden of menske” sitting beneath. At the fote ther of ther sete a faunt, A mayden of menske ful debonere ; Blysnande whyt wat3 hyr bleaunt, I knew hyr wel, I had sene hyr ere. As glysnande golde pat men con schere, So schon pat schene an vnder schore ; On lenghe I loked to hyr pere, Pe lenger I knew hyr more & more. The lady rises and approaches him, and in answer to his inquiries blames him for RIG Rate #- xlix supposing her lost. He wishes to pass the stream, but is told he may not till after death. The lady thence takes occasion to instruct him in religious doctrines, which are of a mystical tendency. The celestial Jerusalem is then pointed out to him, and he beholds a procession of virgins going to salute the Lamb. The lady leaves him to take her place among them; and on his attempting to jump into the stream to follow her, he awakes. The poem concludes on fol. 55>. 2. Then follow two more illuminations; in the first of which Noah and his family are represented in the ark; in the second the prophet Daniel expounding the writing on the wall to the affrighted Belshazzar and his queen. These serve as illustrations to the second poem, which begins at fol. 57, and is written in long alliterative lines. Clannesse who so kyndly cowpe commende, & rekken vp alle pe resownz þ* ho by rizt askez, Fayre forme; my3t he fynde in forering his speche, & in pe contrare kark & combraunce huge. The first part of this poem is occupied with the parable of the marriage-feast, as applicable to cleanness of life. In the second is related the fall of the angels, the creation, and principal events of scripture history to the destruction of Sodom, after which follows a long passage on the birth of Christ, and reflexions of a moral character. The third part embraces the history of Daniel ; and concludes on fol. 82. 3. Two illuminations precede, as before ; one of which represents the sailors throwing the prophet Jonas into the sea, the other depicts the prophet in the attitude of preaching to the people of Nineveh. The poem is in the same metre as the last, and commences thus, fol. 83 :-— Pacience is a poynt, þaz hit displese ofte ; When heuy herttes ben hurt wyth hepyng, other elles, Suffraunce may aswagen hem, & pe swelme lethe, For ho quelles vche a qued, & quenches malyce. It is occupied wholly with the story of Jonas, as applicable to the praise of meekness and patience ; and ends on fol. 90. 4. The Romance intitled by me Syr Gawayn and the Grene Kny3t follows, fol. 91. Prefixed is an illumination, of which an outline engraving is given at p- 18 of the present volume, and needs no further description, except that here and elsewhere the only colors used are green, red, blue, and yellow. A facsimile of the first page of the poem itself is also annexed. It ends on fol. 124, and at the conclusion, in a later hand is written « Hony soit q mal pence,” § which may, perhaps, allude to the illumination on the opposite page, fol. 125, representing the stolen interview between the wife of the Grene Kny3t and Syr Gawayne. (See p. 45.) Above the lady's head is written: l Mi mind is mukul on on, þ* wil me nozt amende, LE Sum time was trewe as ston, & fro schame coupe hir defende. It does not appear very clearly how these lines apply to the painting. Two additional illuminations follow ; in the first of which Gawayne is seen approaching the Grene Chapel, whilst his enemy appears above, wielding his huge axe (see p. 82.); and in the second Sir Gawayne, fully equipped in armour, is represented in the presence of king Arthur and queen Guenever, after his return to the court. (See p-91.) The form of the helmet worn by the knight is here worthy of notice. The third and concluding portion of the Cotton volume extends from fol. 127 to fol. 140°, inclusive, and consists of theological excerpts, in Latin, written in a hand of the end of the thirteenth century. At the conclusion is added Epitaphium de Ranulfo, abbate Ramesiensi, who was abbat from the year 1231 to 1253, and who is erroneously called Ralph in the Monasticon, vol. ii. p. 548, new ed. Zz Il. Tut Tuornton MS. preserved in the Library of Lincoln Cathedral, and marked A.1.17. It is a folio volume written on paper, in a small and occasionally negligent hand, consisting at present of 314 folios, but imperfect both at the beginning and end, and otherwise much injured by neglect’. It was apparently compiled by one Robert de Thornton, between the years 1430-1440. The Contents are, 1. Life of Alexander ; in prose. fol. 1. Beg. .....- downe to pe dyke, and thare he felle, and was alle to-frusched. At the conclusion we read, “ Here ende3 þ* lyf of gret Alexander, conquerour of 1 This MS. was liberally lent to me in 1832, for a. considerable period, by the Dean and Chapter of Lincoln. It was then in thick oaken boards, covered with white leather, and fastened by a clasp, but in so decayed a state, and the leaves in such loose disorder, as to make it absolutely necessary, for the sake of preserving it from destruction, to have it rebound. This I caused to be done, at my own expense, in a © good solid attire of Russia leather,” and I prefixed to it a list of the contents, drawn up with considerable labor, to which I affixed my initials. It was therefore with some surprise I found, on looking into Dr. Dibdin’s ae Bibliographical Tour in the Northern Counties,” 8vo, 1838, that in vol. i. pp. 110-116, the whole of this list was copied in my own words, (with some very trifling alterations, and some very glaring dlunders,) without any proper acknowledgement to myself as the author, but on the contrary, at p. 117, the description is assigned to “Mr. Willson's enlarged notice.” Justice to myself requires me to state this. Either Dr. Dibdin or Mr. Willson has not treated me fairly in this matter. : li alle y* worlde.” It is a literal translation of the Latin prose Life, printed at Strasburg, in 1494, and from this or a similar version the alliterative Scotish Romance in MS. Ashmole 44, seems to have been versified. On the verso of fol. 49 is written in a later hand than the usual text, “ Isto die natus fuit, sancta Maria ante [ Nativitatem?] Domini nostri Jhesu Christi, Robertus Thornton in Ridaylle, anno Domini m°ccccuus.” 2. Prognostications of the weather, etc., written in a different and more recent hand. fol. 50. 3. Lamentacio Peccatoris. fol. 51. Beg. Alle crystyn men pt wawkes me bye. In twenty stanzas of four lines each, written in a later hand than Thornton’s. On fol. 52° is a rude drawing in pen and ink of a combat between a knight and a giant, executed apparently by the same hand. 4. Here begynnes Morte Arthure. fol. 53. Beg. Now grett glorious godd | thurghe grace of hym seluene,. And the precyous prayere | of hys prys modyr. At the bottom of the page is written in red, Then | ygl En espyrance may.... On fol. 93° occurs also the name of © Robart Thornton,” in a scroll attached to an initial letter, and at the end of the poem occurs, “ Here endes Morte Arthure, writene by Robert of Thorntone.” A later hand adds, © Rt. Thornton dictus, qui scripsit sit benedictus. Amen.” Bishop Tanner, and after him Ritson and others, have considered Thornton here and elsewhere as the author, but he is evidently only the seribe. In all probability, this Romance is the “gret Geste of Arthure,” ascribed by Wyntown to Hucheon. (See Notes, p. 303.) 5. Here by-gynnes the Romance off Octavyane. fol. 98°. Beg. Mekylle and littille, olde and 3ynge, Herkyns alle to my talkynge. In six-line stanzas. Unfortunately one half of fol. 108 has been torn away. It differs from the Romance printed by Weber, from the Cotton MS. Calig. A. II., but agrees with the copy at Cambridge, among Bp. More’s MSS. in the Public Library, No.690. (Ff. ii. 38.) D 6. Here begynnes the Romance off Syr Ysambrace. fol. 109. Beg. Jhesu Xp’c, Lorde of heuene kynge, Graunte vs alle his dere blyssynge. In six-line stanzas. At the end is, “ Explicit Syr Ysambrace.” It differs much g2 ie hi from Copland's edition, reprinted by Utterson in his Harly Popular Poetry, vol. i. p. 77. 7. Here bygynnes y* Romance off Dyoclicyane y* Emperour & y* Erle Be- , rade of Tholous, and of y* Emprice Beaulilione. fol. 114°. Beg. Jhesu Criste, God and Lorde in Trynyte, Onely god and persones thre. In six-line stanzas. The close of this Romance has been torn away. It is printed by Ritson, Metr. Rom. vol. iii. p. 93, from Bp. More’s MSS. in Publ. Libr. Cambridge, No. 690, and a third copy exists in the Ashmolean Museum, No. 45. 8. Vita Sancti Christofori. | Her]e bygynnes y* lyffe of y* Story of [S]aynte Cristofre. fol. 1229. Beg. Lordynges, if it be zowre wille, And 3e wille here, and holde zow still. In six-line stanzas. At the end is, © Explicit Vita Sancti Christofori. Thorntone.” 9. Syr Degreuance. fol. 130. Beg. Jhesu, Lorde in Trynite Graunte pam heuene for to see. In eight-line stanzas. At the close is, © Explicit Syr Degreuaunt.” The name is printed erroneously Degrenante by Laing, (who conjectures it may be Sir Degore, which it is not,) and Dygamore by Dibdin. Ritson in his MS. Catalogue of Romances, MS. Add. 10,285, Append., mentions another copy as existing among Bp. More’s MSS. at Cambridge. 10. Incipit Syr Eglamour of Artasse. fol. 138>. Beg. Jhesu p‘ is heuens kyng, Gyff vs alle his blyssyng. In six-line stanzas. There are other copies in MS. Cott. Calig. A. IL, and MS. More, 690. It was printed by Chepman and Myllar at Edinburgh, in 1508, and subsequently by Copland, and by Walley, at London. 11. De Miraculo beate Marie. fol. 147. Beg. Jhesu, Lorde in Trinyte, Po Þ* was, and es, and aye schalle be. In six-line stanzas. The story relates to a wicked knight, who is converted from his sins by a friar. lit 12. Lyarde. fol. 148. Beg. Lyarde es ane olde horse, and may noght wele drawe, He salle be putt in to pe parke, holyne for to gnawe. At the end is, © Here endys Lyarde.” The tale is of an indecent cast. 13. Tomas off Ersseldoune. fol. 149°. Beg. Lystyns, lordynges, bothe grete and smale. In stanzas of four lines each. At the end, © Explicit Thomas of Erseledownne.” It is imperfect; part of fol. 152 and nearly the whole of fol. 153 having been torn away. It was printed from this copy by Laing in his Popular Poetry of Scotland, 4to, 1822, and previously had appeared in Scott's Border Minstrelsy and Jamieson's Popular Ballads, from the Cotton MS. Vitell. E. x., and MS. More Ff. v. 48. 14. Here by-gynnes the Awntyrs of Arthure at the Terne- Wathelyne. fol. 154. Printed in the present Volume, p. 95. A fac-simile of the commencement is annexed, which will shew the general character of the MS. 15. Here bygynnes the Romance off Syr Perecyuelle of Gales. fol. 161. Beg. Lef, lythes to me, Two wordes or thre. In stanzas of eight lines. No other copy is at present known, but it is but of little merit as a composition. 16, 17, 18. Charms for the tooth-ache. fol. 176. 19. Epistola Sancti Salvatoris. fol. 176°. 20. Prayer in Latin, with a Proem in English. fol. 176°. 21. A Preyere off the Fyve Joyes of oure Lady [in] Ynglys, and of the Fyve Sorowes. fol. 177°. 22. Psalmus, Voce mea ad Dominum clamaui. fol. 178. 23. Here bygynnys Fyve Prayers to the wirchipe of the Fyve Wondys of oure Lorde Jhesu Cryste; in Latin. fol. 178. 24. Oracio in Ynglys. fol. 178%. 25. A Colett to oure lady Saynt Marye; in Latin. fol. 178. 26. Oracio in modo Collecte, pro amico. fol. 178>. 27. Antiphona Sancti Leonardi, cum Collecta. fol. 178. 28. Here begynnes the Previte off the Passioune of owre lorde Jhesu. fol. 179. Beg. Who so desyres to fynd comforthe and gostely gladnes. At the end is written, © Buplicit Bonauenture de Misterijs Passionis Jhesu Christi.” liv 29. Incipit tractatus Willielmi Nassyngtone, quondum Aduocati Juris Eboraci, de Trinitate et Vnitate, cum declaracione operum Dei, et de passione Domini nostri Jhesu Christi, ete. fol. 189. Beg. A, Lord God of myghtes maste, Fadere and Sone, and Haly Gaste, Fader, for þ* ert almyghty, sone for thow ert alle wytty. Tanner notices this poem from the present MS., and so does Warton, Hist. Engl. Poetry, vol. iii. p. 9, who with his usual inaccuracy confounds it with Nafsyngton’s translation of John de Waldeby's Myrrour, and then assigns the author to the year 1480; although, in the Royal Library, British Museum, there is a copy of Nafsyngton’s version of the Myrrour, dated in 1418, MS. Reg. 17, C. viii. 30, 31, 32. Prayers in verse. fol. 191°. 33. Of the vertuz of the haly name of Jhesu. fol. 192. A translation from Richard Hampole’s comment on the verse Oleum effusum nomen tuum, etc. 34. A tale pat Richerde Hermet [made]. fol. 193°. Beg. When I hade takene my syngulere purpos, and lefte þ® seculere habyte. 35. A prayere pat p* same Richerde Hermet made, p* es beried at Hampulle ; in Latin. fol. 193%. 36. Vmpnus, quem composuit Sanctus Ambrosyus. fol. 193°. 37. De imperfecta contricione. fol. 194. Beg. Rycherde hermyte reherces a dredfulle tale. 38. Moralia Richardi heremite, de natura apis. fol. 194. Beg. The bee has thre kyndis. At the foot of this folio is written “ Edward Thornton,” in a hand of Henry the Eighth’s time. 39. De vita cujusdam puelle incluse propter amorem Christi. fol. 194». Beg. Alswa Heraclides, pe clerke, telles. At the close is, ‘‘ Richerd heremyte reherces pis tale in ensampille.” 40, 41. Two Latin extracts from “ Richardus Herymyta.” fol. 195, 42. A notabille Tretys off the ten Comandementys, drawene by Richerde the hermyte off Hampulle. fol. 1959. Beg. The fyrste comandement es, Thy Lorde God þ* salle loute. 43. Idem de septem donis Spiritus Sancti, Also of þ* gyftes of the Haly Gaste. fol. 196. Iv 44. Idem de dilectacione in Deo. Also of þ* same, delyte and zernyng of Gode. fol. 196». 45. Incipit Grenn Sancti Edmundi, Cantuar. Archiepiscopi, i in Anglicis. Here begynnys the Myrrour of Seynt Edmonde, p* Ersebechope of Canterberye. ff.197-209. Beg.. Videte vocacionem vestram. This wordes sayse saynte Paule. Edmund Rich, the author of the Latin original of this treatise, died in 1242. 46. Tractatus de dominica oracione. fol. 209°. Beg. In alle the wordes pat er stabilled. 47. Poetical address to Christ. fol. 211. Beg. Jhesu Criste, saynte Marye sonne. In stanzas of four lines. At the end is, Explicit. Amen. Thorntone. Amen. 48. Another metrical orison, in six-line stanzas. fol. 211°. Beg. Fadir, and Sone, and Haly Gaste. 49, Another, to Christ. fol. 212. Beg. Jhesu Criste, Goddes sune of heuene. 50. Incipit a Meditacione of p* Fyve Woundes of oure Lorde Jhesu Criste ; in Latin. fol. 212. 51. A Meditacione of the Crosse of Criste ; in Latin. fol. 212. At the end is added, « R. Thorntone dictus, qui scripsit sit benedictus. Amen.” 52. Moral Poem, in stanzas of four lines. fol. 213. Beg. When Adam dalfe and Eue spane | Go spire, if b" may spede, Whare was pane þ* pride of mane | pat nowe merres his mede. 53. Six lines of poetry ; perhaps composed by Thornton himself. fol. 213°. Beg. Jhesu Criste, have mercy one me. 54. Here begynnes a Sermone pat Dane Joh'n Gaytryge made, þ* whilke teches how scrifte es to be made, and whare af one in nea how many thynge3 solde be consederide. fol. 213>. Beg. Als a grett doctour schewes in his buke. 55. Hymn to Christ ; in four-line stanzas. fol. 219. Beg. Jhesu, thi swetnes wha moghte it ‘se. lvi 56. Religious treatise, in prose: fol. 219°. Beg. Dere frende, wit þ* wele, pat pe ende and þ* soueraynte of perfeccione. 57. Moral Poem. fol. 222. Beg. pi joy be ilke a dele to serue thi Godd to paye. Imperfect at the end, as is the next piece at the beginning, a folio having teeny here torn out. 58. Treatise on Active and Contemplative Life, fol. 223. Beg: 74 wzz menne pat ware in prelacye, and oper also pat ware haly temporalle menne. 59. Prose religious treatise. fol. 229°. Beg. Wit thou wele, dere frende, pat pof pou had neuer done syne. 60. Of Sayne Joh'n þ* euaungelist. fol. 231. Beg. Of alle mankynde pat he made, pat maste es of myghte, And of p® molde merkede and mesured that tyde. An alliterative poem in stanzas of fourteen lines each, of which the third, fifth, and seventh rhyme, and the second, fourth, sixth and eighth. At the close are six shorter lines, of which the first, second, fourth and fifth rhyme, and the third and sixth. 61. Prose tract on Prayer. fol. 233». Beg. Prayng es a gracyous gyfte of owre Lorde Godd. 62. De gracia Dei. fol. 240. Beg. Off Goddis grace stirrand and helpand. 63. Hic incipit quedam reuelacio. A Reuelacyone schewede to ane holy womane now one late tyme. fol. 250. Beg. Alle manere of thyng pat es by-gunne. This revelation is stated to have occurred on St. Lawrence’s day, 1422, which may assist in determining the age of the Manuscript. 64, 65. Two hymns, in Latin. fol. 258. ° 66. Here bygynnys Sayne Jerome Spaltyre; in Latin. fol. 258°. Adjoined are various Latin prayers. On the margin of fol. 266 is written in a hand of the sixteenth century, “ Dorythy Thornton.” : Ivii 67. Religio Sancti Spiritus religio munda. fol. 271. Beg. Off the Abbaye of Saynte Spirite, that es in a place that es callede Conseyence. A, dere brothir and systirs. This is the well-known treatise of the © Abbaye of the Holy Goste,” generally ascribed by bibliographers to John Alcock, bishop of Ely, who died about 1498. That this statement is erroneous, appears not only from the presumed date of the present MS., but by the fact, that there is a copy of the treatise in the Vernon MS. Bodleian Library, written in the reign of Richard the Second, before Alcock was born! Among the MSS. preserved in the library at Lambeth, No. 432, art. 2, a copy of this treatise is attributed to Richard Hampole, and this statement is not unlikely to be the true one. 68. A religious Poem. fol. 276». Beg. The begynnyng es of thre. 69. Ista oracio que sequitur est de vit. gaudia (sic) beate Marie virginis, per sanctum Thomam et Martirem, Cantuariensem episcopum edita. fol. 277°. 70. Anoper Salutacioune tille oure Lady, of hir fyve Joyes; in Latin. fol. 277°, 71. Ane Antyme to p* Fadir of heuene, w' a Colett; in Latin. fol. 278. 72. Anoper anteme of p* passyoune of Criste Jhesu ; in Latin. fol. 278. 73. A Colecte of grete pardone oon to Crist Jhesu; in Latin. fol. 278. 74. Latin hymn to Christ. fol. 278°. At the top of the page is written, © Thorntone. Misereatur met Deus!” 75. A Preyere to p® wounde in Crystis syde; in Latin. fol. 278». 76. Memento, homo, quod sinis (sic) es, a Poem in four-line stanzas, each of which rhymes with the same syllable. fol. 279. Beg. Erthe owte of erth: es wondirly wroghte, Erthe hase getyn one erthe: a dignyte of noghte. 77. Hic incipit liber de diuersis medicinis, et primo, pro capite, ff, 280-314°. Beg. For werke and vanyte ine þ* hede. This treatise is imperfect, the latter leaves having been wholly or partly torn away. The authority of the Rector of Oswaldkirk is often referred to by the compiler, and the names of Magister Will. de Excestre and Syr Apiltone are also cited. The scribe and compiler of this volume, Robert de Thornton, is stated by Mr. Laing to have held some situation in the cathedral of Lincoln, and afterwards to have become archdeacon of Bedford, and to have died in May, 1450. The internal h Ivii evidence of the volume is altogether against such a supposition. From the general contents it appears evidently to have been compiled by a native of Yorkshire, and in all probability by a member of the family of Thornton, which was seated in the Wapontake of Rydale, in the North Riding of Yorkshire, in whose possession it remained till the close of the sixteenth century, as appears by the entries on ff. 194 and 266. Compare the pedigree of Thornton in MS. Harl. 6070, fol. 11, in which the same family names occur. The mention of the Rector of Oswaldkirk and Syr Apiltone concur to prove this conjecture, since Oswaldkirk and Appleton both lie in the same immediate district. Ritson's supposition (Bibl. Poet., p. 107.), that the compiler of the MS. was the same person as Robert de Thornton, Prior of Bardney, in Lincolnshire, is improbable, but it is possible that he may have been the same who was Vicar of Silkeston in the Deanery of Doncaster, in the year 1425, See MS. Add. 11,400, p. 55. III. MS. Douce, now in the Bodleian Library. It consists of eleven folios of coarse paper, written in a large, inelegant, but very legible character, in the reign of Edward the Fourth. The guide-lines for the scribe have been ruled with a rough plummet, and at the bottom of each leaf is a series of signatures in red, beginning with a. 7., and ending with 6. ii. The large initial letter at the commencement is coarsely colored with red. There are about thirty lines on a page, and no punctuation is used except in the middle of a line. On the inside of the cover appears the autograph of “ J. Baynes, Grey’s Inn, 1781.” IV. Porxineton MS. No. 10. A small quarto volume, written on vellum and paper, in the reign of Edward the Fourth. ff. 211. Its Contents are as follows: 1. Secundum Anticos Grecorum. fol. 1. Beg. The man pat fallep syke pe fyrst day of eny monep. This tract consists of rules for sickness or health on certain days; the lucky and unlucky days; rules for the weather; natures of the planets, etc.; and concludes with a short chronology, from the beginning of the world to the battle of Agincourt, in 1415. 2. A Calendar of the days, hours, and minutes in each monta. fol. 4. On fol. 4” occur the names of Griffith Owen of the county of Carnarvon, and of John Williams, petty constable of the parish of Llanarmon. 3. A Table of the hours of day and night. fol. 5. 4. Rules regarding Nativities ; in Latin. fol. 6. 5. Explanation of a Calendar made a.p. 1463 (which is missing) ; of the feast-days, hours of the day, altitude of the sun, etc. fol. 6°. lix 6. Rules for venesection, etc., with a figure. fol. 7. 7. A Table of Eclipses, calculated for the years 1462-1481. fol. 7°. 8. For knowlege of the impressions concerning pe wedyr, fol. 8». Beg. Fyrst it ys to know pt that the eyere ys deuyded. 9. For to know in what sygne and degre pe mone ys. fol. 11. 10. Syre Gawene and the Carle of Carelyle. fol. 12. Printed in the present volume, Append. No. I. There is no title to this romance in the MS. A leaf is out of place between ff. 14 and 15, which ought to be fol. 66. 11. Here begynnythe a schorte tretice for a manne to knowe wyche tyme of the yere hit is best to graffe or to plante treys, and also to make a tre to bere a maner frute of diverys colourys and odowrys, w* many othere thyngys. fol. 27. Beg. When the mone is in ¢auro, hit is good to plante treys of pepyns. 12. Some other receipts of the same nature, which may be part of the same treatise. fol. 32. 13. Here begynnythe the crafte of lymnynge of bokys, etc. fol. 33. Beg. To temper vermelone to wryte ther w*, grynde vermelone one a stone. At the end is added on a scroll the name of the scribe or compiler, © H. Hattun.” 14. A Poem without title; in six-line stanzas. fol. 53. Beg. Louely lordynges, ladys lyke, Wyues and maydyns ryallyke. 15. The Tale of Ten Wives ; an amusing but indelicate Poem, in stanzas of six lines. fol. 56°. Beg. Leve, lystynes to me, Two wordys or thre. 16. Complaint of a Lover, in four-line stanzas. fol. 59°, Beg. Lord, how schalle I me complayne. 17. Moral Poem, in stanzas of four lines. fol. 61. Beg. As I went one my playing. 18. Vision of St. Philibert, or Disputation between the Body and the Soul ; in stanzas of seven lines; translated from the Latin. fol. 63%. Beg. The fadyr of pytte and most of myserycorde. h 2 lx 19. Moral Poem, in stanzas of five long lines and one short one. fol. 79°. Beg. Erthe vppon erth is woundyrly wrozte. A much enlarged copy of the poem in the Lincoln MS. A. 1. 17. fol. 279. 20. Mourning of the Hare. fol. 81°. Beg. Bia forrest as I gane fare. A much better and fuller copy than that printed in Hartshorne’s Metrical Tales, p- 165 ; from MS. More, Ff. v. 48. 21. The Knyite his wyfe, in couplets. fol. 83>- Beg. Ther was a knyzt in a cu[n]ttre, þ* ryche man was wont to be. 22. The holly mane sente Marttayne. fol. 86>. Beg. As he lay in his wesione. 23. Narracyone of sente Tantene. fol. 87. Beg. Saynt Antony also manny a tyme. 24. Poetical address to the Virgin; in four-line stanzas. fol. 87°. Beg. Off alle þ* bryddus p* euer zeyt were. 25. For p* molde Þ* ys fallone doune; a receipt in prose. fol. 89>. 26. Several more receipts of a similar description. fol. 90. 27. Her begynnethe þ* lyfe of Þ* glorus uergyne seynt Katryne, p* wyche lyffe was wrytyne of Athanaysus, Þ* gret doctor ; in prose. fol. 91. Beg. In þ* grete cite of Alexandyr ther was a kynge. 28. A strange prosaical medley ; in the form of an epistle. fol. 129. Beg. A, syre, A, 3e syr, and ze, syr Johne. 29. Be trewe, and holde þ* 3e have hyzt ; in stanzas of eight lines. fol. 130. Beg. Be trewe, and holde pt ze haue hy3te. 30. A similar poem, by the same author. fol. 1309. Beg. A, dere God, haue I deservyd this. a 31. Here bethe the Stacyons of Rome ; in prose. fol. 132. Beg. In Rome bethe ii*, paresche churchs. lxi At the end is written, © Explycyt tractus de indulgencia romana siue apostolica.” 32. The good wyfe wold a pylgremage; in four-line stanzas. fol. 135°. Beg. The good wyf wold a pylgremage © Vnto pe holly londe. A similar poem to the present, intitled, “ How the Goode Wif thaught hir Doughter,” was edited by me from a MS. in the possession of C. W. Loscombe, Esq., of Pickwick House, Wilts, 8vo. 1838. 33. The Friar and the Boy. fol. 139. Beg. God pt dyed for vs alle, And dranke bop® eyselle and galle. A better and fuller copy than that printed by Ritson, in his Pieces of Ancient Popular Poetry, p. 35; but it omits all the lines after 1. 397, and concludes with twenty-one different lines instead. 34. A Poem without title; in stanzas of eight lines. fol. 150. Beg. As I stod in a ryalle haulle. 35. A ludicrous Poem ; in couplets. fol. 152. Beg. Herkons to my tale pt I schalle here schow. At the conclusion we read © Explycyt trutallys.” A similar strange composition is printed by Hartshorne, p. 145. 36. Epistle to a lady ; in couplets. fol. 154. Beg. Honowre w*t alle mannere of heylle. 37. Have my hert; in eight-line stanzas. fol. 154°. Beg. Have alle my hert, and be in peys. 38. Poem without title; in stanzas of four lines. fol. 153°. Beg. As I cam by a forrest syde. 39. The Sege of Jerusalem ; in prose. fol 157>. Beg. Al men p* wylle here of p* sege of Jerusaleme. At the end, © Her enddyth þ* sege of Jerusaleme.” 40. Terms of Venery, etc., taken from Juliana Barnes. fol. 184. 41. Sentences in verse. fol. 187». Beg. Aryse erlly, And serve god dewoutly. Ixii 42. Extracts from Juliana Barnes’ Treatise of Hawking. fol. 188°. 43. Prophecy of Merlin. fol. 192. Beg. When þ* cocke in þ* northe hathe byld his neste. Printed among the Collection of Ancient Scottish Prophecies, pp. 6-9, reprinted for the Bannatyne Club from Waldegrave's edition, 1603. 44. Letter from Balteser, son of the King “of Sarsyn,” to the Duke of “ Borgeyne ” [Burgundy]. fol. 193?. Beg. Baltesere, be þ® grace of Mahounde, sone of p* kynge of Sarsyn. 45. This byne p* presentacyons þ* p* lordus of p® cetty of Vennes haue present to oure fader p* pope geneste [agenste] þ* Torke. fol. 194. 46. A Poem without title ; in stanzas of twelve lines. fol. 195. Y Beg. Timor mortis conturbat me, Thys is my song in my olde age. A different poem with the same burthen, composed by Lydgate, is in MS. Harl. fol. 128>. and Dunbar also adopted the same refrain in his Lament for the Makkaris, vol. i. p. 211, ed. Laing, 8vo, 1834. : This and the three following articles are written by a different hand. 47. Seven moral lines. fol. 198. Beg. Dysseyte disseyvethe. 48. Carol, or song. fol. 198. Beg. Mery hit ys in May mornyng. 49. Another. fol. 198. Beg. The ster he schynythe boþ® ny3te and day. 50. Carol, or religious poem. fol. 200. Beg. Why, why, what ys pis, why hit ys. 51. A Christmas carol, in Latin and English. fol. 201. Beg. Christe qui lus est, etc. A baby ys borne, vs blys to brynge. 52. Carol. fol. 202. Beg. Hey, hey, hey, hey, þ* borrys hede is armyd gay. Probably imperfect. It differs much from the Boars-head Carols printed by Ritson and Sandys. xiii 53. Moral Poem, in the form of a dialogue. fol. 203. Beg. Be a forrest as I gane walke. At the end is the colophon, © Explycyt Marcy and Ryittusnis.” 54. The Marchand. fol. 207°. Beg. Lystons, lordyngus, I yow pray. It is imperfect, ending with 1. 214 of Ritson’s edition in Pieces of Popular Poetry, P- 77. It contains many various readings from the printed text. V. MS. Douce. A small quarto volume, ff. 48, written on paper, in the year1564, and illustrated with rude colored drawings. It contains transcripts of several Romances, apparently taken from editions earlier than Copland’s. _1. Here begynneth the hystorye of the valyaunte knyght, Syr Isenbras. It contains several variations from Copland's edition, but is imperfect, ending with 1. 411. 2. Syr Degore. The MS. commences at 1. 415 of Copland's edition, as reprinted by Utterson, and is very imperfect. At the end is written, © Here endeth the Tretyse of Syr Degore.” In Heber's sale, Lot 556, was an unique copy of an edition by Wynkyn de Worde, from which perhaps this transcript was made. 3. Jeaste of Syr Gawayne. Printed in the present Volume, Append. No. IT. It commences imperfectly, and at the end is drawn a device of a shield bearing three fleurs de lis, supported by two angels. Beneath are the initials E. B., which are probably those of the transcriber. See Notes, p. 348. 4, Syr Eglamoure. This is also imperfect. Dr. Bliss has in his possession some fragments of an edition earlier than that of Copland’s, which perhaps may have served for the text of the present transcript. At the end of this MS. is a device of the letters IHS, and the date 1564, the period of its completion. VI. Taz Percy MS. Now in the possession of Ambrose Isted, Esq., of Ecton Hall, Northamptonshire. A minute account of the volume, with a list of the first fifty-nine articles in it, is given in Dr. Dibdin’s Bibliographical Decameron, vol. iii. pp. 338-344. I had intended to have completed this list, when indulged with a sight of the volume in 1831, but I was unable to accomplish my wish. Four romance-poems are printed from it in the present Volume for the first time. lxiv VII. MS. Rawitnson, marked C. 86, in the Bodleian Library, and formerly belonging to Knox Ward, Esq., Clarenceux king of Arms. It is a small folio, and consists of two distinct portions. The first, extending from fol. 1 to fol. 30 inclusive, is written on vellum and paper in a late hand of the fifteenth century. It contains a long English poem on the Passion of Christ. Prefixed is a rude illumination of the crucifixion. Beg. Off gostly maters I wylle meve. At the end is: “ Explicit Passio Domini nostri Jhesu Christi, composita a quodam sapientissimo in materna lingua, videlicet Anglicorum, hominibus non intelligentibus scripturarum sensus.” And below we read: © Iste liber constat ... (blot)... Wyllm'us Aylysburrey, monachus Sancti Saluatoris de Bermudesay.” The second portion consists of 159 leaves, and is written on paper in a negligent hand towards the close of Henry the Seventh's reign. The principal contents are as follows. 1. Unconnected moral sentences. fol. 31. Beg. Vtter thy langage wythe good avisement. 2. Policronica; a prose geographical tract. fol. 31%. Beg. Josephus of Jewes pt nobyl was the firste auctour of the booke of Policronica. 3. The tale of Jak and his Stepdame. fol. 52. Beg. God that died for vs alle. Printed by W. de Worde, and thence reprinted by Ritson in Pieces of Ancient Popular Poetry, 8vo. 1791. p. 35. Other manuscript copies, all of which differ much from each other, exist in MS. More, Ee. 4. 35. (which was printed by Mr. Wright, in 12mo. Pickering, 1836.) and MS. Porkington, No. 10, f. 139. 4. Four lines of doggerel poetry, in English and Latin. fol. 59. Beg. Syng I wold, but alas! discedant prospera grata. 5. Fabula; a poem of eight stanzas of eight lines each. fol. 59». Beg. Whenne men motythe of byrdys of gret gentree. The burden of each stanza is, * pulle of her bellys and let her flye.” It is probably composed by Lydgate, but is not found in Ritson’s list of his writings. 6. A poem without title, by Lydgate; No. 61. of Ritson’s list. fol. 61. Beg. For helthe of body couere for colde thyne hede, 7. A poem by Lydgate; No. 214. of Ritson. fol. 62d, Beg. Beholde, mane, lyfte vp thy eye and se. lxv 8. A Poem consisting of fourteen eight-line stanzas. The subject is an address of Christ to man. fol. 65. Beg. Late as I wente one myne pleyng. 9. A Poem on the same subject, in eleven stanzas of twelve lines each. fol. 67. Beg. Thys is Goddis owne compleynte. Cf. MS. Lambeth. 853. p. 81. 10. A Poem by Lydgate, being a Lamentation of the Virgin on Christ’s Passion; No. 201 of Ritson. fol. 69°. Beg. In a tabernacle of a towre. 11. A Poem in ten eight-line stanzas, the burden of which is “I wite my self myne owne wo.” fol. 71. Beg. In my youthe fulle wylde I was. Cf. MS. Lamb. 853. p. 226. 12. A Poem containing the Lamentation of our Lady, in twelve eight-line stanzas. fol. 72>. Beg. Ina chirche as I gane knele. 13. A Poem in eleven twelve-line stanzas, of which the burden is, “ Filius Regis mortuus est.” fol 74°. Beg. As Jhesu rewlithe myne recheles mynde. Cf. MS. Lamb. 853. p. 74. 14. Fabula; a Poem by Lydgate, on the mutability of human affairs, in twenty-two seven-line stanzas. fol. 77. Beg. The wor'de so wyde, the ayre so remeveabille. Other copies occur in MSS. Harl. 7333, f. 192, 2251, f. 23°, 2255, f. 14, and Trin. Coll., Cambr., R. 3, 21. On the authority of the first of these, Ritson attributes it to one © squiere Halsam.” A 15. A Poem by Lydgate, in commendation of virtue; No. 95 of Ritson. fol. 79. Beg. As of hony menne gadrene swetnesse. 16. A Poem by Lydgate, against self-love; No. 99 of Ritson. fol. 81>. Beg. Towarde thende-of frosty January. Printed at the end of an edition of Lydgate’s © Proverbes;” by W. de Worde. See Collier's Catalogue of the Library at Bridgewater House, p. 179, 4to. 1837. i lxvii 25. Landavalle. fol. 119. Beg. Sothely by Arthurys day Was Bretayne yn grete nobyle. This is the Romance of Zaunfal, but varies very considerably from the copy in MS. Cott. Calig. A. II., printed by Ritson, Metr. Rom., vol. ii. p. 170; and in Way’s Fabliaux, vol. iii. p. 233, 8vo. 1815. Another copy is in the Lambeth MS. 305. f. 73; and a modernised text is preserved in the Percy MS. 26. The Weddynge of S* Gawene and Dame Ragnelle. fol. 128%. Printed in the present volume, Appendix, No. VIII. This is the identical poem referred to erroneously by Warton as existing in one of the Tanner MSS. (See Notes, p. 358.) For its discovery, (after the greater part of the sheets of this work was printed off,) I am indebted to the Rev. Henry O. Coxe, Assistant Librarian of the Bodleian Library, who most kindly and promptly undertook a transcript, which was subsequently compared by myself with the Manuscript. It is, unquestionably, the original of the mutilated poem in the Percy folio, and is sufficiently curious to render its insertion in the Appendix an object of interest, although, had I been earlier aware of its existence, some change would probably have been made in the arrangement. The title in the MS. is added by a later hand, and the poem itself is very carelessly written, so that several lines appear occasionally omitted, An entire page, containing lines, is, unfortunately, wanting. 27. Tabula; a Poem-by Lydgate; No. 120, of Ritson. fol. 141. Beg. Ther is fulle lytel sicurnesse. The burden of this poem, which consists of nine eight-line stanzas, is, “ That now is hay summe tyme was grasse.” Ritson inserts it in his list, No. 120, on Speght’s authority, but gives no reference to any MS. 28. Gwyscard and Segismonde. fol. 142°. Beg. Prol. O wofulle worlde, deceyver of mankynde. Work. Whylome was ther an hyghe and myghty prynce. It differs from the version of this story by Walter, of which a MS. copy exists in Trin. Coll. Cambr. R. 3.20, and which was printed by W. de Worde. See Ritson’s Bibl. Poet. p. 108. - 29. Poem, consisting of six stanzas of seven lines each. fol. 155°. Beg. Myne hert is set vppone a lusty pynne. At the end is, © Finis, quod Quene Elyzabeth ;” by whom must be meant the queen of Henry the Seventh ; but she is not mentioned as an authoress by Walpole. 30. Grysille. fol. 156%. Beg. Ther is ryghte atte west syde of Italie. Ixviii This is the Clerhe of Ozenforde's Tale, in Chaucer, f. xli>, edit. Speght, 1602. 31. Latin verses. fol. 174. Beg. Carmina qui letus cecini, cano tristia mestus. 32. Poem in seven-line stanzas, on the murder of a child by the Jews. fol. 1742. Beg. O goode Lorde, thyne name how mervelous. This is the Prioresses Tale, in Chaucer, f. lxv. edit. 1602. It is, however, included among Lydgate's writings in MSS. Harl. 2251, f. 69°, and 2382, f. 97 ; whence Ritson has carelessly inserted it in his list, No. 239. 33. Poem on the Expedition of Henry the Fifth into France. fol. 178. Beg. God that alle this world gane make. Attributed to Lydgate in MS. Harl. 565, f. 502; and thence printed by Sir H. Nicolas, in the Chronicle of London, P- 216. A large portion was previously printed hy Hearne, at the end of Tho. de Elmham, p. 359, from MS. Cott. Vitell. D. XII. At the end of the present copy is written, © Explicit per Johannem Reve Free,” who may be the transcriber. 34. Poem on the reigns of the English kings, from William I. to Henry VI. fol. 187. : Beg. This myghti William, duke of Normandy. Attributed to Lydgate in many MSS., and printed by W. de Worde, 4to. 1530; as also by Hearne, in Append. to Robert of Gloucester, vol. ii. p. 585. A copy in MS. Harl. 2251, f. 2°, has an additional stanza on the reign of Edward the Fourth. lxix MARKS OF ABBREVIATION. d’ de, as, knelyd’, had’, welcomy@, knelyde, hade, welcomyde. ? er, as gp ow, op’, aut’, m’ pe, ther, ouer, aunter, merthe. After the letter p it is expressed by re, as, p*sed, p’wey, presed, prewey. € es, as, kryste, lyzte, strike, weltere, krystes, ly3tes, strikes, welteres. hi he, as, high, 1 nogh, wygh, with, burlich, highe, in-noghe, wyghe, withe, burliche. ht hit. P, I, it de, We, as, hondel’, hanfell’, alt, witt, fematts, hondele, hanselle, alle, wille, femalles. In MSS. of the fifteenth century ft is used even with the final e. m me, as, tym, pam, hem, seldom, tyme, thame, heme, seldome. fi ne, as, ari, myfi, af, fythef, arne, myne, ane, sythene; it sometimes has the power of nne, as, gui, pei, whe, gunne, thenne, whenne. p per, as, pauéture, flep, pile, perauenture, sleper, perile. P pro, as, puinces, pfered, provinces, profered. 9, q%, quod. “ ra, as, gyped, gcos, gce, p yde, graythed, gracons, grace, prayed. r re, as, her’, fair’, sekor’, fy” » here, faire, sekore, syre. i ri, as, ciftmaffe, tifel, cristmasse, trifel. Uru, as, the, true. £ ser, syr. {pial, special. þ*®, the. p', thei; sometimes thi. ps; this. pt, that. þ®, thou. ® ur, as, ténayed, cot, gou?no', yo’, tournayed, court, gouernour, your. = ur, as, Gaynor’, yo", Gaynour, your. ? us, as, Brut?, ho®, þ?, ded?, ell°, Brutus, hous, thus, dedus, ellus ; v* is written for us. wt, with. A short stroke over a letter denotes the absence of m or n, as, trames, tresoi, hy, i, etc., frammes, tresoun hym, in. k Syr Gawayn and The Grene Knyzt. Spr Gawayn and the Grene Knyzt. [FYTTE THE FIRST] i [fol. 91.] IpEN pe fege & pe affaut wat3 fefed at Troye, pe bor3 brittened & brent to bronde3 & afke3, pe tulk pat pe trames of tresoi Þ wrozt, Wat3 tried for his tricherie, pe treweft on erthe ; Hit watz Ennias pe athel, & his high kynde, pat fipen depreced puinces, & patrones bicome . Welneze of al fe wele i pe welt iles, Fro riche Romulus to Rome ricchis hy fwype, W' egret bobbaiice pat burze he biges vpon fyrst, & neuenes hit his anne nome, as hit now hat ; 10 Ticius to Tuskan [turnes,] & teldes bigynes ; Langaberde i Libardie lyftes vp homes ; & fer ow? pe French flod Felix Brut? I On mony bonkkes ful brode Bretayn he fette3, EVOL moos M Where werre, & wrake, & wonder, Bi fype3 hatz wont P ine, & oft bope blysse & blader Ful skete hat3 skyfted syne. B 2 (fol. 91.} 4 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. Il. Ande quen fis Bretayn wat3 bigged bi pis burn rych, Bolde bredden fer ine, baret pat lofden, In mony turned tyme tene pat wro3ten ; Mo ferlyes on pis folde han fallen here oft pen in any of” pat I wot, syn pat ilk tyme. Bot of alle pat here bult of Bretaygne kyges Ay watz Arthur pe hendest, as I haf herde telle ; For pi an ait? in erde I attle to fchawe, pat a felly in sizt same men hit holden, & an outtrage awenture of Arthure3 wond’e;3 ; If 3e wyl lysten pis laye bot on littel quile, I {chal telle hit as tit as I i toi herde, As hit is stad & stoken, In stori stif & stronge, W: lel lett?es loken, i londe fo hat; ben longe. III. pis kyg lay at Camylot vpon kryst-masle, Wt mony luflych lorde, lede3 of fe best, Rekenly of pe roiide table alle po rich bref’, W: rych reuel ory3t, & rechles nyþes ; FP té‘nayed tulkes bi tyme3 ful mony, Tufted ful jolile pise gentyle kniztes, Sypen kayred to þe court, caroles to make. For per pe fest wat3 ilyche ful fiften dayes, With alle pe mete & þe mirþe pat me coupe a-vyle ; Such glaumande gle glorio® to here, Dere dyn vp on day, datfyg on ny3tes, | w* tonge ; "29 [fol. 92.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. Al wat3 hap vpon hee i halle; & chambrez, With lorde3 & ladies, as leueft hi þozt ; With all þe wele of þe worlde bay woned Þ famen, pe most kyd kny3te3 vnder kryste feluen, & fe louelokkeft ladies pat eu? lif haden, & he fe comlokeft kyg pat þe court haldes. For al wat3 pis fayre folk i her first age, Pe hapneft vnder heuen, Kyg hyeft ms of wylle, Hit were * now gret nye to neue So hardy a here 6 hille. | on fille ; IV; Wyle nw 3er wat; fo 3ep fat h* watz nwe cimen, pat day doubble on pe dece wat3 fe douth ferued, Fro fe kyg wat3 cimen w* kny3te i to fe halle, pe chaiitre of fe chapel cheued to an ende ; Loude crye wat3 per keft of clerke3 & oper, Nowel nayted o newe neuened ful ofte ; & fypen riche forth rinen to reche honde-felle, 3e3ed zeres 3iftes on hiz, 3elde hem bi hond, Debated bufyly aboute po giftes ; Ladies lazed ful loude, þoz pay loft haden, & he pat wan watz not wrothe, pt may 3e wel trawe. Alle pis mirþe pay maden to fe mete tyme ; When pay had waschen, worpyly Pay wenten to fete, Pe best burne ay abof, as hit best femed ; Whene Guenore ful gay, grayþed i pe myddes, Dressed on pe dere des, dubbed al aboute, 1 werere, MS. 6 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. Smal sendal bisides, a selure hir ou? Of tryed Tolouse, of Tars tapites i nogh, pat were enbrawded & beten wyth pe best gémes, pat my3t be preued of prys wyth penyes to bye, pe comlokest to discrye, Per glent w* y3en gray, A semloker pat ew? he fy3e, Soth mo3t no mon fay. | in. daye ; V. Bot-Arthure wolde not ete til al were ferued, He wat; fo joly of his joyfnes, & si quat child gered, His lif liked hy ly3t, he louied pe laffe Auf’ to lenge lye, or to longe sitte, So bified him his 3onge blod & his brayn wylde ; & also anoÞ? maner meued hi eke, Pat he pur3 nobelay had nomen, he wolde neu? ete Vpon fuch a dere day, er hy deuifed were Of fa auentur? þyg an vncoufe tale, Of fi mayn m?uayle, pat he my3t trawe, _Of' alderes, of armes, of of? auentur?, Op’ fa segg by bi-fo3t of sa siker kny3t, To joyne wyth hy i iustyg in joparde to lay, Lede lif for lyf, leue vchon of”, As fortune wolde fulsa ho fe fayrer to haue. pis wat3 [the] kyges coiitenatice where he i cot were, v0 At vch farand fest amog his fre meny, | in halle; per fore of face fo fere, (fol. 92%.) He ftiztle3 stif i stalle, 1 Of of, MS, SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. Ful 3ep i pat nw 3ere, Much mirthe he mas w* alle. VI. Thus Þ ftondes i stale pe ftif kyg his feluen, Talkkande bifore pe hy3e table of trifles ful hende ; There gode Gawan wat3 gyþed, Gwenore bifyde, & Aguayn a la dure mayn on pat of? fyde fittes, Bope fe kyges fift? fies, & ful fiker knistes ; Bischop Bawdewyn abof bi-gine3 pe table, & Ywan, Vryn fon, ette wit hyseluen ; pife were dizt on þe des, & derworply ferued, & fipen mony fiker fegge at þe fidborde3. pé þe first cors come with crakkyg of tripes, Wyth mony baner ful bry3t, bat per bi henged, Nwe nakryn noyfe w* be noble pipes, Wylde werbles & wy3t wakned lote, pat mony hert ful hize hef at her towches ; Dayntes dryuen ber wyth of ful dere metes, Foysoii of pe frefche, & on fo fele difches, pat pine to fynde þe place fe peple bi-forne For to fette pe fyluen’, pat fere fewes halden, Iche lede as he loued hy felue Per laght w* outen lope, Ay two had difches twelue, Good ber, & bryzt wyn boþe. j on clothe ; VIE. Now wy! I of hor feruife fay yow no more, For vch wy3e may wel wit no wont pat Þ were , [fol. 98] 8 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. An op” noyfe ful newe nezed biliue, pat þe lude my3t haf leue liflode to cach. For vneþe wat3 pe noyce not awhyle fefed, & pe fyrst co'ce i fe co't kyndely ferued, Per hales i at pe halle dor an aghlich mayft’, On pe most on fe molde on mesure hygh ; Fro þe fwyre to be swange fo sware & fo pik, & his lyndes & his lymes fo longe & fo grete, Half etayn i erde I hope pat he were. Bot mon most I algate myn hy to bene, & pat pe myrieft i his muckel pat my3t ride ; For of bak & of brest al were his bodi sturne, Bot his wombe & his waft were worthily {male, & alle his fetures folzande, i forme pat he hade, For wonder of his hwe mé hade, Set I his semblait fene ; He ferde as freke were fade, & ov? al enker grene. VIII. Ande al grayped i grene pis gome & his wedes, A ftrayt cote ful strezt, pat stek on his fides, A mere mantile abof, mensked w* ine, W: pelure pured apert þe pane ful clene, W: blyþe blain? ful bryzt, & his hod bofe, pat wat3 lazt fro his lokke3, & layde on his fchulderes ; Heme wel haled hofe of pat fame grene, pat spenet on his fparlyr, & clene spures vnder, Of bry3t golde, vpon filk bordes, barred ful ryche, & {choles vnder schankes, þere fe {chalk rides ; & alle his vefture uerayly wat3 clene v*dure, || ful clene ; [fol. 93Þ.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. Bope pe barres of his belt & op? blyþe stones, Þ* were richely rayled i his aray clene, Aboutte hy felf & his fadel, vpon filk werke3, Pat were to tor for to telle of tryfles pe halue, Pat were enbrauded abof, wyth bryddes & fly3es, With gay gaudi of grene, be golde ay i myddes ; - Pe pendaiites of his payttrure, pe proude cropure, His molaynes, & alle pe metail anamayld was þene, Pe fteropes pat he {tod on, stayned of þe fame, & his arson; al after, & his apel sturtes, Pat euer glemed & glent al of grene stones. Pe fole pat he ferkkes on, fyn of pat ilke, A grene hors gret & pikke, A stede ful ftif to strayne, i brawden brydel quik, To pe gome he wat3 ful gayn. | fertayn ; IX. Wel gay wat3 pis gome gered i grene, & pe here of his hed of his hors swete ; Fayre fannand fax vmbe-foldes his schulderes ; A much berd as ' a bufk ov’ his breft henges, pat wyth his hizlich here, pat of his hed reches, Watz enefed al vmbe-torne, a-bof his elbowes, Pat half his armes per vnder were halched i þe wyfe Of a kyge3 capados, pat closes his swyre. Pe mane of bat mayn hors much to hit lyke, Wel crefped & cémed wyth knottes ful mony, Folden i wyth fildore aboute fe fayre grene, L as as, MS. Cc (fol. 94.] 10 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. Ay a herle of þe here, an of? of golde ; Pe tayl & his toppyg twynen of a fute, & boiiden bope wyth a bande of a bry3t grene, Dubbed wyth ful dere stonez, as be dok lasted, Sypen prawen wyth a pwong a þwarle knot alofte, Per mony belle3 ful bry3t of brende golde rungen. Such a fole vpon folde, ne freke pat hy rydes, Watz new? fene i pat fale wyth fy3t er pat tyme, He loked as layt fo ly3t, So fayd al pat hy fy3e, Hit femed as no mon my3t, Vnd? his dyntte3 dry3e. | w' y3e5 X. WheP? hade he no helme ne hawbrgh naup’, Ne no pyfan, ne no plate bat pented to armes, Ne no schafte, ne no schelde, to schwne ne to fmyte, Bot i his on honde he hade a holyn bobbe, Pat is grattest I grene, when greuez ar bare, & an ax i his of”, a hoge & vn-mete, A spetos sparþe to expoi i {pelle quo fo my3t ; Pe hede of an elnzerde pe large lenkþe hade, Pe grayn al of grene stele & of golde hewen, pe bit burnyst bry3t, wt a brod egge, As wel schapen to schere as scharp rafores ; Pe ftele of a stif staf pe sturne hit bi-grypte, Pat watz waiden wyth yrn to be wandez ende, & al bigrauen w* grene, i g cos werkes; A lace lapped aboute, þat louked at þe hede, & fo aft? pe halme halched ful ofte, Wyth tryed tasselez perto tacched i noghe, SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. On botoi3 of pe bry3t grene brayden ful ryche. pis hapel heldez hy i, & pe halle entres, Driuande to pe heze dece, dut he no wope, Haylfed he nev’ ane, bot heze he ou? loked. pe fyrst word pat he warp, © wher is,” he fayd, ©** Pe gowno' of pis gyg ? gladly I wolde Se pat fegg i fy3t, & w* hy self speke, To kny3te3 he keft his y3e, & reled hy vp & doa, He stemmed & con studie, Quo walt per most renoi. || rayfou.” XI. Ther watz lokyg on lenþe, pe lude to be-holde, For vch mo had meruayle quat hit mene my3t, Pat a hapel & a horse my3t such a hwe lach, As growe grene as fe gres & grener hit femed, Pen grene aumayl on golde lowande bry3t? ; Al studied pat Þ stod, & stalked hy nerre, . Wyth al þe wonder of þe worlde, what he worth schulde. For fele fellye3 had pay fen, bot such new? are, For pi for fantoi & fayry3e pe folk þere hit demed ; Per fore to answare watz arze mony apel freke, & al stouned at his fteuen, & fton-ftil feten, In a swogh fylence pur3 pe fale riche, As al were flypped vpon slepe fo flaked horlotez, I deme hit not al for doute, Bot si for cortayfye, Bot let hy pat al schulde loute, Cast vnto pat wy3e. | 1 byze; (fol. 94.] 12 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. XIE. pen Arþ& bifore pe hiz dece pat auenture byholdez, & rekenly hy rewenced, for-rad was he new, & sayde, © wy3e, welcii iwys to pis place, pe hede of pis oftel Artho' I hat ; Lizt luflych ado, & lenge, I pe praye, & quat fo þy wylle is, we schal wyt aft.” “Nay as help me,” q pe hapel, * he pat on hy3e syttes, To wone any quyle i pis won, hit watz not my ernde ; Bot for pe los of pe lede is lyft vp fo hy3e, & py bur3 & py burnes beft ar holden, Stifeft vnder ftel-gere on stedes to ryde, Pe wy3teft & pe worpyeft of be worldes kynde, Preue forto play wyth in of” pure laykez ; & here is kydde cortayfye, as I haf herd carp, & pat hatz wayned me hider, I wyis, at pis tyme. 3e may be feker bi pis braich pat I bere here, pat I passe as I pes, & no ply3t feche ; For had I foided i fere, i feztyg wyfe, I haue a haubergh at home & a helme boþe, A schelde, & a scharp fpere, schinande bry3t, Ande of? weppenes to welde, I wene wel als, Bot for I wolde no were, my wedez ar foft?. Bot if p" be fo bold as alle burnez tellen, p" wyl gnt me godly be gomen pat I ask, Artho’ con onfware, & fayd, © f cortays kny3t, If þ* craue batayl bare, Here fayle3 p" not to fy3t.” | bi ry3t.” [fol. 95.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. XIII. < Nay, frayst I no fy3t, i fayth I pe telle, Hit arn aboute on pis bench bot berdle3 chylder ; If I were hafped i armes on a heze stede, Here is no mon me to mach, for my3te3 fo wayke. For py I craue i fis cot a crystemas gomé, For hit is 301 & nwe 3er, & here ar 3ep mony ; If any fo hardy i pis ho? holde3 hy feluen, Be fo bolde i his blod, brayn i hys hede, Pat dar ftifly strike a strok for an of’, I {chal gif hy of my gyft pys giferne ryche, Pis ax, pat is heue i nogh, to hondel’ as hy lykes, & I fchal bide pe fyrst bur, as bare as I sitte. If any freke be fo felle to fonde pat I telle, Lepe ly3tly me to, & lach bis weppen, I quit clayme hit for eu’, kepe hit as his auen, & I {chal stonde hy a ftrok, ftif on pis flet, Ellez þ* wyl dizt me pe dom to dele hy an of’, & 3et gif hy refpite, A twelmonyth & a day ; Now hy3e, & let fe tite Dar any her ine ozt say.” XIV. If he hem stowned vpon fyrft, {tiller were pane Alle pe hered-men i halle, pe hy3 & pe lose ; pe renk on his roiice hy ruched i his fadel, & runifchly his rede y3en he reled aboute, Bende his brefed bro3e3, blycande grene, | barlay ; [fol. 95>.] 14 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3ZF. Wayued his berde for to wayte, quo fo wolde ryse ? When non wolde kepe hy, w* carp he cozed ful hy3e, And rimed by ful richly, & ry3t hy to speke: * What, is pis Arpures ho?,” q pe haþel péne, © Pat al pe ro” renes of, pur3 ryalmes fo mony ? Where is now yo’ soquydrye & yo" coquestes, Yo gryndel-layk, & yo’ greme, & yo’ grete wordes ? Now is fe reuel & fe reno of pe roiide table Ow-walt wyth a worde of on wy3es speche ; For al dares for drede, wt oute dynt {chewed ! ” Wyth pis he lazes fo loude, pat pe lorde greued ; Pe blod schot for {cham i to his schyre face, He wex as wroth as wynde, So did alle bat per were, pe kyg as kene bi kynde, pé stod pat stif mon nere. | & lere ; XV. Ande fayde, ‘‘ hapel, by heuen py askyg is nys, & as p" foly hat3 frayst, fynde pe be-houes ; I know no gome pat is gaft of py grete wordes. Gif me now py geferne, vpon godez halue, & I {chal baypen py bone, bat þ* boden habbes.” Ly3tly lepe3 he hy to, & la3t at his honde ; pen feerfly pat op freke vpon fote ly3tis. Now hat3 Arthure his axe, & be halme grypez, & sturnely sturez hit aboute, pat stryke wyth hit þozt. Pe {tif mon hy bifore ftod vpon hy3t, . Herre pen ani in pe ho” by pe-hede & more ; Wyth sturne schere per he stod, he stroked his berde, & wyth a coitenaiice dry3e he droz dow his cote, SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. 15 No more mate ne dismayd for hys may dintez, Pen any burne vpon bench hade brozt hy to drynk, Gawan, pat fate bi pe quene, To pe kyg he can enclyne, 340 << I be-feche now w' saze; sene, Pis melly mot be myne.” | of wyne. XVI. ** Wolde 3e worpilych, lorde,” q Gawan to fe kg, ** Bid me boze fro pis benche, & stonde by yow pere, Pat I wyth oute vylanye my3t voyde pis table, 345 & pat my legge lady lyked nat ille, I wolde com to yo’ coifeyl, bifore yo’ cort ryche. For me pink hit not femly, as hit is soþ knawen, Þ? such an askyg is heuened fo hy3e i yo fale, a3 3e 30° self be talenttyf to take hit to yo’ feluen, 350 Whil mony fo bolde yow aboute vpon bench sytten, Pat vnder heuen, I hope, non hazer er of wylle, Ne bett? bodyes on bent, per baret is rered ; I am pe wakkeft, I wot, & of wyt feblest, & left lur of my lyf, quo laytes pe fope, 355 Bot for as much as 3e ar myn em, I am only to prayfe, No boite bot yo’ blod I in my bode knowe, & fypen pis note is fo nys, þ* nozt hit yow falles, & I haue frayned hit at yow fyrst, foldez hit to me, & if I carp not comlyly, let alle pis cort rych, Ryche to-geder con roi, & fypen pay redden alle fame, To ryd fe kyg wyth croi, & gif Gawan pe game. 36d | bout blame,” [fol. 96.] 16 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. XVII. pen comaiided þe kyg pe kny3t for to ryfe ; & he ful radly vp ros, & ruchched hy fayre, Kneled dot bifore pe kyg, & cache3 pat weppen ; & he luflyly hit by laft, & lyfte vp his honde, & gef hy godde3 blessyg, & gladly hy biddes pat his hert & his honde schulde hardi be bope. ©** Kepe pe cofyn,” q pe kyg, © pat þ* on kyrf fette, & if þ® rede3 hy ry3t, redly I trowe, pat þ* schal byden pe bur pat he schal bede aft?.” Gawan got3 to be gome, w* giferne i honde, & he baldly hy byde3, he bayst new? fe helder. pen carppe3 to £ Gawan fe kny3t I fe grene, ** Refourme we oure forwardes, er we fyrre passe. Fyrst I epe pe, haþel, how pat þ* hattes, pat Þ* me telle truly, as I tryst may?” “In god fayth,” q fe goode kny3t, ‘‘ Gawan I hatte, pat bede þe pis buffet, quat fo bi-falle3 aft?, & at pis tyme twelmonyth take at be anoþ?, Wyth what weppen fo þ* wylt, & wyth no wy3 elle, pat of? onfware3 agayn, ‘* Sir Gawan, fo mot I pryue, As I am ferly fayn, pis dint pat f° {chal dryue.” XVIII. “ Bi gog,” q pe grene kny3t, ‘‘f Gawan, me lykes, pat I {chal fange at þy fust pat I haf frayst here ; & p" hat3 redily rehersed, bi reson ful trwe, | on lyue.” [fol. 96Þ.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. Clanly al fe couenaiit pat I fe kyge asked, Saf pat f° {chal fwer me, fegge, bi fi trawpe, pat Þ* schal seche me þi self, where fo þ2 hopes I may be funde vpon folde, & fych þe such wages As-þ* deles me to day, bifore fis douþe ryche.” ** Where schulde I wale pe,” q Gauan, © where is py place ? I wot new? where p" wonyes, bi hy pat me wrozt, Ne I know not fe, kny3t, py cort, ne fi name. Bot teche me truly per to, & telle me howe p" hattes, & I {chal ware alle my wyt to wyne me peder ; & pat I swere þe for soþe, & by my feker trawep.” ‘* Pat is in nogh in nwe 3er, hit nedes no more,” q pe gome i fe grene to Gawan fe hende, ‘Gif I pe telle trwly, quen I fe tape haue, & p" me smoþely hatz smyten, smartly I fe teche Of my ho’, & my home, & myn owen nome, pen may þ* frayst my fare, & forwarde3 holde, & if I spende no fpeche, péne {pede3 f" pe bett?, For þ* may leng i py londe, & layt no fyrre, Ta now py gryme tole to fe, & let fe how þ* cnokez.” * Gladly F, for fope,” q Gawan ; his ax he strokes. | bot flokes ; XIX. The grene kny3t vpon groide graypely hy dreffes A littel lut w* fe hede fe lere he difkoue’3, His longe louelych lokkez he layd ow? his cron, Let fe naked nec to fe note schewe. Gauan gripped to his ax, & gederes hit on hy3t, pe kay fote on fe folde he be-fore fette, D [fol. 97.] 18 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. Let hit doi ly3tly ly3t on fe naked, pat fe scharp of fe {chalk schyndered fe bones, & fchrak pur3 fe schyire grece, & scade hit i twyne, pat fe bit of þe brow stel bot on fe groide. pe fayre hede fro þe halce hit [felle] to pe erþe, pat fele hit foyned wyth her fete, þere hit forth roled ; pe blod brayd fro þe body, þ* blykked on þe grene ; & nawper falt’ed ne fel pe freke new? fe helder, Bot styþly he start forth vpon styf schonkes, & ruyschly he razt out, þere as renkke3 stoden, Lazt to his lufly hed, & lyft hit vp fone ; & fypen bozez to his blonk, fe brydel he cachchez, Steppez i to stel bawe, & strydez alofte, & his hede by pe here i his honde haldez ; & as sadly þe fegge hy i his fadel fette, As non vnhap had hy ayled, þaz hedlez ho we’, He brayde his bluk * aboute, pat vgly bodi pat bledde, Moni on of hy had doute, Bi pat his resonz were redde. XX. For pe hede in his honde he halde3 vp even, To-ward pe derrest on pe dece he dreffe3 fe face, & hit lyfte vp þe y3e-lydde3, & loked ful brode, & meled Þ” much wt his muthe, as 3e may now here. ** Loke, Gawan, þ* be grayþe to go as }" hettez, & layte as lelly til þ* me, lude, fynde, As }" hat3 hette i pis halle, herande fife kny3tes ; 1 he were? 2 blunk ? | i stedde ; [fol. 97.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. 19 To pe grene chapel þ* chose, I charge fe to fotte, Such a dunt as þ hatz dalt differued þ® habbez, To be 3ederly 3olden on nw 3eres morn ; pe kny3t of fe grene chapel men knowen me mony ; For pi me for to fynde if þ* fraystez, faylez þ* neu’, 455 Þer fore com, of” recreaiit be calde, fe be-houes.” With a runisch rout þe rayne3 he torne3, Halled out at fe hal-dor, his hed i his bande, Pat pe fyr of fe flynt flaze fro fole houes. To quat kyth he be-com, knwe non fere, New more pen pay wyste frm queþen he wat3 wonen, be kyg & Gawen pare, At pat grene pay laze & gréne, 3et breued wat3 hit ful bare, 465 A nyvuayl amog fo mene. | what péne? XXI. pa3 Arp’ pe hende kyg at hert hade wonder, He let no semblait be fene, bot fayde ful hy3e To pe comlych quene, wyth cortays speche, << Dere dame, to day demay yow new? ; 470 Wel by-comes such craft vpon cistmasse, Laykyg of ent®lude3, to laze & to syng, Amég pife, kynde caroles of kny3te3 & ladye; ; New? pe lece to my mete I may me wel dres, For I haf fen a felly, I may not for-sake.” 475 He glent vpon f Gawen, & gaynly he fayde, «© Now f, heng vp þyn ax, pat hatz 1 nogh hewen.’ & hit wat3 don abof pe dece, on dofer to henge, per alle men for m’uayl my3t on hit loke, & bi trwe tytel Þ of to telle þe wonder. 430 D2 a 20 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. péne pay bozed to a borde þise burnes to-geder, pe kyg & pe gode kny3t, & kene ms he ferued Of alle dayntye3 double, as derrest my3t falle, Wyth alle maner of mete & mynstralcie boþe ; | anlende: Wyth wele walt pay pat day, til worped an ende, 485 Now þenk wel, £ Gawan, For wope pat þ* ne wonde, pis auenture forto frayn, pat þ* hat3 tan on honde. 490 (FYTTE THE SECOND.] I. his hanfell’ hat; Arthur of auenturus on fyrst, In 3onge 3er, for he 3erned 3elpyg to here, Thaz hym worde3 were wane, when pay to fete wenten ; Now ar pay stoken of sturne werk ftaf-ful her hond. Gawan wat3 glad to be-gyne þose gomne; i halle, 495 Bot Þþaz pe ende be heuy, haf 3e no wonder ; For þaz man be mery in myde, quen pay han mayn drynk, A 3ere 3ernes ful 3erne, & 3elde3 neu? lyke, pe forme to pe fynifment folde3 ful felden. For fi pis 301 ow-3ede, & fe 3ere aft?, 500 & vche fefoii ferlepes sued after of? ; After crysten-masse com þe crabbed lentoii, pat fraystez flesch wyth pe fysche & fode more symple ; Bot péne pe weder of be worlde wyth wynter hit þrepez, [fol. 98.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. Colde clenge3 adoi, cloude3 vp lyften, Schyre schedez þe rayn i schowrez ful warme, Fallez vpon fayre flat, flowrez bere schewen, Bope groiidez & pe greuez grene ar her wedez, Brydde3 busken to bylde, & bremlych sygen, For solace of pe fofte fom? pat sues per aft?, & blosstez bolne to blowe, Bi rawez rych & ronk, Pe note3 noble i noze, Ar herde in wod so wlonk. Il. After þe sesoi of fom? wyth pe soft wyndez, Quen zefer” syflez by self on fede3 & erbez, Wela wyne is þe wort þat woxes þer oute, When pe donkande dewe dropez of pe leuez, To bide a blysful blufch of þe bry3t sane. Bot pé hy3es herueft, & hardenes hy fone, Warne3 hy for be wynter to wax ful rype; He dryues wyth dro3t pe duft for to ryfe, Fro pe face of pe folde to fly3e ful hy3e ; Wrope wynde of pe welkyn wrastelez w' þe sane, Pe leue3 lancen fro þe lynde, & ly3ten on pe growde, & al grayes pe gres, pat grene watz ere ; péne al rype3 & rote3 pat ros vpon fyrst, & p® 3irne3 pe zere I 3ifterdaye3 mony, & wynter wyndez azayn, as pe worlde askez, Til mezel-mas mone, Watz ciien wyth wynter wage ; Pen þenkkez Gawan ful fone, Of his amo? uyage. || bi bonk ; | no sage. $30 22 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. III. zet quyl al-hal-day wt Arp? he lenges, & he made a fare on }* fest, for pe freke3 fake, ‘Wt much reuel & ryche of pe roide table ; Knyztez ful cortays & comlych ladies, Al for luf of pat lede i longyge pay were, 640 Bot new? pe lece ne fe lat? pay neuened bot mþe, Mony ioyle3 for pat ientyle iape3 per maden. For aftter mete, wt mo"nyg he mele3 to his eme, & spekez of his passage, & pertly he fayde, ‘* Now, lege lorde of my lyf, leue I yow ask ; 545 3e knowe fe cost of pis cace, kepe I no more To telle yow tene3 per of new bot tifel ; Bot I am boi to þe bur barely to morne, To fech pe gome of fe grene, as god wyl me wysle.” péne pe heft of pe bur3 bozed to-geder, 550 Aywan, & Errik, & of? ful mony, [fol. 989.) £ Doddinaual de Sauage, be duk of Clarence, Launcelot, & Lyonel, & Lucan pe gode, f Boos, & fir Byduer, bigmé boþe, & mony of? menfkful, wt Mador de la Port. 555 Alle pis compayny of court com pe kyg nerre, For to coafeyl pe kny3t, with care at her hert ; Pere wat3 much derne doel driuen i fe fale, pat fo worthe as Wawan schulde wende on pat ernde, To dry3e a delful dynt, & dele no more, pe kny3t mad ay god chere, & fayde, © quat schuld I wonde, Of destines derf & dere, What may mon do bot fonde ! ” 365 | wyth bronde; Cfol. 99.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. IV. He dowellez þer al þat day, and dressez on þe morn, Afke3 erly hys arme3, & alle were pay brozt ; Fyrst a tule tapit, ty3t ou? pe flet, & miche wat3 þe gyld gere pat glent per alofte ; pe stif mon fteppe3 þeron, & pe ftel hondelez, Dubbed i a dublet of a dere tars, & fypen a crafty capados, clofed aloft, Pat wyth a bry3t blainer was boiden wrt ine ; Pene fet pay pe fabatoi3 vpon pe fegge fotez, His lege3 lapped i {tel w* luflych greuez, W*' polayne3 piched per to, policed ful clene, Aboute his kne3 knaged wyth knotez of golde ; Queme quyffewes þe, bat coyntlych closed . His thik prawen þy3ez, wt bwonges to-tachched ; & fypen pe brawden bryne of bry3t stel ryge3, Vmbe-weued pat wy3, vpon wlonk ftuffe ; & wel bornyst brace vpon his boþe armes, W*' gode cowters & gay, & gloue} of plate, & alle pe godlych gere bat hy gayn schulde, Wyth ryche cote armure, His gold fpore3 spend w* pryde, Gurde wyth a bront ful fure, W' silk fayn vmbe his fyde. | pat tyde ; V. When he wat3 hasped i armes, his harnays watz ryche, Pe lest lachet ow? loupe lemed of golde ; So harnayst as he watz he herknez his masse, 24 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE .KNY3T. Offred & hono’ed at pe heze auter ; Sypen he come; to pe kyg, & to his cort fere3, Lachez lufly his leue at lorde3 & ladyez ; & pay hy kyst & conueyed, bikende hy to kryst. Bi pat watz Gryngolet grayth, & gurde w* a fadel, Pat glemed ful gayly wt mony golde frenges, Ay quere naylet ful nwe for pat note ryched ; pe brydel barred a-boute, w* bry3t golde bouden ; Pe apparayl of pe payttrure, & of be proude {kyrtez, Pe cropore, & pe couertor, acorded wyth pe arsoniez ; & al wat3 rayled on red ryche golde naylez, Pat al glytered & glent as glem of pe fine. péne hentes he pe helme, & haftily hit kyffes, Pat watz stapled stifly, & stoffed wyth ine ; Hit wat3 hy3e on his hede, hasped bihynde, Wyth a ly3th vrysoa ow pe auentayle, Enbrawden & boiden wyth pe best géme3, On brode fylkyn borde, & brydde3 on feme;3, As papiaye3 paynted pernyg bitwene, Tortors & trulofe3 entayled fo pyk, As mony burde per. aboute had bs feué wynt’, Pe cercle watz more o prys, Pat vmbe-clypped hys cron, Of diamaitez a deuys, Pat boþe were bry3t & bro. VI. Then pay {chewed hy pe schelde, pat was of schyr goulez, Wyth þe pentangel de-paynt of pure golde hwez ; He braydez hit by be bauderyk, a-boute pe hals kest?e, Pat bisemed pe fegge femlyly fayre. | I tone; [fol. 99Þ.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. & quy þe pentangel apendez to þat prynce noble, I am i tent yow to telle, þof tary hyt me schulde ; Hit is a sygne pat Salamon fet sa quyle, i bytoknyg of trawþe, bi tytle pat hit habbez, For hit is a figure pat haldez fyue poyntez, & vche lyne vmbe-lappe3 & louke3 i oper, & ay quere hit is emdelez, & Englych hit callen ow? al, as I here, þe endeles knot. For py hit acorde3 to pis kny3t, & to his cler armez, For ay faythful i fyue & fere fyue fype3, Gawan wat3 for gode knawen, & as golde pured, Voyded of vche vylany, wyth vertue3 énoned, For py pe pentangel nwe He ber i fchelde & cote, As tulk of tale moft trwe, & gentyleft kny3t of lote. || 1 mote ; VI. Fyrst he watz funden fautlez i his fyue wyttez, & efte fayled neu? pe freke i his fyue fyngres, & alle his afyaiice vpon folde wat3 i pe fyue woide3 Pat cryst kazt on pe croys, as pe crede tellez ; & quere fo ew? bys mon i melly wat3 stad, His pro po3t watz i pat pur3 alle op” þygez, pat alle his forsnes he fong at pe fyue ioye3, Pat pe hende heuen quene had of hir chylde ; At pis caufe be kny3t comlyche hade i pe more half of his schelde hir ymage depaynted, pat quen he blusched þerto, his belde new payred. pe fyft fyue pat I finde pat pe frek vsed, Wat; fraichyse, & felazschyp, for be al þyg E [fol. 100.) 26 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. His clannes & his cortaysye croked were nev’; & pite, pat passe; alle poyntez, þyse pure fyue Were harder happed on pat hapel þ on any of”. Now alle þese fyue fype3 forfope were fetled on pis kny3t, & vchone halched in of’, pat non ende hade, & fyched vpon fyue poynte3, pat fayld new, Ne famned new i no fyde, ne fundred nouþer, W: outen ende at any noke i quere * fynde, Where eu? be gomen bygan, or glod to an ende. Per fore on his schene schelde schapen watz þe knot, Þ? alle wyth red golde vpon rede gowlez, pat is be pure pentaungel wyth pe peple called, Now grayped is Gawan gay, & lazt his laiice ry3t pore, & gef hem alle goud day, He wende for ew? more. : VIIL He fperred pe sted wt fe spurez, & sprong on his way, So ftif pat pe ston fyr stroke out per aft?; Al pat sez pat femly fyked i hert, & fayde foply al fame fegges til of”, Carande for pat comly, ‘‘ bi kryst, hit is scaþe, pat p", leude, {chal be loft, pat art of lyf noble ! To fynde bys fere vpon folde, i fayth is not epe ; Warloker to haf wro3t had more wyt bene, & haf dy3t 3onder dere a duk to haue worped ; A lowande leder of ledez i londe hy wel semez, & fo had bett? haf ben þe britned to nozt, 1 ay quere ? | wt lore. (fo. 100Þ.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. Hadet wyth an aluisch mon, for angardez pryde. Who knew ew any kyg such coifel to take, As kny3te3 i caueloiiz on cryst-masse gomnez ! ” Wel much wat3 pe warme water þ* walt*ed of y3en, When pat femly fyre fo3t fro po wonez, He made non abode, Bot wy3tly went hys way, Mony wylsa way he rode, pe bok as I herde fay. IX. Now ride3 pis renk pur; fe ryalme of Logres, f Gauan on gode3 halue, þaz hy no gomen fo3t ; Oft leudle3 alone he lenge3 on ny3tes, Per he fonde no3t hy byfore pe fare pat he lyked ; Hade he no fere bot his fole, bi frythez & doiie3, Ne no gome bot god, bi gate wyth to karp, Til pat he nezed ful noghi* i to be Norþe Walez ; Alle þe iles of Anglefay on lyft half he haldez, & farez ow? þe forde3 by pe for-londe3, Ow? at pe Holy-Hede til he hade eft bonk, I fe wyldreneffe of Wyrale ; wonde per bot lyte Pat auf? god of gome wyth goud hert louied. & ay he frayned, as he ferde, at freke3 pat he met, If pay hade herde any karp of a kny3t grene, I any groiide per aboute, of be grene chapel * ; & al nykked hy wyth nay, pat nev? i her lyue pay seze new no fegge pat watz of fuche hwez, pe kny3t tok gates ftraunge, || of grene. 1 pat? 2 nygh? 3 clapel, MS. E 2 || pad’ daye; 28 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. 1 mony a bonk vn-bene, His cher ful oft con chaige, pat chapel er he my3t fene. X. Mony klyf he ow? clambe i contraye3 straiige, Fer floten fro his frende3 fremedly he rydez ; At vche warþe oper wat? per fe wy3e passed, He fonde a foo hy byfore, bot ferly hit were, & pat fo foule & fo felle, pat fezt hy by-hode ; So mony m®uayl bi moit Þ fe mon fynde3, Hit were to tore for to telle of fe tenþe dole. Sumwhyle wyth worme3 he werrez, & wt wolues als, Siwhyle wyth wodwos, pat woned i fe knarrez, Bofe wyth bullez & berez, & borez of quyle, & etayne3, pat hy a-nelede, of þe heze felle ; Nade he ben du3ty & dry3e, & dry3tyn had ferued, Douteles he hade ben ded, & dreped ful ofte. For werre wrathed hy not fo much, pat wyt? was wors, When fe colde cler wat? fro pe cloude3 schadden, & fres er hit falle my3t to fe fale erpe ; Ner flayn wyth pe flete he fleped i his yrnes, Mo ny3te3 pé i nogh i naked rokkez, Þ? as clat?ande fro pe crest pe colde borne renez, & henged heze ow? his hede i hard iiffe ikkles. pus i peryl, & payne, & plytes ful harde, Bi contray carye3 pis kny3t, tyl kryst-masse euen, pe kny3t wel pat tyde, To Mary made his mone, pat ho hy red to ryde, | al one ; (fol. 101.] & wyffe hy to sa wone. SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. XI. Bi a moiite on þe morne meryly he rydes, Into a forest ful dep, þat ferly watz wylde, Hie hillez on vche a halue, & holt wode3 vnder, Of hore oke3 ful hoge a hundreth to-geder ; Pe hafel & fe haz-porne were harled al famen, Wt roze raged moffe rayled ay where, Wt mony brydde3 vnblype vpon bare twyges, pat pitofly per piped for pyne of pe colde. pe gome vpon Gryngolet glydez hem vnder, pur3 mony mify & myre, mo al hy one, Carande for his costes, lest he ne keu? schulde To fe pe feruy of pat fyre, bat on pat self ny3t Of a burde wat3 borne, oure baret to quelle ; & þerfore sykyg he sayde, ‘‘I be-feche fe, lorde, & Mary, pat is myldeft moder so dere, Of fai herber, per he3ly I my3t here masse, Ande þy matyne3 to-morne; mekely I afk, & per to preftly I pray my pat? & aue, He rode 1 his prayere, & cryed for his mysdede, He fayned hy i syþes sere, & sayde © cros kryst me fpede!”’ XII. Nade he fayned hy self segge bot prye, Er he wat3 war i pe wod of a won ia mote, Abof a laide, on a lawe, loken vnder bozez, Of mony borelych bole, aboute bi fe diches ; | & crede.” [fol.101».] 30 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. A caftel þe comlokest pat eu? kny3t azte, Pyched on a prayere, a park al aboute, W' a pyked palays, pyned ful þik, pat vmbe-teze mony tre mo pé two myle. Pat holde on pat on fyde pe hapel auysed, As hit schemered & schon pur3 fe schyre okez ; péne hat3 he hendly of his helme, & he3ly he ponke3 Jesus & fay Gilyan, pat gentyle ar bopfe, pat cortayfly hade hy kydde, & his cry herkened. © Now bone hostel,” cope fe burne, ** I be-feche yow 3ette péne gedere3 he to Gryngolet w* fe gilt helez, & he ful chaiicely hat3 chosen to fe chef gate, pat bro3t bremly þe burne to fe bryge ende, pe bryge watz breme vp brayde, Pe 3ate3 wer {token faste, pe wallez were wel arayed, Hit dut no wyndez blaste. XL, Pe burne bode on bonk, pat on blonk houed, Of be depe double dich pat drof to pe place, Pe walle wod i fe wat? wonderly depe, Ande eft a ful huge he3t hit haled vpon lofte, Of harde hewen ston vp to pe table3, Enbaned vnder pe abataylmét, i þe best lawe ; & fypen garyte3 ful gaye gered bi-twene, Wyth mony luflych loupe, pat louked ful clene ; A bett? barbican pat burne blufched vpon new? ; & inermore he be-helde pat halle ful hy3e, Towre telded bytwene trochet ful pik, Fayre fylyole3 pat fy3ed, & ferlyly long, | I haste ; [fol. 102.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. With coruon coproies, craftyly sleze ; Chalk whyt chymnees per ches he i no3e, Vpon baftel rouez, pat blenked ful quyte ; So mony pynakle payntet wat3 poudred ay quere, Amdog pe caftel carnele3, clambred fo pik, pat pared out of papure purely hit femed. Pe fre freke on pe fole hit fayr i noghe * þozt, If he my3t keu? to com pe cloyft? wyth ine, To herber i pat hostel, whyl halyday lested, He calde, & fone per com A porter pure plesait, On pe wal his ernd he nome, & haylfed pe kny3t eryait. | amnant ; XIV. * Gode £,” q Gawan, © wolde3 þ" go my ernde, To pe hez lorde of pis ho”, herber to craue ?” * 3e, Pet?,” q pe port”, © & purely I trowe’, Pat 3e be, wy3e, welci to won quyle yow lykez.” pé 3ede þ*® wy3e azayn swyþe, & folke frely hy wyth, to fonge þe kny3t ; Pay let doi pe grete drazt, & derely out 3eden, & kneled doi on her knes vpon pe colde erpe, To welcii pis ilk wy3, as worþy hom þozt ; Pay 3olden hy pe brode 3ate, zarked vp wyde, & he hem raysed rekenly, & rod ow? fe brygge ; Sere fegge3 by fefed by fadel, quel* he ly3t, & fypen stabeled his stede stif mé i noze. Knyztez & swyerez comen doi péne, 1 nghe, MS. 2 trowoe, MS. 3 quyle? (fol. 102>.} 32 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. For to bryg pis burne ' wyth blys i to halle ; 925 Quen he hef vp his helme, þer hized i nogh For to hent hit at his honde, þe hende to seruen ; His bronde & his blasoi bope þay token. pé haylfed he ful hendly fo hapele3 vch one, & mony proud mon fer p’fed, pat pryce to hon” ; 830 Alle hafped i his he3 wede to halle pay hy wonen, Þer fayre fyre vpon flet fersly brened. péne pe lorde of pe lede loute3 fro his chambre, For to mete wyth menske þe mon on fe flor; He fayde, ‘‘ 3e ar welci to welde as yow lyke3, Pat here is al is yowre awen, to haue at yowre wylle, * Graat mercy,” q Gawayn, ‘* Per kryst hit yow for-3elde,”’ As freke3 pat femed fayn, 840 AyP of? i arme3 co felde. | & welde.” XV. Gawayn gly3t on pe gome pat godly hy gret, & þuzt hit a bolde burne pat þe bur3 azte, A hoge hapel for þe none3, & of hygh elde® ; Brode bry3t watz his berde, & al bev? hwed, 845 Sturne {tif on pe stryþþe on stalworth schonkez, Felle face as pe fyre, & fre of hys speche; & wel hy femed for fope, as pe fegge pu3t, To lede a lortfchyp i lee of leude3 ful gode. Pe lorde hy charred to a chambre, & chesly* ciiaiide3 850 To delyw? hym a leude, hym lo3ly to ferue ; & pere were boi at his bode burnez i noze, ! buurne, MS. 2 eldee, MS. 5 clefly, MS. SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. Pat brozt hy to a bry3t boure, Þ beddyg watz noble, Of cortynes of clene fylk, wyth cler golde héme3, & cou’tore3 ful curious, w* comlych panez, Of bry3t blaunn?” a-boue enbrawded bisydez, Rudelez renande on rope3, red golde ryge3, Tapytez ty3t to be woze, of tuly & tars, & vnder fete on fe flet of folzande fute. Per he wat3 difpoyled, wyth fpeche3 of my?þe, pe burn of his bruny, & of his bry3t wede3 ; Ryche robes ful rad renkke3 hem bro3ten, For to charge, & to chaunge, & chose of pe best. Sone as he on hent, & happed Þ ine, pat fete on hym* femly, wyth faylande skyrtez, Þe ver by his uifage verayly hit femed Welne3 to vche hapel alle on hwes, Lowande & lufly, alle his lyme3 vnder, pat a comloker kny3t neu? kryst made, Whepen i worlde he were, Hit femed as he my3t Be prynce w* outen pere, i felde Þ felle me fy3t. XVI. A cheyer by-fore fe chemne, Þ charcole bréned, Wat; grayped for £ Gawan, graypely w* cloþez, Whyssynes vpon queldepoynte, ba koyt wer bofe ; & péne a mere mantyle watz on pat mon cast, Of a brow bleeafit, enbrauded ful ryche, & fayre furred wyth ine w' felle3 of fe best, 1 blaunm?, MS. 2 hyn, MS. | hem þozt ; [fol. 103.] 34 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. Alle of ermyn i erde, his hode of pe fame ; & be-fete i pat settel femlych ryche, & achaufed hy chefly', & péne his cher mended. Sone wat3 telded vp a tapit, on trefte3 ful fayre, Clad wyth a clene cloþe, pat cler quyt schewed, 885 Sanap, & falure, & sylu? i sponez ; Pe wy3e wefche at his wylle, & went to his mete. Segge3 hym ferued femly i noze, Wyth fere fewes & fete, fefoide of pe best, Double felde, as hit fallez, & fele kyn fischez ; 890 Same baken i bred, same brad on pe gledez, Same fopen, same i fewe, sawed w* spyces, & ayfawes fo slezez, pat pe segge lyked. pe freke calde hit a fest ful frely & ofte, Ful hendely, quen alle be hapeles re-hayted hy at one3, pes Bend, ‘* Pis penaiice now 3e take, & eft hit {chal amende ; ”’ pat mon much m’pe con make, For wy i his hed pat wende. 900 XVII. péne wat3 spyed & spured vpon spare wyfe, Bi preue poynte3 of bat prynce, put to hy feluen, pat he be-knew cortayfly of þe court pat he were, pat apel Arthure pe hende halde3 hy one, pat is be ryche ryal kyg of pe rode table ; 905 & hit watz Wawen hy self pat i pat won syttez, Comen to pat krystmasse, as cafe hy pen lymped. When fe lorde hade lerned pat he pe leude hade, 1 cefly, MS. SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. Loude lazed he Pat, fo lef hit by þozt, & alle be men i pat mote maden much joye, To apere i his presense prestly þat tyme, Pat alle prys, & prowes, & pured þewes Apendes to hys person, & prayfed is ew, By-fore alle men vpon molde, his mensk is þe most. Vch segge ful softly sayde to his fere, ‘* Now schal we femlych fe fle3te3 of pewez, & þe teccheles termes of talkyg noble, Wich spede is i speche, vnspurd may we lerne, Sy we haf fonged pat fyne fader of nurture ; God hatz geuen v® his g“ce godly for fope, Pat such a gest as Gawan graiitez v® to haue, When burnez blype of his burþe schal sitte, I menyg of man’e3 mere, [(fol.103».] Pis burne now {chal v? bryg, I hope pat may hy here, Schal lerne of luf-talkyg.” XVII. Bi pat pe diner wat3 done, & pe dere vp, Hit wat; ne3 at þe ny3t* nezed pe tyme ; Chaplaynez to be chapeles chosen fe gate, Rigen ful rychely, ry3t as pay fchulden, To pe herfi euenfong of be hy3e tyde. Pe lorde loutes þerto, & pe lady als, i to a comly closet coyntly ho entrez ; Gawan glyde3 ful gay, & gos peder fone ; Pe lorde laches hy by pe lappe, & ledez by to fytte, 1 my3t, MS. F 2 | & fyge ; (fol. 104.] 36 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. & couply hy knowez, & callez hy his nome, & sayde he watz pe welcomest wy3e of pe worlde ; & he hy ponkked proly, & ay}? halched oper, & feten foberly famen pe feruife-quyle ; Péne lyst pe lady to loke on pe kny3t. Péne com ho of hir closet, w* mony cler burdez, Ho wat3 pe fayreft i felle, of flefche & of lyre, & of compas, & colo, & coftes of alle op’, & wener fen Wenore, as be wy3e þozt. He ches pur3 fe chaisel, to cheryche pat hende ; An oper lady hir lad bi pe lyft honde, Pat wat3 alder fen ho, an aiician hit femed, & hezly honowred w' haþeles aboute. Bot vn-lyke on to loke þo ladyes were, For if pe 30nge watz 3ep, 3olze watz pt op? ; Riche red on þat on rayled ay quere, Rugh ronkled cheke3 pat of” on rolled ; Kerchofes of pat on wyth mony cler perle3 Hir breft & hir bry3t þrote bare displayed, Schon fchyrer pé snawe, pat scheder on hillez ; Pat of? wyth a gorger wat3 gered ow? pe swyre, Chymbled ov? hir blake chyn wt mylk-quyte vayles, Hir froat folden i fylk, enfoubled ay quere, Toret & trejeted w* tryflez aboute, Pat no3t wat3 bare of pat burde bot þe blake brozes,. Pe tweyne y3en, & þe nase, þe naked lyppe3, & pofe were foure to fe, & fellyly blered ; A menfk lady on molde m6 may hir calle, Hir body wat3 schort & pik, Hir buttoke3 bay & brode, More lykker-wys on to lyk, Wat3 pat {cho hade on lode. || for gode ; SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. XIX. When Gawayn gly3t on pt gay, þ gcio”ly loked, Wyth leue lazt of pe lorde he went hem azaynes ; pe alder he haylfes, heldande ful lowe, Pe loueloker he lappe3 a lyttel i arme3, He kyffes hir comlyly, & kny3tly he mele; ; Pay kallen hy of a quoytaiice, & he hit quyk askez To be her seruaiit fothly, if hem self lyked. pay tan hy bytwene hem, wyth talkyg hy leden To chambre, to chemne, & chefly pay afken Spyce3, pat vn-sparely me speded hom to bryg, & pe wyne-lych wyne Þ w' vche tyme. Pe lorde luflych aloft lepe3 ful ofte, Myned m’the to be made vpon mony syþez, Hent hezly of his hode, & on a spere henged, & wayned hom to wyne fe worchip per of, pat most myrþe my3t mene þ* crystenmas whyle ; * & I {chal fonde, bi my fayth, to fylt? wyth fe best, Er me wont fe wede3, wt help of my frendez.” Þ? wyth lazande lote3 pe lorde hit tayt’ makez, For to glade £ Gawayn wt gomne; i halle, Til pat hit watz tyme, pe kyg comaiidet ly3t, £ Gawen his leue con nyme, & to his bed hy dist. | pt ny3t ; 1 layt? (fol. 1049.] 38 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. XX, On þe morne, as vch mon mynez pat tyme, 995 pat dry3tyn for oure destyne to deze wat3 borne, Wele waxez i vche a won i worlde, for his fake ; So did hit pere on pat day, þurz dayntes mony ; Bope at mes & at mele, messes ful quaynt ; Derf men vpon dece, dreft of pe best. 1000 pe olde aiician wyf hezest ho fytte3 ; Pe lorde lufly herby lent, as I trowe ; Gawan & pe gay burde to-geder pay feten, Euen i mydde3, as be messe metely come ; & fypen pur3 al fe fale, as hem beft femed, 1005 Bi vche grome at his degre g’ypely wat3 ferued. p° watz mete, per watz myrþe, Þ wat3 much ioye, pat for to telle þerof hit me tene were, & to poynte hit 3et I pyned me pauéture ; Bot 3et I wot pat Wawen & fe wale burde 1010 Such comfort of her compaynye ca3ten to-geder, pur3 her dere dalyaice of her derne wordez, Wyth clene cortays carp, closed fro fylþe ; & hor play watz passande vche prynce gomen, þ 3 VALE? Trapez & nakerys, Much pypyg Þ repayres, Vche m6 tented hys, & pay two teted payres. XXI. Much dut watz fer dryuen pat day & pat of’, _ & pe þryd as pro pronge i peraft? ; [fol. 105.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. Pe ioye of sayn Jone3 day wat3 gentyle to here, & wat3 pe last of pe layk, leude3 per þozten. Per wer gestes to go vpon þe gray morne, For py wonderly pay woke, & fe wyn dronken, Daifed ful drezly wyth dere carole; ; At pe laft, when hit wat3 late, pay lachen her leue, Vchon to wende on his way, pat watz wy3e stronge. Gawan gef hy god-day, þe god mo hy lachchez, Ledes hy to his awen chambre, be chyne bysyde, & þere he dra3e3 hy on dry3e, & derely hy ponkkez, Of pe wyne worschip & ' he hy wayned hade, As to hond’ his ho” on pat hy3e tyde, & enbelyse his burz w* his bele chere. «I wyffe £, quyl I leue, me worpez pe better, pat Gawayn hatz ben my gest, at godde3 awen fest.” © G*nt merci’ f,” q Gawayn, * 1 god fayth hit is yowrez, Al fe hon is yo' awen, fe heze kyg yow 3elde ; & I am wy3e at yo wylle, to worch yo'e heft, As I am halden } to, i hy3e & i loje, Pe lorde faft can hy payne, To holde lenger þe kny3t, To hy answrez Gawayn, Bi non way pat he my3t. | bi rizt.” XXII. Then frayned þe freke ful fayre at him selus, Quat derne dede had hy dryuen, at pat dere tyme, So kenly fro pe kyge3 kourt to kayre al his one, Er pe halidaye3 holly were halet out of tot ? 1 pat? 2 nerci, MS. 39° 1045 _ (fol. 105b.] 40 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. «© For fope £,” q pe fegge, ‘‘ 3e fayn bot pe trawpe ; A heze ernde & a hasty me hade fro fo wonez; For I am fined my felfe to fech to a place, I wot ' i worlde wheder warde to wende, hit to fynde ; I nolde, bot if I hit negh my3t on nw3eres morne, For alle pe londe i wyth Logres, fo me oure lorde help ! For py, £, pis enqueft I require yow here, Pat 3e me telle wt trawþe, if ev? 3e tale herde Of pe grene chapel, quere hit on groide stondez, & of be kny3t pat hit kepes, of cold’ of grene ? p° wat; stabled bi statut a steuen v? by-twene, To mete pat mon at p' mere, 3if I my3t laft ; & of pat ilk nw3ere bot neked now wonte3, & I wolde loke on pat lede, if god me let wolde, Gladloker, bi godde3 fa, þs any god welde ! For fi I wyffe, bi 3owre wylle, wende me bi-houes, Naf I now to busy bot bare pre daye3, & me als fayn to falle feye as fayly of my* ernde.” Pene lazande q þe lorde, ‘‘ now leng pe by-houes, For I schal teche yow to pa terme bi pe tymez ende, Pe grene chapayle vpon groide, greue yow no more ; Bot 3e fchal be i yowre bed, burne, at py efe, Quyle forth daye3, & ferk on pe fyrst of pe 3ere, & cum to pat merk at mydmorn, to make quat yow like3, Dowellez whyle new 3eres daye, & rys, & rayke3 péne, Ms schal yow sette 1 waye, Hit is not two myle hene.” 1 not? * myy, MS. | in spene; SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. XXIII. Þene watz Gawan ful glad, & gomenly he la3ed,— ** Now I ponk yow pryuandely þurz alle of? þyge, Now acheued is my chaiice, I schal at yo wylle Dowelle, & ellez do quat ze demen.” péne fefed hy fe syre, & set hy bysyde, Let pe ladiez be fette, to lyke hs fe bett? ; Per wat3 seme solace by hem self stille ; Pe lorde let for luf lotez so myry, As wy3 pat wolde of his wyte, ne wyst quat he my3t. péne he carped to pe kny3t, criande loude, **3e han demed to do þe dede pat I bidde ; Wyl 3e halde pis hes here at pys onez ? ” << 3eF, for fope,” fayd pe fegge trwe, *© Whyl I byde i yowre borze, be bayn to 30we' heft.” ‘* For 3e haf trauayled,” q pe tulk, © towen fro ferre, & fypen waked me wyth, 3e arn not wel waryst, Nauf” of foftnaiice ne of flepe, foply I knowe ; ze schal lenge i yo' lofte, & ly3e i yo" ese, To morn quyle fe meffe-quyle, & to mete wende, When 3e wyl, wyth my wyf, pat wyth yow {chal fitte, & comfort yow wt compayny, til I to cort torne, & I {chal erly ryfe, On hityg wyl I wende.” Gauayn £ntez alle pyfe, Hy heldande, as pe hende. 1 jowre? | 3e lende ; 42 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. XXIV. ** 3et firre,” q pe freke, © a forwarde we make ; 1105 Quat fo euer I wyne i fe wod, hit worþez to yoez, & quat chek fo 3e acheue, chaiige me per forne ; Swete, swap we fo, {ware w* trawþe, QueP leude fo lymp, lere of? bett?.” ‘‘ Bi god,” q Gawayn pe gode, “I gnt Þ tylle, 110 [fol. 106.] & fat yow lyst forto layke, lef hit me þynke.” * Who bryge3 v” pis beu’age, pis bargayn is maked,” — So fayde pe lorde of pat lede ; pay lazed vchone, pay dronken, & daylyeden, & dalten vnty3tel, pife lordez & ladye3, quyle pat hem lyked ; 115 & fypen wt frenkysch fare & fele fayre lote3 Pay stoden, & stemed, & ftylly speken, Kysten ful comlyly, & kazten her leue. Wt mony leude ful ly3t, & lemande torches, Vche burne to his bed wat3 bro3t at pe lafte, To bed 3et er pay 3ede, Recorded couenaite3 ofte ; Pe olde lorde of pat leude’, Cowpe wel halde layk a-lofte. 1135 | ful fofte ; 1 lede ? [fol. 106Þ.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. 43 (FYTTE THE THIRD.] I. ul erly bifore fe day þe folk vp ryfen, Geftes pat go wolde, hor gromez pay calden, & pay busken vp bilyue, blonkke3 to fadel, Tyffen her' takles, truffen her males, Richen hem pe rychest, to ryde alle arayde, 1130 Lepen vp ly3tly, lachen her brydeles, Vche wy3e on his way, per hy wel lyked. pe leue lorde of fe londe wat3 not fe last, A-rayed for pe rydyg, w' renkke3 ful mony; Ete a fop haftyly, when he hade herde maffe, 1125 W: bugle to bent felde he bufke3 by-lyue ; By pat pat any day-ly3t lemed vpon erpe, He w' his hapeles on hy3e horsses weren. péne fife cacheres pat coupe, cowpled hor hoidez, Vnclosed þe kenel dore, & calde hem Poute, 1140 Blwe bygly i bugle3 pre bare mote ; Braches bayed }’fore, & breme noyfe maked, & pay chastysed, & charred, on chafyg pat went ; i ef he belts A hundreth of hunt?es, as I haf herde telle, : To trystors vewters 30d, Couples huntes of-kest, pf? ros for blastez gode, Gret rurd i pat foreft. 1 he, MS. G 2 44 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. EE: At þe fyrst quethe of þe quest quaked þe wylde ; Der drof i þe dale, doted for drede, Hized to pe hy3e, bot het*ly pay were Restayed w' pe ftablye, pat stoutly afcryed ; pay let fe hertte3 haf be gate, w* pe hy3e hedes, pe breme bukkez also, wt hor brode paumez ; For pe fre lorde hade defende i fermyfoi tyme, Þ* Þ schulde no mon mene to þe male dere. pe hinde3 were halden i, w* hay & war, Pe does dryuen w' gret dyn to fe depe {ladez ; per my3t mon fe, as pay slypte, fleutyg of arwes, At vche wende vnder wande wapped a flone, Pat bigly bote on fe brow, w' ful brode hedez, What pay brayen, & bleden, bi bonkke3 pay dezen. & ay rachches i a res radly hem folzes, Hiiterez wyth hy3e horne hafted hem aft, Wyth such a crakkande kry, as klyffes haden brusten ; What wylde so at-waped wy3es pat schotten, Watz al to-raced & rent, at pe refayt. Bi pay were tened at fe hy3e, & tayfed to pe wattrez, pe lede3 were so lerned at fe lo3e trysteres, & pe gre-hoiide3 fo grete, pat geten hem bylyue, & hem to fylched, as faft as freke3 my3t loke, pe lorde for blys abloy, Ful oft con laice & ly3t, & drof pat day wyth joy, Thus to þe derk ny3t. | PP ry3t. Wimind 13 mull orf y* Hit me nos amenbe | pea time Gas tresbeas ton ae Bameconye lyrr&fends (fol. 107.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. IIT. p° laykez pis lorde by lynde wodez euez, & G. fe god mon, i gay bed lygez, Lurkke3 quyl fe day-ly3t lemed on fe wowes, Vnder couerto’ ful clere, cortyned aboute ; & as i flom’yg he flode, slezly he herde A littel dyn at his dor, & derfly vpon ; & he heue3 vp his hed, out of fe clopes, A corner of be cortyn he cazt vp a lyttel, & wayte3 warly þider warde, quat hit be my3t. Hit wat3 pe ladi, loflyest to be-holde, pat dro3 pe dor aft? hir ful dernly & ftylle, & bozed to-warde fe bed; & þe burne fchamed, & layde hy doi lystyly, & let as he slepte. & ho stepped stilly, & stel to his bedde, Kest vp fe cortyn, & creped w' ine, & set hir ful softly on þe bed-syde, & lenged þere felly longe, to loke qué he wakened. Pe lede lay lurked a ful longe quyle, Compatt i his concience to quat pat cace my3t Mene of? amoit, to m’uayle hy post ; Bot 3et he fayde i hy self, © more femly hit were To afpye wyth my spelle, space quat ho wolde.” Þen he wakenede, & wroth, & to hir warde torned, & vn-louked his y3e-lydde3, & let as hy wondered, & sayned hy, as bi his saze þe saw? to worthe, Wyth chyne & cheke ful swete, Bope quit & red i blande, Ful lufly con ho lete, Wyth lyppe3 {mal lazande. || wt hande ; 46 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. IV. * God moron, f Gawayn,” fayde pat fayr lady, *©3e ar a slep vn-fly3e, pat mo may slyde hider ; Now ar 3e tan astyt, bot t"e v? may schape, 140 I {chal bynde yow i yo’ bedde, þ* be 3e trayst ; ''— Al lazande pe lady lanced po bourdez. © Goud moroii g’e',” q Gawayn þe blyþe, © Me {chal worpe at yo wille, & pat me wel lykez, For I 3elde me 3ederly, & 3eze aft? gce, we & pat is pe best, be my dome, for me by-houez nede ;''— & pus he bourded a-3ayn wt mony a blype Ja3t? ;— © Bot wolde 3e, lady louely, pé leue me g'nte, & deprece yo’ pryson, & pray hy to ryfe, I wolde bo3e of pis bed, & bufk me bett?, 1220 I schulde kew? pe more comfort to karp yow wyth.” [fol.107».] ‘* Nay, for fope, beau f,” fayd pat swete, * 3e {chal not rife of yo” bedde, I rych yow bett?, I {chal haue yow here pat op” half als, & fypen karp wyth my kny3t, pat I ka3t haue ; 1225 For I wene wel, I wysle, £ Wawen 3e are, Pat alle pe worlde worchipe3, quere fo 3e ride ; Yo’ hono’, yo" hendelayk is hendely prayfed W: lordez, wyth ladyes, w* alle pat lyf bere. & now 3e ar here, I wysse, & we bot oure one; 1250 My lorde & his ledez ar on lenþe faren, Op’ burne3 i her bedde, & my burdez als, pe dor drawen, & dit wt a derf hafpe ; & syþen I haue i pis ho? hy pat al lykez, t I {chal ware my whyle wel, quyl hit lastez, | wt tale; 1 This word is very doubtful in the MS. [fol. 103.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. ze ar welci to my cors, Yowre awen won to wale, Me be-houez of fyne force, Yo feruait be & schale.” V. ‘In god fayth,” q Gawayn, © gay hit me þynkkez, Þaz I be not now he fat 3e of speken ; To reche to fuch reuerence as 3e reherce here I am wy3e vn-worpy, I wot wel my feluen ; Bi god, I were glad, & yow god þozt, At faze of” at feruyce pat I fette my3t To fe plesaiice of yo’ prys, hit were a pure ioye.” ** In god fayth, £ Gawayn,” q pe gay lady, ** Pe prys & fe prowes pat plefe3 al of”, If T hit lakked, of? fet at ly3t, hit were littel daynte ; Bot hit ar ladyes i no3e, pat leu? wer nowþe Haf pe hende i hor holde, as I fe habbe here, To daly wt derely yo daynte wordez, Kew? hem comfort, & colen her carez, Þe much of pe garysoi of” golde pat* pay hauen ; Bot I louue® pat ilk lorde, pt fe lyfte haldez, I haf hit holly i my honde, pat al defyres, Scho made hy fo gret chere, Pat wat3 fo fayr of face, pe kny3t wt speches skere, Afwared * to vche a cace. 1 pat pt, MS. 2 louie? 3 anfwared? | purze grace.” 48 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. VI. * Madame,” q pe myry mon, © Mary yow 3elde, For I haf foiiden, i god fayth, yowre fraiichis nobele, & oP ful much of of? folk fongen hor dedez ; 1265 Bot pe daynte þ* pay delen for my difert nysen, Hit is þe worchyp of yo self, pat no3t bot wel cone.” © Bi Mary,” q be menfkful, © me þynk hit anoP ; For were I worth al be wone of wymen alyue, & al pe wele of be worlde were i my honde, 1270 & I schulde chepen & chose, to cheue me a lorde, For pe coftes pat I haf knowen vpon pe kny3t here, Of bewte, & debonerte, & blyþe semblait; & pat I haf er herkkened, & halde hit here trwe ', pf’ schulde no freke vpon folde bifore yow be chosen.” 1275 ‘I wyffe, worpy,” q pe wy3e, ‘‘3e haf waled wel bett?, Bot I am proude of fe prys pat ze put on me, & foberly yo’ feruaiit my sowayn I holde yow, & yowre kny3t I be-com, & kryst yow for-zelde.” p? pay meled of much quat, til myd-morn paste, 1280 & ay pe lady let lyk, a* hy loued mych ; Pe freke ferde wt defence, & feted ful fayre. ‘* Paz I were burde bryztest,” pe burde i mynde hade, ** Pe laffe luf i his lode, for lur pat he sozt, ‘pe dunte pat schilde hy deue, & nede3 hit most be done ;” pe lady pen spek of leue, He gnted hir ful fone. | boute hone ; 1 trwee, MS. 2 and? [fol. 108Þ.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. 49 VIE Þene ho gef hy god-day, & wyth a glent lazed, & as ho stod, ho stonyed hy wyth ful stor worde3,— ** Now he fat fpede3 vche spech, pis disport 3elde yow ! Bot pat 3e be Gawan, hit gotz i myde.” “ Quer fore?” q pe freke, & freschly he askez, Ferde left he hade fayled i fo'me of his castes ; Bot fe burde hy blessed, & bi pis {kyl fayde, © $0 god as Gawayn gaynly is halden, & cortayfye is closed fo clene i hy feluen, Couth not ly3tly haf lenged fo long wyth a lady, Bot he had craued a coffe, bi his cotaysye, Bi fa towch of same tryfle, at sa tale; ende.” bé q Wowen, © I wysse, worpe as yow lyke3, I schal kyffe at yo’ comatidement, as a kny3t falle3, & fire ' left he difplefe yow, fo* plede hit no more.” Ho comes nerre w' pat, & cache3 hy i armez, Loutez luflych adot, & þe leude kyffe3 ; pay comly bykenen to kryst ay}? of? ; Ho dos hir forth at fe dore, wt outen dyn more. & he ryches hy to ryfe, & rapes hy fone, Clepes to his chamberlayn, chofes his wede, Bo3e3 forth, quen he wat3 boi, blypely to masse, & péne he meued to his mete, pt meskly hy keped, & made myry al day til pe mone ryfed, W'** new freke fayrer fonge, Bitwene two fo dygne dame, pe alder & fe 3onge, Much folace fet pay fame. | wt game ; 1 fere? 2 fo? 3 Was? Nas? [fol. 109.] 50 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. VIIL. And ay fe lorde of fe londe is lent on his gamnez, To hit i holtez & hepe, at hynde3 barayne, Such a fowme he Þ flowe bi pat pe fine heldet, Of dos & of of? dere, to deme were wonder. péne ferfly pay flokked i folk at pe lafte, & quykly of fe quelled dere a querre pay maked ; pe best bozed þerto, wt burnez I nogh, Gedered fe grattest of gres pat per were, & didden hem derely vndo, as fe dede askez ; Serched hem at fe afay, same pat Þ were, Two fygeres pay fonde of þe fowleft of alle ; Sypé pay flyt þe slot, fefed fe erber, Schaued wyth a scharp knyf, & þe schyre knitten ; Sypen rytte pay pe foure lymes, & rent of þe hyde, pé brek pay pe bale, þe bale3 out token, Lystily forlancyg, & bere of þe knot ; pay gryped to fe gargula, & gypely departed pe wesaut fro be wynt-hole, & walt out þe gutte3 ; pé scher pay out fe fchuldere3 wt her fcharp knyuez, Haled hem by a lyttel hole, to haue hole fydes ; Sipen britned pay þe breft, & brayden hit i twyne, & eft at þe garguli bigyne3 on þene, Ryue3 hit vp radly, ry3t to pe by3t Voyde3 out pe a-vanters, & vayly paft? Alle fe rymez by fe rybbe3 radly pay lance ; So ryde þay of by resoi bi pe rygge bone3, Euenden to fe haunche, pat henged alle famen, & heuen hit vp al hole, & hwen hit of þere, & pat pay neme for pe noables, bi nome as I trowe, | bi kynde; [fol. 109Þ.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. 51 Bi pe by3t al of pe py3es, Pe lappe3 pay lance bi-hynde, To hewe hit i two pay hy3es, Bi pe bak-bon to vnbynde. IX. Bope pe hede & pe hals pay hwen of péne, & fypen funder pay pe fyde3 fwyft fro pe chyne, & pe corbeles fee pay keft i a greue ; pén purled pay ayper pik side pur3, bi pe rybbe, & henged péne af? bi hozes of pe fourchez, Vche freke for his fee, as fallez forto haue. Vpon a felle of be fayre best fede pay payr hotdes, Wyth pe lyu? & pe ly3te3, pe leper of be paunche3, & bred baped i blod, blende fer amogez ; Baldely fay blw prys, bayed þayr rachche3, Sypen fonge pay her flefche folden to home, Strakande ful stoutly mony ftif mote3. Bi pat pe dayly3t wat3 done, pe douthe wat3 al wonen i to be comly caftel, per pe kny3t bidez, Wyth blys & bry3t fyr bette, pe lord is comen Þ tylle, When Gawayn wyth hy mette, per wat3 bot wele at wylle. X. || ful stille ; Thene comaiided pe lorde i þ* fale to {amen alle pe meny, Bope pe ladyes on logti to ly3t, w* her burdes, Bi-fore alle pe folk on pe flette, frekez he bedde3 V’ayly his venyfou to fech hy byforne ; H 2 52 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. & al godly i gomen Gawayn" he called, Techez by to þe tayles of ful tayt bestes, Schewez hy pe schyrer grete schorne vpon rybbes. — ** How paye3 yow pis play ? haf I prys wonen ? Haue I pryuandely ponk pur3 my craft ferued ?” 1380 *© 3e, I wyffe,” q pat of wy3e, © here is wayth fayrest pat I sez pis seuen 3ere, i sesoi of wynt?.” *& al I gif yow, Gawayn,” q pe gome þene, ‘* For by a-corde of couenait ze craue hit as yd’ awen.’ ** pis is soth,” q pe segge, © I fay yow fat ilke, 1385 & I haf worthyly * pis wone3 wyth ine, I wyffe w* as god wylle hit worpe3 to 30°e3.”” He hafppe3 his fayre hals his arme3 wyth ine, & kyffes hy as comlyly as he * coupe awyfe,— ** Tas yow þere my cheuicaiice, I cheued no more, 1390 I wowche hit faf fynly, þaz feler hit were.” “Hit is god,” q pe god mon, © gnt m’cy p°fore, Hit may be such, hit is pe bett?, & ze me breue wolde Where 3e wan fis ilk wele, bi wytte of hor* feluen ? ” ** Pat wat3 not forward,” q he, ‘‘ frayst me no more, For 3e haf tan fat yow tyde3, trawe ze non of” pay lazed, & made hem blyþe, Wyth lote3 pat were to lowe, To foper pay 3ede affwypfe, 1400 Wyth dayntes nwe i nowe. | 3e mowe.” XI. And fypen by “e chymne i chamber pay feten, Wy3e3 be walle wyn wezed to hem oft, 1 Gaway, MS. 2 A word seems here to be wanting. 5 ho, MS, 4 your? [fol. 110.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. & efte i her bourdyg bay baypen i pe morn, To fylle be fame forwarde3 pat pay by-fore maden, pat chaiice fo by-tyde3 hol cheuysatice to chaiige, What nwez fo pay nome, at nazt quen pay mette. Pay acorded of be couenaiitez byfore pe cot alle ; pe beuerage wat3 bro3t forth i bourde at pat tyme ; Þene pay louelych lezten leue at pe last, Vche burne to his bedde bufked bylyue. Bi pat pe coke hade crowez* & cakled bot pryfe, Pe lorde wat3 lopen of his bedde, pe leude3 vch one, So pat pe mete & fe masse watz metely delywed; pe douthe dressed to fe wod, er any day sprenged, He3 wt hite & hornez, pur3 playne3 pay passe i space, Vn-coupled amog po þornez, Rachez pat ran on race. XII. Sone pay calle of a queft i aker fyde, pe hit re-hayted þe hoide3, pat hit fyrst myged, Wylde worde3 hy warp wyth a wraft noyce ; pe howndez pat hit herde, haftid pider fwype, & fellen as fast to fe fuyt, fourty at ones ; Pene such a glawande glam of gedered rachchez Ros, pat pe rochere3 ragen aboute ; Hiterez hem hardened w* horne & wyth muthe. pé al i a femble sweyed to-geder, Bitwene a flosche i pat fryth, & a foo cragge ; In a knot, bi a clyffe, at fe kerre fyde, 1 crowed? | to chace ; (fol. 110Þ.] 54 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. Pp? as fe rogh rocher vn-rydely watz fallen, bay ferden to pe fyndyg, & freke3 hem aft? ; Pay vmbe-keften pe knarre & fe knot bofe, Wy3e3, whyl pay wysten wel wyt ine he hit were, pe best pat per breued watz wyth pe blod-hoide3. péne pay beten on fe buskez, & bede hy vp ryle, & he vnsoiidyly out fo3t, fegge3 ou? þwert, On pe fellokeft fwyn fwenged out þere, Long fythen for þe soider pat wizt for olde, For he wat3 b . . . & bor alper gratteft, Seta ee ere quen he gronyed, þene greued mony, lc) eee t pe fyrst praft he pry3t to pe erþe, & sped . . . forth good sped, boute spyt more, And pay halowed hygh ful hy3e, & hay ! hay ! cryed, Haden horne3 to mouþe heterly rechated ; Mony wat3 pe myry mouthe of men & of hoadez, pat buskkez aft? pis bor, w* boft & wyth noyse, Ful oft he byde3 fe baye, & mayme3 fe mute in melle, He hurte3 of pe hoiide3, & pay Ful 3omerly 3aule & 3elle. XIII. Schalke3 to schote at hy schowen to pine, Haled to hym of her arewez, hitten hym oft ; Bot fe poyte3 payred at fe pyth þ* py3t i his scheldez, & þe barbe3 of his browe bite non wolde, Þaz pe schauen schaft schyndered i pece3, pe hede hypped azayn, were fo ew hit hitte ; 1 The MS. is here in several lines illegible. | to quelle ; [fol 111.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. Bot quen þe dynte3 hy dered of her dry3e arwez, © Pen brayn-wod for bate on burnez he rafe3, Hurtez hem ful heterly per he forth hy3e3, & mony arzed þerat, & on lyte drozen. Bot pe lorde on a ly3t horce laices hym aft?, As burne bolde vpon bent his bugle he blowez, He rechated, & r . . .* pur3 rouez ful þyk, Suande pis wylde swyn, til pe fine schafted. pis day wyth fis ilk dede fay dryuen on fis wyfe, Whyle oure luflych lede lys i his bedde, Gawayn, gypely at home, i gerez ful ryche. pe lady no3t forzate, Com to hy to falue, Ful erly ho wat3 hy ate, His mode forto remwe. | of hewe ; XIV. Ho comes to pe cortyn, & at fe kny3t totes, & Wawen her welciied worpy on fyrft, & ho hy 3elde3 azayn, ful 3erne of bir wordez, Settez hir sofly by his fyde, & fwypely ho lazez, & wyth a luflych loke ho sayde hy þese worde; : «F, 3if 3e be Wawen, wonder me pynkke3, Wy3e pat is fo wel wrast alway to god, & connez not of compaynye pe costez vnder-take, & if mon kénes yow hom to knowe, 3e keft hom of yo’ myde ; p" hat3 for-zeten 3ederly pat 3ift?day I taztte Bi alder trueft token of talk pat I cowpe.” « What is pat ? ” q pe wygh, “I wyffe I wot nev’, 1 rydes? rode? 56 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T, If hit be fothe pat 3e breue, pe blame is my awen.” © 3et I kende yow of kyffyg,”’ q pe clere péne, ©* Quere fo coiitenaiice is coupe, quikly to clayme, 1490 pat biciies vche a kny3t, bat cortayfy vies.” << Do way,” q pat derf mon, ‘‘ my dere, fat speche, For pat durst I not do, left I denayed were, If I were werned, I were wrang I wysle, 3if I pfered.” “‘ Ma fay,” q þe mere wyf, ‘‘3e may not be werned, 1495 ze ar stif i nogti to constrayne wyth strenkþe, 3if yow lykez, 3if any were fo vilano? pat yow denaye ' wolde.” * 3e, be god,” q Gawayn, © good is yo speche, Bot þrete is vn-pryuande i pede Þ I lende, & vche gift pat is gyuen not wt goud wylle ; 1500 I am at yo comaundemét, to kysse quen yow lyke3, 3e may lach quen yow lyst, & leue quen yow pynkke3, Pe lady loute3 a-doi, & comlyly kyffes his face, Much {peche pay Þ expoi, Of druryes greme & gce. | in space.” XV, *<T woled wyt at yow, wy3e,” pat worpy per fayde, * & yow wrathed not per wyth, what were pe skylle, Pat fo 3ong & so 3epe, as 3e at pis tyme, So cortayfe, fo kny3tyly, as 3e ar knowen oute, & of alle cheualry to chose, be chef þyg a-losed, Is* þe lellayk of luf, þe lettrure of armes ; For to telle of fis teneljg of pis trwe kny3te3, Hit is pe tytelet, token, & tyxt of her werkkez, 1515 de vaye, MS. ® In? (fol. 111Þ.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. How le. . .' for her lele luf hor lyue3 han aitered, Endured for her drury dulful stoidez, & aft? wenged w* her walo, & voyded her care, & bro3t blysse i to boure, wt boitees hor awen. & 3e ar knyzt comlokest kyd of yo' elde, Yo! worde & yo’ worchip walkez ay quere, & I haf feten by yo' self here fere twyes, zet herde I neu? of yo’ hed helde no wordez Pat ev? longed to luf, laffe ne more ; & 3e, pat ar fo cortays, & coyt of yo" hetes, Ogii to a 3onke þyk 3ern to schewe, & teche si tokene3 of trweluf craftes. Why ar 3e lewed, pat alle fe los welde3, Op’ elles ze demen me to dille, yo’ dalyaiicetoherken? I com hider fengel, & sitte, To lerne at yow fu game, Dos teche3 me of yo wytte, Whil my lorde is fro hame.” XVI. © In goud faype,” q Gawayn, © god yow for-3elde, Gret is fe gode gle, & gomen to me huge, pat fo worpy as 3e wolde wyne hidere, & pyne yow w* fo pow? a mon, as play wyth yo’ kny3t, With any skyne3 coiitenaiice, hit keu’e3 me ese ; Bot to take fe tornayle to my self, to trwluf typou, & towche fe temes of tyxt, & tale3 of armez, To yow, pat I wot, wel werdez more fly3t Of pat art, bi pe half, or a hidreth of feche 1 ledes ? I | for schame ! 15-40 58 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. As I am, of” ew? fchal, i erde per I leue, Hit were a fole fele folde, my fre, by my trawþe. 1545 I wolde yowre wylnyg worche at my my3t, As Iam hy3ly bihalden, & eu? more wylle Be feruaiit to yo’ feluen, fo faue me dry3tyn!”’ Þ? hy frayned pat fre, & fondet hy ofte, Forto haf wonen hy to woze, what fo scho þozt elle3, 1550 Bot he defended by fo fayr, pat no faut femed, Ne non euel on naw} halue, naw}? pay wysten, pay lazed & layked longe, At pe last {cho con hy kyffe, 1556 Hir leue fayre con scho fonge, & went hir waye I wysle. || bot blyffe ; XVII. Then rupes hy pe renk, & ryfes to fe masse, [fol. 112.] & fipen hor din? watz dy3t, & derely ferued. Pe lede w' fe ladye3 layked alle day, 1560 Bot pe lorde ow? pe londe3 laiiced ful ofte, Swe3 his vncely swyn, pat swygez bi pe bonkke3, & bote pe best of his brache3 be bakkez i fader ; Per he bode i his bay, tel’ bawe men hit breken, & maden * hym, maw-gref his hed, forto mwe vtt?, 1565 So felle flone3 per flete, when pe folk gedered ; Bot 3et pe styffest to start bi stoadez he made, Til at pe last he watz fo mat, he my3t no more rene, Bot i pe hast pat he my3t, he to a hole wyne3, Of a raffe, bi a rokk, Þ réne3 þe borne ; 1570 He gete fe bonk at his bak, bigyez to scrape, 1 ti]? 2 madee, MS. (fol. 112Þ.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. 59 pe froþe femed * at his mouth, vnfayre bi þe wykez, Whettez his whyte tufche3 ; wt hy þe irked Alle þe burnez so bolde, þat hy by stoden, To nye hy on ferum, bot neze hy non durst, He hade hurt so mony byforne, Pat al þozt þene ful lope, Be more wyth his tuschez torne, Pat breme watz bray-wod both. 1580 | for woþe; XVIII. Til pe kny3t com hy felf, kachande his blonk, Sy3 hy byde at fe bay, his burne3 byfyde, He lyzte luflych ado, leue3 his corfo’, Braydez out a bry3t bront, & bigly forth ftryde3, Foide3 fast pur pe forth, per pe felle byde3. 1585 Pe wylde wat3 war of þe wy3e wt weppen i honde, Hef hy3ly pe here, fo hett®ly he fnast, Pat fele ferde for pe frekez *, lest felle hy fe worre ; Pe swyn settez hy out on þe fegge euen, pat pe burne & fe bor were boþe vpon hepez, 1590 In pe wy3creft * of be wat”, pe worre had pat op? ; For fe mon merkke3 hy wel, as pay mette fyrst, Set sadly fe scharp i fe slot euen, Hit by vp to fe hult, pat pe hert schyndered, & he 3arrande hy 3elde, & zedon * pe wat?, A hidreth hondez hy hent, Pat bremely con hy bite, Burnez hi brozt to bent, & dogge3 to dethe endite. 1600 | ful tyt ; 1 fomed ? 2 freke ? 3 This word is doubiful in the MS, + zede doun ? 60 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. XIX. There watz blawyg of prys i mony breme horne, Heze halowig on hize, w* haþelez pat my3t ; Brachetes bayed pat best, as bidden pe mayft’e3, Of pat chargeaiit chace pat were chef hites. péne a wy3e pat wat3 wys vpon wod-crafte3, To vnlace pis bor lufly bigyne3 ; Fyrft he hewes of his hed, & on hize settez, & fypen rende3 him al rogh bi be rygge after, Brayde3 out þe boweles, bréne3 ho on glede, With bred blent per w* his braches rewardez ; Sypen he britnez out þe brawen, i bry3t brode cheldez, & hat3 out pe haftlette3, as hiztly bisemez ; & 3et hem halche3 al hole þe halue3 to-geder, & fypen on a ftif stange stoutly hem henges. Now with pis ilk fwyn pay swengen to home ; Pe bores hed wat3 borne bifore pe burnes seluen, pat hi for-ferde i be forþe, þur; forse of his honde, Til he fey £ Gawayne, T halle hy þozt ful longe, ‘ He calde, & he com gayn, His feez Þ for to fonge. XX. pe lorde ful lowde w' lote, & lazed myry, Whé he seze £ G: wt! solace he fpere3 ; Þe goude ladyez were geten, & gedered þe meyny, He schewez hem pe scheldez, & schapes hem fe tale, | so stronge ; (fol. 113.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. 61 Of pe largeffe, & pe lenþe, be hy?ne3° alle, Of pe were of þe wylde swyn, i wod fer he fled. Pat op’ kny3t ful comly comended his dede3, & prayfed hit as gret prys, pat he proued hade ; 1630 For suche a brawne of a best, be bolde burne fayde, Ne fuch fydes of a fwyn, fegh he nev? are. Þene hondeled pay pe hoge hed, fe hende m6 hit prayfed, & let lodly þerat pe lorde forto here ;— «© Now Gawayn,” q be god mon, “‘ bis gomen is yd’ awen, 1635 Bi fyn forwarde & faste, faythely 3e knowe.” « Hit is sothe,” q fe segge, © & as siker trwe ; Alle my get I {chal yow gif agayn, bi my trawpe.” He * fe hapel aboute fe halfe, & hendely hy kyffes, & eft? fones of fe fame he ferued hy þere. 1640 *© Now ar we euen,” q pe hapel, ‘‘i pis euen-tide, Of alle pe couenaites pat we knyt, fypen I com hider, Pe lorde fayde, © bi faynt Gile, 3e ar pe beft pat I knowe, 1645 ze ben ryche i a whyle, Such chaffer & 3e drowe.” | bi lawe ; XXI. péne pay teldet table3, trestes* alofte, Kesten clope3 vpon clere ly3t þzne, Wakned bi wozez waxen torches, 1650 Segge3 fette, & ferued i fale al aboute ; Much glam & gle glent vp Þ ine, Aboute pe fyre vpon flet, & on fele wyfe, At pe soper & aft”, mony apel songez, 1 hynez? 2 A word is here deficient, perhaps hent or hasped, Cf.1.1388. 3 ontreftes? [fol. 113Þ.] 62 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. As coidutes of kryst-masse, & carolez newe, 1655 With alle be manly m?pe p' mon may of telle. & ew oure luflych kny3t pe lady bi-fyde ; Such femblait to pat segge femly ho made, Wyth stille stollen coiitenaiice, pat stalworth to plefe, . Pat al for-wondered watz be wy3e, & wroth w* hy feluen, 1669 Bot he nolde not for his nurture nurne hir a-3ayne3, Bot dalt w* hir al i daynte, how fe ew? be dede turned, Quen pay hade played i halle, As lange as hor wylle hom last, 1665 To chambre he con hy calle, & to pe chemne pay past. | to wrast ; XXII. Ande per pay dronken, & dalten, & demed eft nwe, To norne on pe same note, on nwe3ere3 euen ; Bot pe kny3t craued leue to kayre on þe morn, 1670 For hit wat3 ne3 at pe terme, pat he to schulde. pe lorde hy letted of pat, to lenge hy refteyed, & fayde, © as I am trwe fegge, I swer my trawþe, p" schal cheue to fe grene chapel, py charres to make, Leude, on nw3ere3 ly3t, longe bifore pryme ; 1675 For py pow lye i py loft, & lach þyn ese, & I schal hit in pis holt, & halde þe towchez, Chaige wyth pe cheuifaiice, bi pat I charre hider ; For I haf fraysted fe twys, & faythful I fynde pe, Now þrid tyme þrowe best þenk on fe morne, 1680 Make we mery quyl we may, & myne vpon joye, For þe lur may mon lach, when so mon lykez.” Pis wat3 grayþely graited, & Gawayn is lenged, t Joop - Blipe brozt watz hym drynk, & pay to bedde 3eden, | w' It; [fol. 114.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. f G: lis & flepes, Ful stille & softe al nizt ; Þe lorde þat his craftes kepes, Ful erly he wat3 dizt. XXIII. Aft? meffe a morfel he & his men token, Miry watz pe mornyg, his moiiture he askes ; Alle fe haþeles pat on horse schulde helden hy aft, Were boi busked on hor blonkkez, bi-fore ' fe halle 3ate3 ; Ferly fayre wat3 pe folde, for pe forst clenged, I rede rudede vpon rak rises fe sine, & ful clere cofte3 pe clowdes of be welkyn. Hiteres vnhardeled bi a holt fyde, Rocheres roigen bi rys, for rurde of her hornes ; Sime fel i pe fute, per fe fox bade, Trayle3 ofte a trayt?es, bi trait of her wyles ; A kenet kryes þerof, pe hit on hy calles, His felazes fallen hy to, pt fnasted ful pike, Rinen forth i a rabel, i his ry3t fare ; & he fyskez hem by-fore, pay foiiden hy fone, & quen pay segh hy w* fy3t, bay sued hy fast, Wrezande hy ful weterly with a wroth noyfe ; & he trantes & tornayee3 pur; mony tene greue, Hamloiie3, & herkene3, bi hegge3 ful ofte ; At þe last bi a littel dich he lepez ov’ a spene, Stele; out ful ftilly, bi a strothe raude, Went haf wylt of pe wode, w* wyle3 fro fe howdes. Pene watz he went, er he wyst, to* a wale try{t?, Per pre pro at a þrich þrat hy at ones, 1 bi-forere, MS. 2 to to, MS, | al graye ; 64 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. He blenched azayn bilyue, 1715 & stifly start on stray, With alle þe wo on lyue, To þe wod he went away. XXIV. Théne wat3 hit lif vpon lift to lypen fe hoiide3, When alle þe mute hade hy met, menged to-geder, 1720 Suche a for3e at pat fy3t pay fette on his hede, As alle pe clamberande clyffes hade clat?ed on hepes ; Here he watz halawed, when hapele3 hy metten, Loude he wat3 3ayned, w' 3arande speche ; Per he wat; preted, & ofte þef called, 1725 & ay pe titleres at his tayl, pat tary he ne my3t ; Ofte he wat3 rinen at, when he out rayked, & ofte reled i azayn, fo reniarde wat3 wyle. & 3e he lad hem bi lagmon, pe lorde & his meyny ; On pis man? bi fe moites, quyle myd, ou’, vnder, 1730 Whyle pe hende kny3t at home halfily flepes, With ine pe comly cortyes, on fe colde morne. Bot fe lady for luf let not to slepe, Ne pe purpose to payre, pat py3t i hir hert, Bot ros hir vp radly, rayked hir þeder, 1735 In a mery mantyle, mete to fe erþe, Pat wat; furred ful fyne wt fellez wel pured, No hwez goud on hir hede, bot pe hazer stones Trafed aboute hir tresso', be twenty i cluft’es ; Hir pryuen face & hir prote prowen al naked, 1740 Hir brest bare bifore, & bihinde eke. Ho comez w* ine pe chambre dore, & closes hit hir aft?, (fol. 114°.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. Waynez vp a wyndow, & on fe wyze callez, & radly þ” rehayted hy, wt hir riche wordes, *A ! mon, how may þ* slepe, Pis mornig is so clere ? ” He wat3 i drowpig depe, Bot þene he con hir here. XXV. In dre3 droupyg of dreme draueled pat noble, As mon pat watz in mornyg of mony pro þoztes, How pat destine schulde pat day his wyrde, At þe grene chapel, when he þe gome metes, & bi-houes his buffet abide, with oute debate more ; Bot quen þat comly he kewed his wyttes, Swenges out of þe sweuenes, & swarez w' hast. Þe lady luflych cum lazande swete, Felle ow? his fayre face, & fetly hy kyssed ; He welcie3 hir worpily, with a wale chere ; He sez hir fo glorio”, & gayly atyred, So fautles of hir fetures, & of so fyne hewes, Wi3t wallande joye warmed his hert ; W*' smoþe smylyg & smolt bay fmeten i to m’pe, Pat al wat; blis & bonchef, bat breke hem bi-twene, Pay lanced wordes gode, Much wele þs wat3 Þ ine, Gret pile bi-twene hem stod, Nif mare of hir kny3t myne. 1 bi, @ sec. manu. I | w'* chere ; | & wyne ; [fol. 115. 66 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. XXVI. For pat prynce of pris deprefed hy fo pikke, Nurned hy fo nee fe pred, pat nede hy bi-houed, OP lach per hir luf, of? lodly refuse ; He cared for his cortaysye, left craþayn he were, & more for his mefchef, 3if he schulde make fyne, & be traytor to pat tolke, pat pt telde azt. *© God schylde,” q pe schalk, © pat {chal not be-falle!”’ W' luf-lazyg a lyt, he layd hy by syde Alle pe spechez of specialte pat sprange of her mouthe. q pat burde to fe burne, ‘‘ blame 3e differue, 3if 3e luf not pat lyf pat 3e lye nexte, Bifore alle pe wy3es i pe worlde, woiided i hert, Bot if 3e haf a léman, a lev’, pat yow lyke3 bett?, & folden fayth to pat fre, feftned fo harde, pat yow laufen ne lyst, & pat I leue nouþe ; And pat 3e telle me pat, now trwly I pray yow, For alle be lufez vpon lyue, layne not þe soþe, pe kny3t sayde, © be fayn Jon,” & {mepely con he smyle, “Tn fayth I welde rizt non, - Ne non wil welde pe quile.” XXVII. “ bat is a worde,” q pat wy3t, © pat worlst is of alle, Bot I am swared for fope, pat fore me þinkkez ; Kyffe me now comly, & I {chal cach hepen, I may bot mone vpon molde, as may pat much louyes.” Sykande ho sweze doi, & femly hy kyssed, | for gile.” (fol. 115%.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. 67 & fipen ho sewes hy fro, & says as ho stondes, <© Now, dere, at pis departyg, do me pis ese, Gif me sumquat of py gifte, pi gloue of ' hit were, pat I may myne on fe mon, my mOnyg to lassen.” 1800 ‘* Now I wysle,” q pat wy3e, © I wolde I hade here pe leueft pig for þy luf, pat I in londe welde, For 3e haf deferued, forsoþe, fellyly ofte More rewarde bi refou, pé I reche my3t, Bot to dele yow for drurye, þ* dawed bot neked ; 1305 Hit is not yo’ hone to haf at pis tyme A gloue for a garysoi, of Gawaynez gifte3, & I am here an erande i erde3 vncoupe, & haue no me wyth no male3, wt menfkful þigez ; pat miflyke3 me, lade, for luf at pis tyme’, Iche tolke mon do as he is tan, tas to non elle, *© Nay, hende of hy3e hono's,” q pat luffi vnder lyne, * Paz I hade ozt of yoez, 1815 zet schulde ze have of myne.” ‘ || ne pine.” XXVIII. Ho ra3t hy a riche rynk of red golde werkez, Wyth a ftarande ston, stondande alofte, pat bere blusschande beme3 as fe bry3t sane ; Wyt 3e wel, hit watz worth wele ful hoge. » 1820 Bot þe renk hit renayed, & redyly he sayde, © 1 wil no giftez for gode, my gay, at pis tyme ; I haf none yow to norne, ne no3t wyl I take.” Ho bede hit hy ful byfily, & he hir bode wernes, 1 if? 2 tyne, MS. K 2 68 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. & {were swyftely ' his sothe, pat he hit fefe nolde ; 1825 & ho fore pat he forfoke, & fayde }Þ after, “« If 3e renay my rynk, to ryche for hit semez, 3e wolde not fo hy3ly halden be to me, I {chal gif yow my girdel, pat gaynes yow lasse.” Ho la3t a lace ly3tly, pat leke vmbe hir fyde, 1830 Knit vpon hir kyrtel, vnder þe clere mantyle, Gered hit watz w* grene fylke, & w* golde schaped, Nozt bot aroide brayden, beten w* fyngrez ; & pat ho bede to fe burne, & blyþely bi-sozt Paz hit vn-worþi were, pat he hit take wolde. 1835 & he nay pat he nolde negh i no wyfe, Nauber golde ne garyson, er god hy gce fende, To acheue to pe chaiice pat he hade chosen pere. ** & perfore, I pray yow, displese yow nozt, & lettez be yo' bisinesse, for I baype hit yow new, I am derely to yow biholde, Bi cause of yo sembelait, & ew i hot & colde To be yo trwe feruait.” 1845 | to graute ; XXIX. “* Now forfake 3e pis filke,” fayde pe burde þene, <* For hit is symple i hit self, & fo hit wel semez, Lo! fo hit is littel, & laffe hit is worpy ; Bot who fo knew fe costes pat knit ar per ine, He wolde hit prayfe at more prys, parauenture ; 1850 For quat gome so is gorde wt fis grene lace, While he hit hade hemely halched aboute, | fwyftel, MS. [fol. 116.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. 69 Per is no haþel vnder heuen to-hewe hy pat my3t ; For he my3t not be flayn, for slizt vpon erþe.” Þe keft pe kny3t, & hit come to his hert, 1855 Hit were a juel for be joparde, pat by iugged were, When he acheued to þe chapel, his chek forto fech ; My3 * he haf slypped to be vn-flayn, pe fle3t were noble. Þene he pulged with hir þrepe, & poled hir to speke, & ho bere on hy þe belt, & bede hit hy fwyfe, 1850 & he gnted, & hy gafe with a goud wylle, & bi-sozt hym, for hir sake, difceu? hit nev’, Bot to lelly layne, for hir lorde ; fe leude hy acorde3, pat new wy3e fchulde hit wyt, I wysse, bot pay twayne, He ponkked hir oft ful fwype, Ful pro w* hert & þozt, Bi pat on þryne syþe, Ho hat; kyst pe kny3t fo tozt. | for nozte ; XXX. Théne lachchez ho hir leue, & leue3 by pere, 1870 For more myrþe of pat mon mozt ho not gete; When ho* wat3 gon, f G. gere3 hy fone, Rises, & riches hy i araye noble, Lays vp þe lut-lace, þe lady hy razt, Hid hit ful holdely, Þ he hit eft fonde ; 1975 Sypé cheuely to fe chapel chofes he fe waye, Preuely aproched to a preft, & prayed hy þere pat he wolde lyfte* his lyf, & lern hy bett?, How his fawle fchulde be faued, when he schuld feye hefé. Pere he fchrof hy schyrly, & schewed his mysdedez, 1880 1 my3t? 2 he, MS. 3 Iyste ? 70 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. Of pe more & fe myne, & mci besechez, & of absolucioi he on fe fegge calles ; & he afoyled hy furely, & fette hy fo clene, As dome}3-day schulde haf ben dizt on þe morn. & fypen he mace hy as mery amog fe fre ladyes, 1865 W' comlych caroles, & alle kynes ioye, As new he did bot pat daye, to fe derk nyt, Vche mon hade daynte pare, Of hy, & fayde I wyffe, 1890 p? myry he wat3 nev? are, Syn he com hider, er pis. | w* blys ; XXXII. Now by lenge i pat lee, Þ luf hy bi-tyde ; zet is pe lorde on þe laide, ledande his gomnes, He hat; forfaren pis fox, p' he folzed longe ; 1895 As he sprent ow a spene, to spye fe schrewe, [fol.116".] Per as he herd fe howndes, pat hafted hy swyþe, Renaud com richchande þurz a roze greue, & alle fe rabel 1 a res, ry3t at his helez. Pe wy3e wat3 war of þe wylde, & warly abides, 1900 & brayde3 out pe bry3t bronde, & at þe best castez ; & he {chit for þe scharp, & schulde haf arered, A rach rapes hy to, ry3t er he my3t, & ry3t bifore fe hors fete pay fel on hy alle, & woried me fis wyly wyth a wroth noyfe. 1995 pe lorde ly3te3 bi-lyue, & cache3 by * fone, Rafed hy ful radly out of pe rach moufes, Halde3 heze ou? his hede, halowez fafte, 1 hy? SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. 71 & f° bayen hy mony bray hoiidez ; Hates hy3en hem peder, w* horne3 ful mony, 1910 Ay rechatande ary3t, til pay þe renk sezen ; Bi pat wat3 comen his compeyny noble, Alle pat eu? ber bugle blowed at ones, & alle fife of? halowed, pat hade no hornes, Hit watz be myrieft mute pat eu? ms herde, pe rich rurd pat þ? watz raysed for renaude faule, . Hor hoide3 pay Þ rewarde, Her’ hede3 pay fawne & frote, & fypen pay tan reynarde, 1920 & turnen of his cote. | w' lote ; XXXII. & péne pay helden to home, for hit wat3 niez ny3t, Strakande ful stoutly i hor store horne; ; pe lorde is ly3t at pe lafte at hys lef home, Fyndez fire vpon flet, pe freke Þ by-fide, 1925 Sir Gawayn pe gode, pat glad wat3 w' alle, Amog fe ladies for luf he ladde much ioye. He were a bleait of blwe, pat bradde to pe erpe, His furkot femed hy wel, pat fofte wat3 forred, & his hode of pat ilke henged on his fchulder, 1930 Blande al of blainer were boþe al aboute. He mete3 me pis god man i myddez pe flore, & al with gomen he hy gret, & goudly he fayde, * I {chal fylle vpon fyrst oure forwardez nouþe, (fol. 117.] Pat we spedly han spoken, per spared watz no drynk ; ” 1935 pen acoles he [pe] kny3t, & kyffes by þryes, . 1 her her, MS. 72 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. As fauerly & sadly as he hem sette coupe. ** Bi kryst,” q pat of? kny3t, *f 3e cach much fele, I cheuisaiice of pis chaffer, zif 3e hade goud chepez.” ‘« 3e of pe chepe no charg,” q chefly pat of’, 1940 ‘« As is pertly payed pe chepe3 pat I azte.” ‘* Mary,” q pat of? mon, © myn is bi-hynde, For I haf hited al pis day, & no3t haf I geten, Bot pis foule fox felle, pe fende haf þe gode3, & pat is ful pore, for to pay for fuche prys þiges, As 3e haf pry3t me here, pro suche pre coffes, ** Inoz,” q £ Gawayn, ‘IT ponk yow, bi fe rode; '— & how pe fox wat3 slayn, 1950 He tolde hy, as pay stode. | fo gode.” XXXIIL. With m’pe & mynstralsye, wyth mete3 at hor wylle, pay maden as mery as any mé mo3ten, W' lazyg of ladies, w' lote3 of borde;3 ; Gawayn & pe gode m6 fo glad were pay bofe, 1955 Bot if pe douthe had doted, of? dronken ben of’, Bope pe mon & fe meyny maden mony iape3, Til þe sesoi wat3 sezen, pat pay seu? mofte ; Burne3 to hor bedde be-houed at fe laste. péne lo3ly his leue at fe lorde fyrst 1969 Fechchez pis fre mon, &-fayre he hy ponkke3,— ** Of such a fellyly ' soiorne, as I haf hade here, Yo hono, at pis hy3e fest, pe hyze kyg yow 3elde ! I 3ef yow me for on of yoez, if yowre self lykez, 1 selly? (fol. 117Þ.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. 73 For I mot nedes, as 3e wot, meue to morne ; 1985 & 3e me take si tolke, to teche, as 3e hy3t, Pe gate to þe grene chapel, as god wyl me suffer To dele, on nw3ere3 day, pe dome of my wyrdes.” ** In god faype,” q pe god mon, “‘ wyth a goud wylle ; Al pat ew? I yow hy3t, halde schal I rede.” 1970 per afygnes he a feruait, to fett hy i pe waye, & coudue hy by fe downe3, pat he no drechch had, For to ferk ' þur; fe fryth, & fare at pe gaynest, pe lorde Gawayn con þonk, 1975 Such worchip he wolde hy weue ; pé at fo ladye3 wlonk, pe kny3t hat; tan his leue. } bi greue. XXXIV. With care & wyth kyffyg he carppe3 hem tille, & fele pryuande ponkkez he frat hom to haue, 1980 & pay 3elden hy azayn * 3eply pat ilk ; pay bikende hy to kryst, w* ful colde sykyge3. Sypen fro pe meyny he menfkly departes ; Vche mon pat he mette, he made hem a þonke, For his feruyfe, & his solace, & his sere pyne, 1985 pat pay wyth busynes had ben, aboute hy to serue ; & vche segge as fore, to seu? w* hy þere, As pay hade wonde worpyly w* pat wlonk ew?. þe w' ledes & ly3t he wat3 ladde to his chambre, & blypely brozt to his bedde, to be at his rest ; 1990 zif he ne slepe soidyly, fay ne dar I, 1 in post ; For he hade muche on þe morn to myne, zif he wolde, : 1 frk, MS. 2 ajay, MS. [fol. 118.] 74 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. Let hy ly3e pere ftille, He hat nere pat he sozt, & 3e wyl a whyle be stylle, I {chal telle yow how pay wrozt. [FYTTE THE FOURTH.] I ow ne3e3 fe nw3ere, & fe ny3t paffe3, pe day dryuez to pe derk, as dry3tyn biddez ; Bot wylde wedere3 of fe worlde wakned peroute, Clowdes kesten kenly fe colde to þe ere, Wyth ny3e in nogh of pe norþe, fe naked to tene ; Pe snawe snitered ful snart, pat snayped þe wylde ; pe werbelande wynde wapped fro pe hy3e, & drof vche dale ful of dryftes ful grete. Pe leude lystened ful wel, pat le3 i his bedde, Þaz he lowkez his lidde3, ful lyttel he flepes ; Bi vch kok pat crue, he knwe wel þe steuen *. Deliu’ly he dressed vp, er fe day fprenged, For þere wat; ly3t of a laupe*, pat lemed i his chambre ; He called to his chamberlayn, pat cofly hy swared, & bede hy bryg hy his bruny, & his blonk fadel ; pat of? ferke3 hy vp, & feche3 hy his wedez, & grayþez me f Gawayn vpon a grett wyfe. Fyrst he clad hy i his clope3, pe colde forto were ; 1 This word is doubtful in the MS. , 2 Jaumpe ? SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. 75 & fypen his of? harnays, pat holdely watz keped, Bofe his paiice, & his plate3, piked ful clene, Þe ryge3 rokked of pe roust, of his riche bruny ; & al wat3 fresch as vpon fyrst, & he watz fayn péne, Vip ponks He hade vpon vche pece, Wypped ful wel & wlonk ; pe gayeft 1 to Grece, Pe burne bede bryg his blonk. IL Whyle þe wlonkest wedes he warp on hy feluen; 2025 His cote, wyth pe conyfaiice of þe clere werkez, Ennurned vpon veluet v’tuu? stonez, Aboute beten, & boiiden, enbrauded feme;3, & fayre furred w* ine wyth fayre pelures. zet laft he not pe lace, pe ladiez gifte, 2030 pat for-gat not Gawayn, for gode of hy feluen ; Bi he hade belted fe bronde vpon his balze haiiche3, pen dreffed he his drurye double hy aboute ; Swype fwebled vmbe his fwange swetely, pat kny3t, pe gordel of fe grene filke, pat gay wel bi-femed, 2035 Vpon pat ryol red clope, pat ryche wat3 to schewe. Bot wered not pis ilk wy3e for wele pis gordel, For pryde of þe pendaitez, þaz polyst pay were, & þaz pe glytPande golde glent vpon endez, Bot forto faué hy self, when suffer hy by-houed, To byde bale w* oute dabate, of bronde hy to were, Bi pat pe bolde mon bon, Wynez þeroute bilyue, Alle pe meyny of reno, 2045 He ponkke3 ofte ful ryue. | oÞ knyffe ; [fo]. 118b,] 76 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. III. Théne wat3 Gryngolet graype, pat gret wat3 & huge, & hade ben soioned sawly, & I a fiker wyfe, Hy lyft prik for poyt, pat proude hors péne ; Þe wy3e wyne3 hy to, & wyte3 on his lyre, & fayde foberly hy self, & by his foth swerez, ** Here is a meyny i pis mote, hat on menske penkke3,— pe mon hem mayntemes, ioy mot pay haue ; Pe leue lady, on lyue luf her bityde ; 3if pay for charyte cheryfen a gest, & halden hono’i her honde, pe haþel he 3elde, pat halde3 pe heuen vpon hy3e, & al fo yow alle! & 3if I my3t lyf vpon londe lede any quyle, -T schuld rech yow si rewarde redyly, if I my3t.” pen steppez he i to stirop, & strydez alofte ; His schalk schewed hy his schelde, on schulder he hit lazt, Gorde3 to Gryngolet, w* his gilt helez, & he ftarte3 on fe ston, stod he no lenger, His hapel on hors wat3 péne, Pat bere his spere & latice,— ** pis kaftel to kryst I kéne, He gef hit ay god chaiice !” | to praice ; IV. The brygge wat3 brayde don, & pe brode 3ate3 Vn-barred, & born open, vpon bofe halue ; pe burne blessed hy bilyue, & pe brede3 passed ; Prayfes pe porter, bifore pe prynce kneled, Gef hym god & goud day, pat Gawayn he faue ; (fol. 119.) SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. & went on his way, w* his wy3e one, Pat schulde teche hy to tone to pat tene place, Per pe ruful race he fchulde refayue. pay bozen bi bonkke3, Þ bo3e3 ar bare, Pay clomben bi clyffe3, per clengez pe colde ; pe heuen wat3 vp halt, bot vgly per vnder, Mist muged on fe mor, malt on fe moiitez, Veh hille had a hatte, a myst-hakel huge ; Brokez byled, & breke, bi bonkke3 aboute, Schyre schat?ande on schorez, Þ pay doi schowned. Welawylle watz þe way, þer þay bi wod schulden, Til hit wat3 fone seson, pat pe fine ryfes, Pay were on a hille ful hy3e, pe quyte snaw lay bifyde ; Pe burne pat rod hy by, Bede his mayster abide. | pat tyde ; V. « For I haf wonen yow hider, wy3e, at pis tyme, & now nar 3e not fer fro pat note place, Pat 3e han spied & spuryed fo specially aft? ; Bot I {chal fay yow for fope, syþen I yow knowe, & 3e ar a lede vpon lyue, pat I wel louy, Wolde 3e worch bi my wytte, ze worped pe bett?. Pe place pat 3e prece to, ful perelo® is halden ; Per wone3 a wy3e I pat waste, pe worst vpon erpe ; For he is stiffe, & sturne, & to ftrike louies, & more he is pé any mon vpon myddelerde, & his body bigger pé pe best fowre, Pat ar i Arpure3 ho?, hestor ', op? of’. | Hector ? red (fol. 119Þ,] 78 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. He cheuez pat chaiice at fe chapel grene; Per passes non bi pat place, fo proude i his armes, pat he ne dyne3 hy to depe, w* dynt of his honde ; For he is a mon methles, & mercy non vies, For be hit chorle, of? chaplayn, pat bi fe chapel rydes, Monk, of? maffe-preft, of? any mon elles, Hy pynk as queme hy to quelle, as quyk go hy feluen. For py I fay pe as fope as 3e i fadel fitte, Com 3e þere, 3e be kylled, may pe kny3t rede, Trawe 3e me pat trwely, þaz ze had twenty lyues He hatz wonyd here ful ore, On bent much baret bende, Ajayn his dynte3 fore, 3e may not yow defende.” VI. ‘“« For py, goude f Gawayn, let pe gome one, & got3 a-way sa of? gate, vpon goddez halue, Cayrez bi sa oÞ kyth, per kryst mot yow spede ; & I schal hyz me hom azayn, & hete yow fyrre, Pat I {chal swere bi god, & alle his gode hal3e3, As help me god & fe halydam, & oþez i nogh, Pat I fchal lelly yow layne, & lance new? tale, pat eu? 3e fondet to fle, for freke pat I wyst.” “ G*nt m’ci,” q Gawayn, & gruchyg he fayde, © Wel worth pe wy3e, pat woldez my gode, & pat lelly me layne, I leue wel }" woldez ! Bot helde þ® hit new fo holde, & I here passed, Foided for ferde for to fle, i fo'me pat þ* telle3, 1 were a kny3t kowarde, I my3t not * be excused. 1 mot, MS. | to spende ; SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. 79 Bot I wyl to þe chapel, for chaiice pat may falle, & talk wyth pat ilk tulk þe tale pat me lyste, Worfe hit wele, op? wo, as pe wyrde lykez, nee Paze he be a sturn knape, To stiztel, & ' {tad w* staue, Ful wel con dry3tyn schape, His feruaite3 forto save.” VII. ** Mary!” q pat op? mon, © now þ* fo much spellez, 2140 Pat þ* wylt þyn awen nye nyme to py feluen, & pe lyst lefe py lyf, pe lette I ne kepe ; Haf here fi helme on py hede, pi fpere i pi honde, & ryde me doi pis ilk rake, bi 30n rokke fyde, Til þÞ* be bro3t to pe boþem of þe brem valay ; 2145 péne loke a littyl on pe laiide, on þi lyfte honde, & þ® schal fe i pat flade pe self chapel, & pe borelych burne on bent, pat hit kepe3. Now fare3 wel on gode3 half, Gawayn pe noble, For alle pe golde vpon groide I nolde go wyth fe, 2150 Ne bere pe felazschip pur3 pis fryth on fote fyrre.” Bi pat pe wy3e i be wod wende; his brydel, Hit pe hors w* þe hele3, as harde as he my3t, Lepe3 hy ou? fe laiide, & leue3 pe kny3t pere, *© Bi godde3 self,” q Gawayn, « T wyl naup” grete ne grone, To godde3 wylle I am ful bayn, & to hy I haf me tone.” | al one ;— 1 & & MS. 80 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. VIL [fol. 120.) Thene gyrde3 he to Gryngolet, & gedere3 fe rake, 2160 Schowuez i bi a schore, at a schaze fyde, Ridez pur3 pe roze bonk, ry3t to pe dale ; & péne he wayted hy aboute, & wylde hit hy þozt, & seze no fygne of refette, bi-sydez nowhere, Bot hy3e bonkke3 & brent, vpon bope halue, 2165 & ruze knokled knarre3, w* knorned stonez ; pe fkwe3 of be scowtes skayned hy þozt. péne he houed, & wyth-hylde his hors at pat tyde, & ofte changed his cher, fe chapel to feche ; He sez non fuche i no fyde, & felly hym þozt, 2170 Sone a lyttel on a laide, a lawe as hit were’; A bal; ber3, bi a bonke, fe bryme by-syde, Bi a for3 of a flode, þ* ferked pare ; pe borne blubred per ine, as hit boyled hade. pe kny3t kache3 his caple, & com to pe lawe, 2175 Liztez doi luflyly, & at a lynde tache3 pe rayne, & his riche, with a roze braiiche ; péne he bozez to þe berze, aboute hit he walke3, Debetande w* hy self, quat hit be my3t. Hit hade a hole on pe ende, & on ayper fyde, 2180 & ow-growen w' greffe i glodes ay where, & al wat3 hol3 i w*, no bot an old caue, Or a creuiffe of an olde cragge, he coupe hit no3t deme, *© We, lorde,” q fe gentyle kny3t, 2185 ** Whefer pis be fe grene chapelle ; He my3t aboute myd-ny3t, pe dele his matynes telle !” | w' spelle, 1 we, MS. (fol. 120.7] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. IX. ‘* Now I wyffe,” q Wowayn, © wyfty is here ; pis oritore is vgly, wt erbe3 ow? growen ; Wel bifeme3 þe wy3e wruxled i grene Dele here his deuocioi, on fe deuele3 wyfe ; Now I fele hit is pe fende, 1 my fyue wytte3, pat hat3 {token me pis fteuen, to strye me here ; pis is a chapel of meschaice, pat chekke hit by-tyde, Hit is pe crafedeft kyrk, pat eu? I com ine !” With heze helme on his hede, his laiice i his honde, He romez vp to fe rokke of fo roz wonez ; pene herde he of pat hy3e hil, i a harde roche, Bizonde pe broke, i a bonk, a wonder breme noyfe, Quat hit clat*ed i pe clyff, as hit cleue schulde, As one vpon a gryndelston hade groiden a fype ; What hit wharred, & whette, as wat? at a mulne, What hit rusched, & ronge, rawþe to here. pene ‘‘ bi godde,” q Gawayn, “‘ pat gere, at' I trowe, Is ryched at fe rewence, me renk to mete, Let god worche we loo, Hit helppe3 me not a mote, My lif pa3 I for-goo, Drede dotz me no lote.” X. Théne fe kny3t con calle ful hy3e, « Who ftiztle3 i fis sted, me fteuen to holde? 1 as? M || bi rote ; 82 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. For now is gode Gawayn goande ry3t here, If any wy3e 03t wyl wyne hider fast, 2216 OP now, of” new, his nedez to spede.” ** Abyde,” q on on þe bonke, abouen ow? his hede, ** & Þ* {chal haf al i hast, pat I pe hy3t ones.” zet he rufched on pat rurde, rapely a þrowe, & wyth quettyg a wharf, er he wolde ly3t ; 2220 & fypen he kewez bi a cragge, & comez of a hole, Whyrlande out of a wro, wyth a felle weppen, A dene3 ax nwe dy3t, pe dynt w* o' 3elde W: a borelych bytte, bende by pe halme, Fyled i a fylor, fowre fote large, 2226 Hit wat3 no lasse, bi pat lace pat lemed ful bry3t. & þe gome i pe grene gered as fyrft, Bope fe lyre & pe legge3, lokke3, & berde, Saue pat fayre on his fote he foadez on fe erpe, Sette pe ftele to the stone, & stalked byfyde. 2230 When he wan to pe watter, ber he wade nolde, He hypped ov’ on hys ax, & orpedly strydez, Bremly broþe on a bent, pat brode watz a-boute, [fol. 121.] £ Gawayn pe kny3t con mete, 2236 He ne lutte hy no pyg lowe, Pat op? fayde, © now, £ fwete, Of fteuen mon may þe trowe.” | on snawe. XI * Gawayn,” q pat grene gome, ** god pe mot loke ! I wysse Þ* art welcom*, wy3e, to my place, 2240 & Þ® hatz tymed pi trauayl as t%e* mon schulde ; 1 to? 2 welcon, MS. 3 tee, MS. SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. 83 & þ* knowez fe couenaiitez keft v? by-twene, At pis tyme twelmonyth þ® toke pt pe falled, & I schulde at pis nwe 3ere 3eply fe quyte. & we ar i pis valay, v’ayly oure one, Here ar no renkes vs to rydde, rele as v? likez ; Haf py py helme of py hede, & haf here py pay ; Busk no more debate þ& I pe bede þene, When p" wypped of my hede at a wap one.” ‘Nay, bi god,” q Gawayn, ** þ me goft lante, I schal gruch fe no grwe, for grem pat falle3 ; Bot fty3tel pe vpon on strok, & I {chal stonde stylle, & warp be no wernyg, to worch as pe lyke3, He lened w' pe nek, & lutte, & {chewed pat schyre al bare, & lette as he no3t dutte, For drede he wolde not dare. XII. The pe gome i fe grene grayþed hy swyþe, Gederez vp hys gryme tole, Gawayn to smyte ; W: alle pe bur i his body he ber hit on lofte, Mit as maztyly, as marre hy he wolde ; Hade hit dryuen adoi, as dre3 as he atled, Per hade ben ded of his dynt, pat do3ty watz ew. Bot Gawayn on pat giferne glyfte hy byfyde, As hit com glydande adoi, on glode hy to schende, || no whare.” & schranke a lytel w' pe {chulderes, for fe scharp yrne. Pat of? schalk wyth a {chit pe schene wyth-haldez, & pene repreued he fe prynce wt mony prowde worde3 :— « D* art not Gawayn,” q pe gome, ** þ* is fo goud halden, 2270 pat neu? ar3ed for no here, by hylle ne be vale, M 2 84 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. (fol. 1219.] & now p" fles for ferde, er þ* fele harmez ; Such cowardife of fat kny3t cowpe I nev? here. Nawp” fyked I, ne flaze, freke, quen }" myntest, Ne keft no kauelacoa, in kygez ho” Arthor, 2276 My hede flaz to my fote, & 3et flaz I new?; & þ®, er any harme hent, ar3e3 I hert, | P fore.” Wherfore þe better burne me burde be called, | *q G:”, © I {chit onez, 2280 & so wyl I no more, Bot þaz my hede falle on fe stonez, I con not hit reftore. XIII. Bot busk, burne, bi pi fayth, & bryg me to þe poyt, Dele to me my deftine, & do hit out of honde, 2285 For I schal ftonde þe a strok, & start no more, Til py ax haue me hitte, haf here my trawþe.” << Haf at pe þene,” q þÞ* of’, & heue; hit alofte, & wayte3 as wropely, as he wode were ; He mynte3 at hy ma3tyly, bot not pe mon ryue;3, 2290 With-helde het?ly his' honde, er hit hurt my3t. Gawayn grayþely hit byde3, & glent w' no membre, Bot ftode stylle as fe fton, of? a stubbe auþer, pat rapeled is i roche groiide, w* rotez a hundreth. pé muryly efte con he mele, fe mon i fe grene, 2295 ‘* So now p" hat3 pi hert holle, hitte me bihoues ?; Halde fe now fe hy3e hode, pat Arpur pe razt, & kepe py kanel at pis keft, 3if hit kev? may.” G: ful gryndelly w' greme péne fayde, 1 hs, MS. 2 bihous, MS. SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. 85 **Wy þresch on, p" pro mon, p" prete3 to longe, 2300 I hope pat pi hert arze wyth þyn awen seluen.” «« For fope,” q pat op” freke, © fo felly þ* spekez, I wyl no leng? on lyte lette pin ernde, péne tas he' hy stryþe to stryke, 2805 & froafes boþe lyppe & browe, No meruayle þaz hy myslyke, Pat hoped of no refcowe. ae | rizt nowe. XIV. He lyftes ly3tly his lome, & let hit doi fayre, [fol.122.] W'* pe barbe of pe bitte bi pe bare nek; 2310 Þaz he homered het*ly, hurt hy no more, Bot snyrt hy on pat on fyde, pat seuw%ed þe hyde ; pe scharp schrank to pe flesche þurz fe schyre grece, Pat pe schene blod ow? his schulderes {chot to þe erpe. & quen pe burne sez fe blode blenk on fe snawe, 2815 He fprit forth spene fote more þe a spere lenþe, Hent het?ly his helme, & on his hed cast, Schot w* his schulderez his fayre schelde vnder, Braydez out a bry3t sworde, & bremely he spekez ; New syn pat he wat3 burne borne of his moder, 2420 Wat; he new i pis worlde, wy3e half fo blype :— ‘* Blyne, burne, of py bur, bede me no mo ; I haf a stroke i fis {ted wt oute ftryf hent, & if pow reche3 me any mo, I redyly {chal quyte, & 3elde 3ederly azayn, & Þ to 3e tryst, Bot on stroke here me falle3, pe couenait {chap ry3t foo, | & foo; 1 he he, MS. 86 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. ES E935 i1 Arpure3 hallez, & þer fore, hende, now hoo!” 2330 XV. The hapel heldet hy fro, & on his ax rested, Sette þe schaft vpon schore, & to þe scharp lened, & loked to fe leude, þat on pe launde 3ede, How pat dozty dredles dernely per stondez, Armed ful a3le3 ; i hert hit hy lyke3. 2335 Þen he mele3 muryly, wyth a much steven, & wyth a rykande rurde he to þe renk sayde, ** Bolde burne, on pis bent be not so gryndel ; No mon here vn-man*ly pe mys-boden habbe, Ne kyd, bot as couenaiide, at kyge3 kort schaped ; 2340 I hy3t pe a strok, & p* hit hatz, halde þe wel payed, I relece pe of þe remnaiit, of ry3tes alle of? ; zif* I deliver had bene, a boffet, parait?, I coupe wropeloker haf, waret, to be haf wrozt ang? *. Fyrst I manfed fe muryly, w' a mynt one, 2345 [fol.122%.] & roue pe wyth no rof, fore w* ry3t I pe pfered, For pe forwarde pat we fest i pe fyrst ny3t, & p" trystyly pe trawþe & trwly me haldez, Al be gayne pow me gef, as god mon schulde ; pat of? mit for be morne, mon, I fe profered, p" kyssedes my clere wyf, pe coffe; me raztez, For boþe two here I þe bede bot two bare myntes, Trwe mon trwe reftore, péne par mo drede no wafe ; 2355 At pe prid p" fayled pore, & P for pat tappe tape. 1 legible. 2 uf, MS. 5 This word is doubtful. | boute feape ; [fol. 123.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T, XVI. For hit is my wede pat þ* werez, þ* ilke wouen girdel, Myn owen wyf hit pe weued, I wot wel forsoþe ; Now know I wel fy coffes, & py coftes als, & be wowyg of my wyf, I wrozt hit myfeluen ; I fende hir to afay pe, & fothly me þynkkez, On pe fautleft freke, pat eu? on fote 3ede ; As perle bi þe quite pefe is of prys more, So is Gawayn, i god fayth, bi of? gay kny3te3. Bot here yow lakked a lyttel, £, & lewte yow wonted, Bot pat wat3 for no wylyde werke, ne wowyg naup’, Bot for 3e lufud yo" lyf, pe laffe I yow blame.” pat of stif mon i study stod a gret whyle ; So agreued for greme he gryed w' ine, Alle pe blode of his brest blende i his face, pat al he schrank for schome, pat pe {chalk talked. pe forme worde vpon folde, pat pe freke meled,— ‘* Corfed worth cowarddyfe & couetyfe boþe ! I yow is vylany & vyfe, pat vtue disstryez.” péne he kazt to pe knot, & pe keft lawsez, Brayde bropely fe belt to be burne feluen :— ‘Lo! per pe falffyg, foule mot hit falle ! For care of by knokke cowardyfe me ta3t To a-corde me w* couetyse, my kynde to for-sake, pat is larges & lewte, pat longez to kny3te3. Now am I fawty, & falce, & ferde haf ben ew; Of trecherye & vn-trawpe boþe bityde for3e, I bi-knowe yow, kny3t, here stylle, Al fawty is my fare, Letez me ow-take yo’ wylle, & efte I schal be ware.” | & care! 2881) 88 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. XVII. Then 103e pat op’ leude, & luflyly fayde, ‘J halde hit hardily’ hole, pe harme pat I hade ; 2390 p" art confessed fo clene, be-knowen of py mysles, & hat3 pe penaiice apert, of be poyt of myn egge, I halde þe polyfed of pat ply3t, & pured as clene, As p" hade3 neu? forfeted, fypé p" wat3 fyrst borne. & I gif pe, £, þe gurdel pat is golde hémed ; 2395 For hit is grene as my goune, f G:, 3e maye Penk vpon fis ilke þrepe, Þ p" forth pryge3 Amog prynces of prys, & pis a pure token Of pe chaiice of þe grene chapel, at cheualro? knyztez ; & 3e {chal i pis nwe 3er azayn to my wone;3, i fal bene.” & wasch y reuel fe remnait of pis ryche fest, per laped hy faft pe lorde, & fayde, ‘‘ wt my wyf, I wene, We {chal yow wel acorde, 2405 pat watz yo’ enmy kene.” XVIII. «© Nay, for soþe,” q pe fegge, & fefed hys helme, & hat3 hit of hendely, & pe hapel ponkkez, *© T haf foiorned sadly, fele yow bytyde, & he 3elde hit 30w 3are, pat 3arkke3 al méfkes ! 2410 & comaiide3 me to pat cortays, yo’ comlych fere, Bofe pat on & pat of, myn hono'ed ladye3, pat p? hor kny3t wyth hor keft han koytly bigyled. 1 hardilyly, MS. (fol. 123D.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. 89 Bot hit is no ferly, pa3 a fole madde, & pur3 wyles of wymen be wonen to sorze ; 2415 For fo watz Adam i erde wt one bygyled, & Salamon wt fele sere, & Samson eft fone3, Dalyda dalt by hys wyrde, & Dauyth fer aft? Wat3 blended w* Barsabe, Pat much bale poled. Now hese were wrathed wyth her wyles, ht were a wyne huge, 2120 To luf hom wel, & leue hem not, a leude fat coupe, For pes wer forne pe freeft pat folzed alle þe fele, Exellently of alle pyfe of’, vnder heuen-ryche, ey & alle þay were bi-wyled, 2426 With * wymen pat pay vied, Paz I be now bigyled, Me fink me burde be excused.” XIX. ** Bot yo: gordel,” q G: © god yow for-3elde ! Þat wyl I welde wyth good wylle, not for þe wyne golde, 2430 Ne pe faynt, ne þe fylk, ne fe fyde pendaiides, For wele, ne for worchyp, ne for pe wlonk werkkez, Bot i fygne of my furfet I {chal fe hit ofte ; When I ride i reno, remorde to myfeluen Pe faut & fe fayntyfe of pe flesche crabbed, 2495 How tender hit is to entyfe teches of fylþe ; & f°, quen pryde schal me pryk, for prowes of armes, Pe loke to pis luf lace {chal lepe my hert. Bot on I wolde yow pray, difplefes yow nev? ; Syn 3e be lorde of the 3onder londe, }? I haf lent ine, 2440 Wyth yow wyth worfchyp,—pe wy3e hit yow 3elde 1 with wyth, MS, N (fol. 124.] 90 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. Pat vp-haldez pe heué, & on hy3 sittez,— How norne 3e yowre ry3t nome, & þene no more ?” ** pat schal I telle pe trwly,” q þ* of” þene, ** Bernlak de Hautdefert I hat i pis londe, 2445 Purz my3t of Morgne la Faye, pat i my ho” lenges, -&' koyntyse of clergye, bi craftes wel lerned, pe mayftres of M°lyn, mony ho* taken ; For ho hat3 dalt drwry ful dere sa tyme, With pat conable klerk, pat knowes alle yo’ kny3te3, po EE Morgne þe goddes, Þerfore hit is hir name ; Welde3 non fo hy3e hawteffe, Pat ho ne con make ful tame. 2455 XX. Ho wayned me vpon fis wyse to yo' wyne halle, For to assay pe surquidre, 3if hit soth were, pat renes of pe grete renow of pe Roide Table ; Ho wayned me pis wonder, yo wyttez to reue, For to haf greued Gayno’, & gart hir to dy3e, 2460 Wt gopnyg of pat ilke gomen, pat goftlych speked, W*' his hede i his honde, bifore be hy3e table. pat is ho pat is at home, pe aiician lady ; Ho is even þyn ait, Arpure3 half suster, pe duches do3ter of Tyntagelle, pat dere Vt? aft? 2465 Hade Arpur vpon, pat apel is nowþe. Perfore I eþe fe, hapel, to com to py nait, Make myry i my ho?, my meny fe louies, & I wol þe as wel, wy3e, bi my faythe, | in? 2 ho hat3? jl (fol. 124Þ.] SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. 91 As any gome vnder god, for py grete trauþe.” 2470 & he nikked hy naye, he nolde bi no wayes ;— Pay acolen & kyssen, [bikennen] ayper op” To fe prynce of paradise, & parten ry3t þere, Gawayn on blonk ful bene, 2475 To pe kyges burz bufke3 bolde, & pe kny3t i pe enker grene, Whiderwarde fo ev? he wolde. || on coolde ; XXI. Wylde wayez i pe worlde Wowen now rydez, On Gryngolet, pat pe g'ce hade geten of his lyue ; 2480 Ofte he herbered i house, & ofte al peroute, & mony a-venture i vale, & venquyft ofte, Pat I ne ty3t, at pis tyme, i tale to remene. pe hurt wat3 hole, pat he hade hent i his nek, & pe blykkande belt he bere þeraboute, 2486 A belef as a bauderyk, boiden bi his syde, Loken vnder his lyfte arme, þe lace, w* a knot, I tokenyg he watz tane i tech of a faute ; & p? he comes to pe cot, kny3t al i foide. per wakned wele i pat wone, when wyst pe grete, 2490 pat gode G: watz comen, gayn hit hym þozt ; be kyg kyssez pe kny3t, & þe whene alce, & fypen mony fyker kny3t, pat fo3t hy to haylce, Of his fare pat by frayned, & ferlyly he telles ; Bi-knowez alle pe coftes of care pat he hade,— 2495 pe chaiice of þe chapel, pe chere of fe kny3t, pe luf of pe ladi, þe lace at pe last. pe nirt i pe nek he naked hem schewed, pat he lazt for his vnleute at be leudes hondes, N2 || for blame ; 92 SYR GAWAYN AND THE GRENE KNY3T. He tened quen he schulde telle, He groned for gref & grame ; Þe blod i his face con melle, When he hit schulde schewe, for schame. XXII. ** Lo! lorde,” q pe leude, & fe lace hondeled, ** pis is pe bende of pis blame I bere [in] my nek, pis is pe lape & pe loffe, pat I lazt haue, Of couardife & couetyfe, pat I haf cazt pare, pis is pe token of my trawþe, pat I am tan ine, & I mot nede3 hit were, wyle I may last ; For non may hyden his harme, bot vnhap ne may hit, For Þ hit one3 is tachched, twyne wil hit neu’.” pe kyg comforte3 fe kny3t, & alle fe cot als, Lazen loude Þ at, & luflyly acorden, Pat lordes & ladis, þ* longed to þe Table, Vche burne of fe broÞ-hede a bauderyk fchulde haue, A bende, a belef by a-boute, of a bry3t grene, & pat, for fake of pat segge, i swete to were. For pat wat3 acorded þe renot of þe Ronde Table, & he hono’ed pat hit hade, ew more aft?, As hit is breued i fe best boke of romaiice. Þ? i Arthur? day pis ait? bitidde, pe Brut? bokee Þ of beres wyttenesle ; Sypé Brut?, pe bolde burne, bozed hider fyrst, Aft? pe fegge & fe afaute wat; fefed at Troye, Mony ait*ez here bi-forne, Haf fallen fuche er pis :— Now pat bere fe croi of porne, He bryg v? to his blyffe! AMEN. | 1 wyffe ; The Awntyrs of Arthure at the Terne Wathelpne, [fol. 154.] Here bygynnes The awntyrs of Arthure at the Terne Wathelpn, I; N ‘Kyng Arthure tym' ane awntir by-tyde, By the ‘TerneWahethelyii, als* the buke tellis, Als* he to Carelele was comeii, that * conqueroure kyde, With dukes, and w*'* ducheperes, pat w* pat® dere duellys, For’ to hinte at the herdys, pat lange hafe * bene hyde ; 5 And? one a daye pay pam '* dighte to þ* depe delhs, To fette" of f° femmales, in þ*"* foreste 'wele frythede”, Faire ‘in the fernyfone tyme, by frythis*, and fellis. Thus to f°’ wode are” thay wente, the wlonkefte in wedys, — Bothe the kynge, and the qwene, — H And att p* doghety by-dene, + Dame Gayenoure he ledis. Syr Gawane, gayeste one grene,—- 1.—! the tyme of Arthur, MS. Douce. * Turnewathelaf, as. 5 Whaii. + and. > This word omitted. * pe. . 7 Om. * had. ? Om, ‘hem. '' fall, 12 Om. 13 and frydde. + by pe firmyschamis, in frithes. '5 Om, 1° arn. 96 THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. I. And’ thus £ Gawane Þ* gay, dame* Gayeno’ he ledis, In a glet?ande gyde, pat glemet full gaye ; 15 With riche rebanes reuerffede, ‘who þ* righte redys, Raylede w' rubes, ‘one royalle* arraye ; Hir hude ‘was of hawe* hewe, þ* hir hede hydys, 'Wroghte w* peloure, and patte, and* perrye to paye ; Schruedede’ in a fchorte cloke, pat the rayne schrydes*, 20 Sett ow? w* fafyrs, full® fothely to saye. ‘And thus wondirfully was att þ* wyghtis wedys”, — 5 Hir saditt femyde " of fat ilke,—- | ‘Semlely fewede w'” fylke; Gayely {cho™ glydis. One a muyle als” the milke, [ = ITE. Thus' alle in glet?ande golde gayely scho* glydis The gates, w' f Gawane, by a* grene wette ; ‘Nane bot hym felfe, one a* blonke, ‘by p' birde* bydis, That borne was in Burgoyne, by buke, & by bette ; a0 He ledde þt lady so lange by ‘pofe lande3° fydys, Sythefi’ vndir a 'lorere scho* lyghte, lawe by a fette ; Sir’ Arthure, w' his erles, futt’ ernestly rydis, To teche 'þam to þaire tristis, trewely" to tette. IL—! Om. ? Om. *hoso, +* of riall, 5 of a herde. 5 Of pillo’, of palwerk, of, 7 Schurde. 5 shedes. 9 Om. 1 With faffres & seladynes, fet by pe sides, "' fette. *'2 Saude with sambutes of. 5 as, !* she. III.—! Om. ? ho, *pe. 4 And pat burne, ofi his. * with the Quene. © pe lawe, 7 Om. 8 lorre pey. .9 And. 1° Om. 1! hem to her tristres, pe trouthe for. [fol. 154°.) THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. 97 To 'þaire triftis he pam taughte, who þ* righte” trowes, ‘Tike a” lorde, wt owttyfi lett, ‘At his triste was he sett", W: bowe and w* barcelett, Vndir pofe’’ bewes. IV. Vndir pofe' bewes bay bade, þose beryns so bolde, To bekire at ‘pofe barrayne*, in bankis so bare ; 40 Thay kefte of þaire* copitts, in clyffes so calde ; ‘Thay recomforthed paire* kenettis, to 'kele þam* of care ; Pare myghte 'hirdmeii, hendely forfothte®, herdis by-halde, Herkyn huntynge ‘wt hornnes’, in holtis so hare; Pay ‘fellede dowfie*® þ* femmatts, full thikke folde, 45 W: frefche hundis, and fette, ‘felonofly pay’ fare. ‘Pay queftede”, and quellys,— By” frythis and fellis, ——— ‘& darkys and darys”.—— ‘pat þ* dere dwellys'*, ————— V. ‘Atte darkis' the dere, ‘and to down fchowys’, And’, for þ* dowte* of þ* dede* drowpys the daa, And by þ* stremys so strange, pat swyftly swoghes’, 12 here triftres he hem tauzt, ho pe trouth, 13 Eche, 1+ To afi oke he hem fette. 15 pe. IV.—! pe. * pes baraynes. * here, + Conforte her. 5 hele hem. © hapeles in hiz. 7 in hast. * fel of. ° pei folowefi her. '° With gret questes. 1! Both in. 12 AIP the dure in pe delles. '3 They durkefi, and dare. In MS. Douce the lines 5, 6 are transposed before the two which precede. In both MSS. a line seems wanting (the ninth) to complete the stanza. V.—! Then durken. 2 in pe dyme skuwes. * pat. * drede, 5 deth. 5 This line is omitted in MS. D. [0] 98 THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. Pay wery þ* wilde fwyne, and 'wyrkkis pai waa’ ; ‘Thay hunte, and halowes, in holttis and hillys*, 50 ‘And till þaire riste, raches relyes ofi þaire raye? ; Thay gafe no” gameni, ‘no grythe", þ* one grownde growes, Grete hundis” [in the greues”] fut” gladly ‘gafi gaa”. Thus thies gomes pay ga”, in grevys so grene, ‘And boldly blawes rechayse”, ——\ And folowes * faste one þ* trase, —| Swylk” folauce to sene.— W' many fergyaunte of mace, LE VI. Thus' w* folauce pay femelede’, the prowdefte in patte, And sew? to Þ* foueraygne, ‘in cleues fo clene* ; 60 Nane* bot £ Gawane, the* gayeste of alte, By-leuys w* dame GaynO in ‘pofe greues” grene ; Vndir a lorrere ‘{cho laye*, pat lady fo {matte, Off boxe, and of barborafie’, byggyde full bene ; Fafte by-fore vndrone”, this ferly gui" falle, 65 And this mekitt mervette, pat I of" mene. Now wit” I of this mervette meen, 3if I mote ; The daye waxe als dirke, -— | Ais“ it were mydnyghte myrke ;— And lyghte one his fote. Ther of 'f Gawane” was irke, 7 worchefi hé wo. 5 The huntes pei halowe, in hurftes and huwes. ° And bluwe rechas, ryally pei rai to the ro. '0 to no. 11 Om. 12 pe grete gre[uJndes. 13 Supplied from MS, D. '+ so. 1 pei go. 15 So gladly pei gon. 27 The king blowe rechas. '8 folowed. 2" pt. VI.— Om. *femble. 5 suweh., * wt in schaghes schene. 5 Al. ® Om. 7 greues so. * ho was lizt. ® berber. 9 yndre, 1 cofi, 23 shal of, 13 wol. 1 As, ' pe king, (fol. 155.] THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. 99 Vil, Thus one’ fote are pay ‘lyghte, þose* frekis vn-fayne, And ‘fledde faste to* the forefte, and* to þ* fawe’ fellis ; Thay rafie faste to the roches, for reddoure of þ* rayfie*, For þ* 'slete, and þ* snawe, pat snayppede pam so snefte” ; 75 Thare come a 'lowe one the loughe, i lede es noghte* to layne, In the lyknes of Lucyfere, layeth este in hette ; And glyddis to ‘dame Gaynoure? the gatis full” gayne, ‘z30llande 3amyrly", with many lowde 3elte”. ‘It 3ellede, it 3amede, with vengeance fult” wete; And saide, 'ofte syghande fult'* sare,— | * T ame” the body ‘pt f°” bare, —+ I gloppyi” and I grete!” Allas! now kyndyls my kare, VII. Thane gloppenyde, and grett, dame’ Gaynoure the gay, 85 And askede* f Gawayne, whatt ‘was his beste* rede ? «It es* the clippes of the mone’, I herde a clerke saye ;”— And thus he comforthede* þ* qwene, w*7 his knyghtehede.— «« Sir Cadore, ‘Sir Caduke, Sir Costarde*, Sir Kaye, Thir? knyghtis are” vn-curtayse, by crofe, & by crede! 90 That thus ‘me hafe lefte in this erthe, at my dede" daye, VII.—! to. °farei pes. ‘fleenfro. * Om. 5 fewe. 5 This line and line 6 are omitted in MS. D. 7 sneterand fnawe snartly hem snelles. 5 lede of pe lawe, in londe is not. 9 Syr Gawayfi. 9 to, 1! Zauland, and zomerand. '2 zelles, 1° Hit zaules, hit zamers, w* waymynges. '* with siking. '5 bafi. 15 me, 17 gloppe. VIIL— Om. * seid to. * is pi good. ‘ar. * foi 5 confortes. 7 for. ® Sir Cleges, Sir Coftardyne. 9 Pes. 2 arfi, 1! oonly have me laft ofi my dep*. o 2 100 THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. With the gryfelyefte gaste, pat eu? herde I grete" !''— *'At this” gaste,” quod 'f Gaweayne", © greue 30we no m ore; I” satte speke wt 3one" spyrete, — | ‘In 3one wayes 80” wete,—-__+, Of zone"? body bare.” ‘If I* maye the bales bete, —— — IX. Bare was hir* body, and blake to the bone, Atte by-claggede in claye, ‘vn-comlyly clede? ; It 'weryit, it wayemettede, lyke* a woman, 95 ‘pat nowp’ one hede, ne on hare, hillynge* it hade ; It ftottyde?, it stotinede, it stode als* a stane, It marrede, it 'mo'nede, it moyffed’ for made. ‘Vn to pat’ gryfely gaste £ Gaweayne es gane ; He raykede ‘to it one? a rafe, for he” was new rade". 100 ‘For rade” was he new, ‘nowe who þ*” ryghte redys ; One Þ* chefe of þ* chotte' ———— A 'tade pykit one hir” potte, Hir eghne ware” holkedefutt hofte,— 'Glowand als” gledis, X. Atte glowede ‘als gledis' the gafte, 'whare scho* glydis, 'Vmbyclede in* a clowde, 'w* clethynge* vn-clere ; 12 Written at first grede, and so MS, D. 8 Of pe. pe gome. '* For I. © pe. 17 And of pe wayes I shall’. 18 What. 1” pe. IX.—' pe. 2? in vncomly cladde. 5 waried, hit wayment, as. + But on hide, ne on huwe, no heling. > stemered. 5 as, 7 memered, hit mufed. 5 Agayfi pe. 9 out at. 1° Om. drad. 12 Drad. ho fo. 24 clolle, 15 nade pikes oh pe. 16 Om, 17 That gloed as pe. X.—! as a glede. * pere ho, 5 Vmbe-clipped hi wt. + of cleyng. (fol. 155°.] THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. 101 Cerkelytt* with serpentes, ‘pat satt by hir* sydes;— To telte þ* dedis” per one, my tonge were to’ tere. The ‘beryfi brawndeche owte his? brande, and the body bydis, There fore pat’ cheualrous knyghte ‘thoghte it" no chere ; 110 The htindes ‘are to hillys”, & ‘paire hedes” hydes, For pat" gryfely gafte made 80” gryme bere. The grete grewhundes were agayste, ‘for pat’ grym-bere ;— The birdes on” the bewes, pat one ‘that gaste gewes'*,———| That 'hedows whefiþay® here. Thay clyme” in the clewes”, — Xl. ‘Who pat myghte pat hedows see, hendefte in’ haute, How 'hir chotte chatirede, hyr chaftis, and hir* chyne ; 19 Thane coniurede ‘hir þat* knyghte, and* one Crifte guf* he catte,— ‘« Atts® þou was crucytyede one croyle, to ‘faue vs fra’ syfi, ‘Thou spirette, saye* me the fothe, whedir pat’ pou salt, And whi þat* fou walkes” thies wayes, thies" woddis, w* inn?”— © T was of fegure, and ‘of flesche, the” fayerefte of alte, Cristenede, and krysomede”, with kynges in my kyn. 125 I hafe kynges in my kyii, knawefi ‘kyde futt kene; God hafe ‘fent me this” grace, | To speke with 3oure qwéne. To drye my paynes in this place, ‘And nowe am I cémefi one a pase',— 5 Skeled. all’ aboute pe. 7 todes, *® full’. ° burne braides out pe. 1° pe. 11 changed. 1? hizen to pe wode. '%herehede. pe. 5a, 5ofpe, Tin 18 pe goost glowes. 'fkryke. % skowes. 2 hapeles may. XI.—! Hapelefe mizt here fo fer into. * chatered pe cholle, pe chalus off pe. 3 pe. * Om. ‘con. © As. 7 clanse vs of 5 That p* sei, ° Om. 1° walkeft. 1! pe. 12 face, 13 knowefi. 14 for. In MS. L. first written “for kyde,” but afterwards “for” crossed out and © full’ kene” added, '* me geven of his. '5 I am comefi in pis cace. 102 THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. XII. Qwene was I ‘whilome, wele' bryghtere of browes, Than Beryke?, or Brangwayne, the? byrdis so balde ; Of ‘any gamnes, or gudis\, pat one the’ grownde growes, Wele* grettere pan’ Gayndo’, of garsomes*, & of? golde, Of ‘pales, of powndis, of parkes”, of plewes, 155 Of townnes, of towris, of tresoures” vn-tolde, ‘Of contres, of caftetts”, of cragges, of clewes ; ‘And nowe am I cachede” owte of 'kythie, in“ carys so colde ! In” care am I cachede”, and cowchede in claye ; —o—zIPT—_— Loo”! curtayse knyghte, ——— How ‘pat dede” hafe me dyghte ;— Of Gayeno' the gaye.” —- Nowe gyffe me anes” a syghte, — XII. ‘Nowe to’ GayenG' þ* gaye Sir Gaweayne es gane, And to þat* body ‘hafe he* broghte ‘that birde pefi fo* bryghte : us ** Welecome, Wayno'!” 'scho says, © þ** worthye in wane! Loo ! howe pat® dulefutt dede” hafe thi dame dyghte. I was reddere in* rode pan rose in þ* rayne ; My lyre als’ the lely, ‘lufely to syghte”, And” nowe ‘I am a grisely ** gaste, and 'grymly granes”, 150 W: Lucefere, in a lake, lawe ame I lyghte. XII.— some wile. 2 Berell', 5 pes. + al ghmeli, or gle. 5 Om. © Om. 7 pefi Dame, * garfofi. 9 Om. '° palaies, of parkes, of pondes. '! treso*, 1% Of castelles, of contreyes. 23 Now ame I cau3t. !* kide, to. > Into, 5 caught. 17 Lo! fir, 18 delfulle deth. +9 Lete me onys haue. XIIL— After. * pe. * he her. + and to pe burde. 5 i-wis. © Om. 7 deth. » of, 9 as. 19 lonched on hight. " Om. !? am I a gracelos. 1 grisly I grofi. [fol. 156.] THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. 103 ‘Thus am I lyke to Lacefere, takis witnes* by mee; For att zoure” frefche fauoure, ‘Nowe moyfe one this” mirroure— Thus salt 3e bee. For bothe” kynge and empoure, XIV. And' thus dede wilt zow dighte, ‘takis witnesse by me’, And? there one hertly takis* hede, whils p** þ* es* here ; When pou ‘es richely” arrayede, and 'rydes in a* rowte, Hafe þaii? pete, '& mynd” one f° pore, for" þ* arte of powere ; 160 Beryns, and byrdis, ‘are besye* the a-bowte, Wheii thi body es bawmede, and broghte appone” bere, Thane ‘witt pay leue the lyghtely”, pat nowe witt the lowte, ‘And thane helpes the” no thynge, bot halye prayere. The prayere of f°” pore ‘chaffes the from helte” ; Of ‘pafe pat 3ellis at thi® 3ate, ——\ | Wheii ‘f" sittis” in thi sette, i ‘Some dayntes pou dele”. With att mirthes at thi” mete, — va XV. With daynteths’ one deffe, thi dyetes are dyghte, 170 And thus? in dawngere, and dole, ‘I downe, &° I duette ; Nafty*, and nedfutt, and* nakede one nyghte, Pere folowes® me a ferde of fendis ‘fult felt’ ; 14 Take truly tent tizt nowe. 1° pi. 25 Muse ofi my. 17 Om, XIV.— Om. * thare you not doute. 5 Om. ‘take. * Om. Sart. 7 art richest. 8 ridest in pi. 9 Om. 1° Om. 1! Om. 32 pat bei. '* ofi a. 1 lite wyfi pe light. 15 For pefi he helpes, '* Om. 7 may purchas pe pes, *'* that pou yeues at pe. ' pou art set. © Om. *% And dayntes on des. XV.—! riche dayntes. ? 1. * in dongofi. * Naxte, 5 Om. © folo. 7 of helle. 104 THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. Thay harle me vnhendely, 'and hewys* me one hyghte ; In braffe, and in bromstane, I ‘burne als? a bette ; 175 Was nev’ wroghte in this werlde a wafullere wyghte ; It were ‘tore tiff” any tonge my tourmenttis” to tette ! Bot” now wilt I of my tourment talke”, or I gaa; Thynke hertly on this, | Now" fande to mende of” thi mys : Bewarrenow, ”bemy waa!” For” thou erte warnede, I wysle, XVI. ** Now' wo es me, for thi waa!” sayd* Wayno', ‘‘ I wyffe, Bot ‘a worde* wolde I wete, and* thi will ware ; Gyff* matyfis, or messes*, myghte oghte’ menden* thi myffe, ws Or any mobytts? on molde, my myrthis” ware the mare ; Or" bedis of bechopis myghte brynge the to blyffe, Or coueiitis, in cloyft?s”, myghte kele” the of care ; For“ if pou be my modir, grete m?vette” it es, That ‘thi burlyche” body es blakenede” fo bare !— 190 *©T bare the of my body ; whate bote es ‘to lye ?——— ‘Be that to takenynge” thou trowe,5 | I brake a folempne a-vowe, —-—~ ‘And Þ fore dole I drye”.” ‘That none wyste, bot I &” thowe, ® pei harme. °brefias. !® ful tore, '! t'ment. 12 Om, ‘tel. 1+ Om. 15 Om. 15 Om, 17 Om, XVI.—! Om. *q4. 5 one ping. ‘if. +5 If auper. * mas. 7 Om. 5 mende. 9 meble. 'merthe. "If. 12 cloistre, kere. '* Om. 15 wonder, 2 al pi burly. 17 brouzt to be, '* ht I layfi. 9 By pt tokefi. °° And no mafi wist ht but. 2! Pat sopely I fayfi, The lines 10, 11, 12 of this stanza in MS. D. stand in order 12, 10, 11, THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. 105 XVII. ‘«‘Tette me now' sothely, what may ‘safe thi sytis’, And I salt 'garre feke fayntes’, for thi fake ; . Bot ‘of thafe* balefult beftis, þ* one thi body bytys’, Atte 'blendis my blode, thi blee es* foo blake.” — ‘* "This es it to luffe pamoures, and lustis, and litys’, 200 That gerse* me lyghte and ‘lenge so lawe in pis’ lake ; For” atte the welthe of this" werlde thus” a-waye wytis ; ‘This werlde es wandrethe, pat wirkis me wrake. For" wrake ‘it me wirkis, now” Waynoure, I wysse ; — Were thritty trentatts dofte, 'By-twyxefi vndrofie” and nofie, -| And broghte 'i to” blyffe.” My saule ‘were saluede futt”” fone, XVIII. ' “To blysse brynge the that* barne, þ* ‘dere hafe the boghte?, That was crucyfiede one croyfe, & crownnede w* thorne ; 210 Crystynnede*, and krysomede, w* canditts*, and coude, 'Fullede in fufistane, fult® frely by-forne ; Mary, ‘pat es’ myghty, and* myldeste of mode, ‘That bare þ* blyfichede’, in Bedleme was borne, XVII.— Say. 2? pe fauefi, y-wys. © make fere mefitofinge. ‘*pe. is. 6 bledis my ble, pi bones arfi. 7 Pat is luf par amo”, liftes, and delites. 5 has. ° laft lozin a. 1° Om. "pe. 12 pi, '8 With pe wilde wermis, pt worche. '+ Om. 15 pei me worchen. '5 By-twene vnder. '7 focoured with. 1° to pe. XVIII.—! In the Lincoln MS. this and the two next stanzas, are misplaced, and appear as the XIX., XX., and XVIII. The peculiar form of the verses, and the authority of MS. D. both confirm the order now adopted. * pe. * brought [boghte ?] pe ofi rode. * As pou was cristened. 5 candel. 6 Folowed in fonteftone off. 7 pe. 8 Om. ? Of whom pe blifful barme [barne]. P 106 THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. Gytfe"” me grace, ‘for to" grete ‘thy saule w* some gude”, 215 And mene” the wt meffes", and matynes'* one morne.” — * To ‘mene me" wt messes, grete 'menske nowe” it were ; —— For hym, þ* ryste one the rode, — | Gyffe nowe" faste of thy gude,— 'Whytts pat” pou erte here.” To folke pat fayles" the fude, XIX. «© Now’ here hertly one* hande, ‘I hete the* to halde, W‘ a melyone of messes to make ‘thy menynge*.— ‘Bot one worde,” faide dame Wayno’, © nowe wiete pt I walde’, Whate greues* Gode mofte ‘of any kyns thynge’ ?”— 225 ** Pride, wt ‘apparementis, als* pphetis haue? tolde, By-fore þ* pople ‘appertly, in thaire” p*chynge ; ‘The [bowe] is futt" bittire, pare of be thou balde, It” makis beryns ‘fult balde”, to breke his byddynge. “Who fo“ his byddynge brekis, ‘bare he es” of blyffe ; —-——_— Bot pay be falued of that sare, Certis”, or pay hethyfi fare, Thay mofi wiete” of calde* care,-- | Waynoure, I wys.” -——~ 10 Lene. 1! pt I may. 1? pe wt gode. * mynge. 4 matens. 25 masses. 1° mende vs. 17 myster. 18 Om. '9 failefi. 2 While. XIX.—! Om. * my. * pes heftes. * pe mynyg. ° A! quod Wayno’, I wis, yit weteii I wolde. ° wrathed. 7 at pi weting. 5 peappurtenaunce, as. ° han, 1° apt inher. 1 Hit beres bowes. Instead of the word inclosed within brackets a blank space is left in the Lincoln MS. '* pat. 3 so bly. + Bot ho, | pei befi. 1 Om. 7 wetefi. 18 Om. [fol. 156°.] THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. 107 XX. i \ce *© 'Tette me,” fayde’ Wayno' '** a worde’, 3if pou wofte, 235 Whate dedis* myghte me beste ‘in to blysche* brynge ?”— ‘“* Mekeneffe and mercy,” ‘fcho saide*, © ‘po are* the moste, Hafe’ pete one the pore, ‘thane plefys pou owre* kynge ; Sythefi ‘aft? that, do almous dedis of atte of? thynge’ ; Thies arefi the gud” gyftis of the holy goste, 240 That enfpyres ‘alte fperites, w' owttyii" spillynge, ‘For to come to that blysse, that eu? more saft lafte”. Of 'thies sperituale thynges {pyre me” na mare ; Whills'* pou arte qwene in thi quarte, Halde thies wordis in thyn” herte, — Hethyii salt p" fare.” — For” pou satt lyffe bot a starte ; XXI. « How satt we fare,” faide' the freke, “‘ þ* fowndis* to fyghte, "That ofte foiidis the folkes, in* fele kyngis landis ; ‘That riche rewmes ou’ rynnes, agaynes the* ryghte, 250 ‘And wynnes wirchippis, & welthis, by* wyghtenes of handis ?”— «« —3zowre kynge es to couetous, I tell® the, sir knyghte, Maye no maii 'stere hy of” strenghe, 'whitts þ** whele ftandis ; XX.—! Wyffe me, qf. °fom wey. *bedis. + to pe bliffe. 5 Om. © pes arfi. 7 And fipefi haue. 5 pat plefes heuen. ° charite is chef, and pen is chaste. 1° graces ful. 1! iche sprete, with oute. '? And pefi almeffe dede cure al ping. In MS. D. this line is the 6th. 1 pis fpi’al ping spute p*. + Als. 15 Om. 35 Om. XXIL—' qf. 2 fondefi. * And pus defouleii pe folke, ofi. + And riches ouer reymes, w* outefi eny. ° Wynnen worfhipp’ in werre, porgh. 5 warne. 7 ftry him with. 5 while his. P 2 (fol. 157.] 108 THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. Wheii he es in his magefte ‘heghefte, &* matte ‘es of” myghte, He satt lighte fult lawe, appone” the see sandis. 255 ‘Thus 30ure” cheualrous kynge® chefe schalte a chawnce, 'False fortune” in fyghte, ‘That wondirfuft whele-wryghte”, | Takes" witnes by Fraunce.— 'Mase lordis lawe for” to lyghte ; XXII. Fraunce hafe 3e frely w* 30° fyghte wonnefi ; ‘The Frolo, and þ* Farnaghe, es frely by-leuede' ; Bretayne, and Burgoyne, ‘es bothe to 3ow bowneii’, And alle the dugepers* of Fraunce w* þ** dyfi dreuede’. Gyane may gretyfi®, p'’ þ* werre was by-gounnefi ; 265 ‘Es noghte a lorde in pat lande, appofi lyfe* leuede ; zete salt þ* riche Romaynes’ w* ‘jow beii ou’” ronnefi, And alle” þ* Rownde Tabilt paire” rentis be reuede. ‘Thay salt zitt be Tybire tymbire zow® tene ; Gete the, £ Gawayne, Turne pou™ to Tuskayne, ———| W' a knyghte” kene. For ‘[lefe] thu fatt’* Bretayne, —- » Om. "% in his. '! ofi, 1° And this, 3 knizt. '* porgh. 5 Falfely fordone. '5 With a wonderfull’ wight. 17 Shall’ make lordes. '® Take. XXII.—! Freol, and his folke, fey ar pey leued. ? al to you bowefi. * duffiperes. yo". ‘deued. 5 grete, 7 Om. % There ar no lordes ofi lyue, in pat londe. 9 remayns. 29 one be aur. ' with. 2? pe. '5 Thus shal a Tyber vntrue tymber with. pe. 25 ye shal lese. In MS. L. a blank space is left for the word lefe. 16 king, THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. 109 XXIII. ‘A knyghte salt kenly clofeii þ* crowne, And at Carelyone* be crownede for* kynge ; 275 That* fege salt ‘be fefede at a fefone’, That 'mekitt bale, and barete, titt Ynglande® fall brynge ; Ther” fatt in Tufkane be tallde of þat* trefofie, And ‘torne home a-3ayne for that’ tydynge ; And” ther satt the Rownde Tabitte losse” the renowfie, 280 Be-syde Rameffaye, full ryghte” at a rydynge ; ‘And at Dorfett* fait dy the doghetyefte of alte. Gette the, f Gawayne, —-———— | Þ* baldeste of Bretayne ;———— | ‘Swylke ferly” salt fatte |- For" in a flake þ* fait be slayne, —— XXIV. ‘Siche ferly' fait falle, w* owtten* any fabitte, Appofie Cornewayle cofte, w* a knyghte kene ; 'Arthure Þ* auenante, p' honeste es & abift?, Sait* be wondid, I wyffe, fult* wathely, I wene ; 290 [And al fe rial rowte of be Rounde Table, Pei fhullefi dye ofi a day, pe dougtity by-dene’ ;] Suppryfede w' a ‘sugette, pat beris of” sabilte, XXIII.—' This knight shal be clanly enclosed wt a. 2? Carlele shal pat comly. 5 as. * A. * he feche, with a ceffion. 5 myche baret, and bale, to Bretayh. 7 Hit. 3 pe. ® ye fhullefi tne ayefi for pe. 1° Om. "Ilefe. '? rad. 1% In Dorset shire. 14 Om. '5 Sich ferlyes. XXIV.—' Suche ferlies. 2 oute. 3 Syr Arthur pe honest, auenant, and able. = He shal. * Om. © These two lines are omitted in MS. L. and are supplied from MS. D. 7 surget, he beris hit in. (fol. 157Þ.] 110 THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. A* sawtire engrelede, of siluer futt schene. He beris [it*] of sabitte, sothely to saye ; In kyng” Arthures hautte ———— | The childe" playes hym at the batte,4 'Futt derfely a" daye. That 'satt owttraye” zow alte, XXV. Hafe gud daye, dame’ Gayno’, and Gawayne þ* gude ! 200 I hafe no langare ‘tyme, mo tales to* tette ; ‘For me bufe wende one my waye, thorowte this? wode, ‘Vn to my wonnynge wane’, in waa for to welte’. For hym p* 'rewfully rafe, & rente was one* rude, Thynke one þe dawngere, ‘and the dole’, p' I in duette ; 308 And* fede folke, for my fake, pat fawtes* the fude, And mene” me w* ‘meffes, and matyns” i mette. [Masses arfi medecyes to vs that bale bides” ;] I Vs thynke a meffe als” swete, Als” any spyce pat eu? ‘p" ete*.”—-~ The gaste a-waye glydis. ‘And thus”, wt a gryfely grete, — XXVI. [With a grisly grete, fe goofte a-wey glides, And goes, with gronyng fore, porgh pe greues grene’ ;] 3 With a. ° Supplied from MS. D. riche. ' barne. '* Om. '5 on-tray shall’. 14 Delfully p*. XXV.—! Om. * tome, tidinges. ° I mote walke ofi my wey, porgh pis wilde. * In my wonyng stid. » dwelle. 6 rightwifly rose, & rest of pe. 7 Om. * Om. *faileh. '9 menge. 1! matens & masse. 1% Instead of this line from MS. D. the Lincoln MS. has the last five lines of stanza XVIII. inserted, by negligence of the scribe. ‘as. 1 ye yete. 15 Om. XXVI.—! These lines are wanting in MS. L. [fol. 158.] THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. 111 The wynde?, and’ the wedyrs, þafi* welkefi ‘in hydis* ; 315 Thafi vnclosede the clowddis, þ* sofie 'schane schene®. The kynge his bogitt hase blowefi, & on þ* bent bydis ; His fayre folke in 'firthes, flokkes in fere” ; ‘Alle that royatte* rowte to þ* qwene rydys, ‘And melis to hir mildely, one þaire manere?. 320 The 'wyes on swilke wondirs a-wondirde paire’® were ; ‘The prynces" prowdefte in patte, Dame Gayno’, and atte, — To faire” sopere. —— — - Wente to ‘Randolfe fett hautte”, XXVIL The kynge ‘was fett to þ* supere, &' ferued in fale, Vndir a seloure of fylke, ‘fult daynetyuoufely* dighte; W: alte the* wirchipe ‘to welde, & wyne for to wale’ ; 'Birdis in brede, of brynt golde* bryghte. Ther come ‘two fetolers in®, w' a fymbale, 380 A lady, luffome of late”, ledande a knyghte ; ‘Scho rydes vp to þ* heghe deffe*, by-fore f° royatte’, And afkede” f Arthure, fult" hendely one highte. Scho” faide to þ'”* sowayne, wlonkefte in wedis*, ——— ——— «© Mane moste” of myghte, Here ‘es comyfi ane armed” knyghte : For thi manhede.”” ——+ Now” do hym refone, and ryghte, — 2 wyndes. * Om. + pe. 5 vnhides. 5 con shene, 7 pe frith pei flokkefi by-dene. 8 And al pe riall’. 9 She fayes hem pe selcoupes, pat pai hadde per feefi. 1 wise of pe weder for-wondred pey. Prince. '? Rondoles halle. 19 pe. XXVII.—' to souper is fet. * dayntly. * Om. 4 and wele mewith pe walle. 5 Briddes brandefi, and brad, i bankers. © in a soteler. 7 lote. * Ho raykes vp, in a res. ‘rialle. halsed, '"' Om. '? Ho. '* pe. 14 wede. ''5 makeles. 16 comes afi errant. !7 Om. 112 THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. XXVIII. The' mane in his’ mantytt ‘fyttis at his* mete, In 'paulle purede w* pane, futt p’cyoufely dyghte* ; 340 Trofelyte, and trauerste, wyth trewloues in trete’ ; The ‘tafee was* of topas, pat ‘per to was’ tyghte. He glyfte vpe with hys eghne, pat graye ware, & grete, With his burely* berde, one pat birde bryghte ; He was the sou’aynefte ‘fir, sittande? in sette, 345 pat ew any” segge 'saughe, or fene was w' syghte". ‘Thus the” kyng, crowned in kythe, carpis” hir titt, — ———— *© Welecome, worthyly wyghte ! Thou” satt hafe resone, & rete; | If it be thi wilt 2”? ——— —- Whytheii es this” comly knyghte, XXIX. Scho' was the worthilieste* wyghte, þ* any ‘wy myghte welde? ; Hir gyde was gloryous, and gaye, ‘alle of gyrfe* grene ; Hir bette was of plonkete’, with birdis full baulde, ‘Botonede wt befantes*, & bokellede full bene ; 355 Hir faxe in fyfi perrye ‘frette was’ in fowlde, ‘The cont?felette in a* kette, colourede full clene ; With a crowne ‘of crystalte, and of clere* golde ; Hir courchefes were coryoufe, wt many prowde pyi. XXVIII.—! Om. *pe. 5 pat sittes at pi. # pal pured to pay, prodly pight. 5 This line is omitted in MS. D. © taffes were. 7 were pereto. * beueren. 9° of al fitting. 1° Om. 1 had fefi wt his eze-sight. 12 Om. 1 talkes. '* He. 1° ze. XXIX.—! Ho. 2? worpiest. * wede wolde. + of a greffe. 5 blunket. *° Branded wt brende golde. 7 was fretted. 5 Contrefeled and. ® craftly, al of clene. [fol. 158d.] THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. 113 [Her perre was praysed, with prise men of might ;] The" bryghte byrdis, and balde, — | Had ‘note ynoghe" to by-halde —| And one þthende"knyghte. One” pat freely to fawlde, ——— XXX. That’ knyghte in his coloures was armede futt clene, + 365 With his comly crefte, ‘futt clene* to by-holde ; His brenyes’, and his bacenett, burnefchet fult bene, W'‘ a bourdoure* a-bowte, alle of brynte golde ; His mayles was’ mylk-whytte, ‘enclofede fo clene* ; His horse trappede ‘witfi the fame, als it was’ me taulde. 370 The* schelde one his schuldir, of syluere full’ schene, With ‘bare-heuedis of blake, burely, and” baulde ; His horse 'withe sendale was teldede, and" trappede to þ* hele; And his” cheuarone by-forne, —— = Stode als ane vnycorne, — + ‘And mayles” of stele. Als so“ scharpe als any” thorne,— XXXI. In stele ‘was he' stuffede, pat 'sterys was one’ stede, Atte of sternys of golde, ‘pat stekillede was one straye* ; ‘He, and his gambefotins, glomede als gledys*, 380 10 This line is wanting in MS, L. U Om. 3 i-nore (stc.) Of. 4 pe. XXX.—! The. 2? clere. 5 brene. * braudure. 5 were. © many hit seefi. 7 of that ilke, as true me. 5 His. ® so. 1° bere-hedes of brake, browed ful. 1 in fyne sandel was. '? in his. 3 as. 14 Om. 5a, 16 An anlas. XXXI.—! he was. * stourne vpposi. * his pencell’ displaied. + His gloues, his gamesons, glowed as a glede. Q (fol. 158>.] 114 THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. With graynes of 'rubyes, that graythede were’ gaye ; And his schene ‘{chynbawdes, scharpe for® to schrede ; [His polem® with pelicoc? were poudred to pay”.] pus® wt a lance appoii® lofte, pat ‘lady guii he” lede ; A swayne”, one a frefone, 'folowede hym®, in faye” ; 385 [The fresofi” was a-fered, for drede of pat fare ;] ‘He was feldom wounte” ‘To see the tabitte at his frounte” : ‘Futt feldom to see”. ‘Swilke gaffimenes was he wonte”® XXXII. Arthure afkede ‘in hye, one-herande paiii’ alle, + Whate woldeft þ*, wy, 3if it were* thi witte? Tetle me whate p" sekis, and ‘whedir þ* þ** {chatte, And why p" stonyes* on thi stede, and* stondis so stifte?” He lytfte* vpe his ‘vefage fro þ*” ventatte, 395 And* wt a knyghtly contenance he carpis hy tilt : ©* Be? þÞ* kayfere, or kynge, here I the be-catte, To” fynde me a freke, to fyghte one” my fill ; For” fyghtynge to frayste, I fowndede fra hame.” — ——— —— "The kynge carpede on heghte”, — | © 'Lyghte, & lende” alte nyehté,—| And telle me thi name.” If thou be curtayfe knyghte*, — > rebe, that graied befi. © schynbandes, pat sharp wer’. 7 This line, and line 9 of this stanza, are wanting in MS, L. 5 Om. 9 ofi, '® lovely coi. '? freke. 1% him folowed. 1+ This and the preceding line are transposed in MS.L. '* freke. 26 For he was feldefi wonte to fe. 17 The tablet fluré. '5 Siche gamen ne gle. +" Saz he neuer are, XXXII.— off hizt, herand hem. 2 be. 3 wheper pou. + sturne. > Om. © wayned. 7 vifer fro his. § Om. °Wheper. '9 Fore to. !! with. '* Om. 1° Then feid the king vppoii hight. '* Late lenge. 1° This and the previous line are transposed in MS, D. THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. 115 XXXIII. ** My name es f Galleroufi, w' owttyii any gyle ; The grettefte of Galowaye, of greves & ‘of gyllis', 405 Of Konynge’, ‘of Carryke*, of Conygame, ‘of Kyte’, Of Lomonde, of Lenay’, of Lowthyane hillis ; Thou hase wonné ‘thaym one® werre, w' owttrageoufe’ wilt, And gyffet pam* £ Gawayne, and’ pat myi herte grilles. [But he fhal wring his honde, and warry the wyle”,] 410 ‘Or he weldefi my landes, at myii vii-thankes”. By alte þ* welthe of this” werlde, he satt pam” new welde, 'Whitts I my” hede may bere ; — ‘Bot he” wyfi 'þam one” werre, —4 Appone” a fair felde !——- 'Bothe w*” schelde, & wt” spere, — : XXXIV. I wilt fighte one a felde, &' Þ to ‘make I my” faythe, With any freke ‘one the? foulde, pat frely es borne ; To ‘loffe swylke* a lordchipe, me ‘thynke it futt* laythe, And ‘ilke a leueande lede* wolde laughe me to fkorne.”— 420 « We arefi’ here* in the wode, walkande? one our wathe ; We” hunte at the herdis”, wt hundes”, and wt horne ; We 'arefi one” owre gamefi, we ‘ne hafe no gude™ graythe, XXXIII.—' grylles. ? Connok. 3 Om. * and also Kyle. 5 Lofex. © hem in. 7 a wrange. * hem to. 9 Om. '° This line is omitted in MS. L. | Er he weld hem, y-wys, agayh myfi vmwylles. '* pe. ‘hem. ' While I pe. '5 But if he. 15 hem in. 17 Witha. ‘a. '9 On, XXXIV.—! Om. *I make, * vpposi. * lefe suche. 5 wold thenke. 6 fiche iche?] lede opofi lyue. 7 ar. * Om. 9 went, to walke. 1° To. 1 hertes. '2 hotide. — 3 arin. | haue no gome. Q 2 [fol. 159.) 116 THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. Bot 3itt þ* satt be machede by middaye to morne. And” for thilrede the, 'þ® rathe mane, þ*riste the atte þ*' nyghte.”— Than” Gawayne, gayeste'* of alte,— Ledis hym owte of the hautte, -——| That prowdely was pyghte. ‘Vn tift”” a paveledne of pautte, —— XXXV. Pighte was it' prowdely, with purpure and pautte, 430 ‘And doffours, and qweschyns, and bankowres futt* bryghte; “Wt inn* was a chapelle, a chambir, ‘and ane* haute, A chymneye w* charecole, to ‘chawffefi fat’ knyghte. His stede was sone*® stabillede, and lede to þ* ftatte, ‘And haye hendly heuyde in hekkes’ one hyghte. 455 Sythefi ‘he braydes* vp a burde, and clathes gun” calle ; ‘Sanapes, and falers, futt'? femly to fyghte, Preketes", and broketes, and standertis by-twene. Than” thay feruede Þ knyghte, — And his worthy” wyghte, —— In siluere futt'® {chene.-——~ W: fult* riche daynteths” dyghte, XXXVI. In silw? fa femly ‘pay ferue pam of the beste, W: vernage, in verrys and cowppys fa’ clene ; And thus 'thase gleterande gomes, gladdis þaire geftis’, 445 15 Om. 16 penke rest al. '7 Om. 18 grapest. 19 Into. - RXXV.— Om. * Birdes brandefi aboue, in brend gold. * Inwith, * a. ° chaufe pe. ° Om. 7 Hay hertly he had, in haches. * pei braide. ° pei. 1° Sanape, and faler. ' Torches. '? Thus. '3 worzely, '* Om. '* dayntes. '5 fo. XXXVI.—! were ferued. * ful. % Sir Gawayfi pe good, glades ho” gest. THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. 117 With riche daynteths*, endorrede, in dysches by-defie. Wheii the ryaile renke was gone to his ryfte, The kynge in’ to concelfe hafe callede his knyghtis so kene ; Sayse*, © lukes” nowe, ‘3e lordyngs*, oure lose be noghte lost, 49 Who salt encont? with zone? knyghte, 'nowe lukes vs” by-twene.” Thane faide ‘f Gawayne, ** he sail vs noghte” greue ; —— Here my trouthe” I zow plyghte®, | I satt" feghte with zone” knyghte, My” lord, with *;owrelefe.” In p*" defence of my ryghte, XXXVII.' *© I leue wele,” quod the kynge, ‘‘ thi latis are 1[i3t, But I nolde, for no lordeshipp, fe pi life lorne.”] ** Late gaa,” quod # Gawayne, © Gode st[ond with fe rizt,] If he skape skatheles, [hit were a foule fkorne.”’] In the dawynge of f° (day, þe doughti were dight ;] 460 ‘Thaye herde* matyns [and masse, erly off morne ;] By that, one Plu[ton land a palais was pizt, | Whare new? f[reke opofi folde had fou3ten biforne. pei fettefi listes by-lyue ofi fe 103 lande ;] Twa’ sop[pes de mayn] Was* b[rought to £ Gawayfi, ] — | Pe king gared comaunde. |— For [to confort his brayi, ——— + dayntees. * Om. © Om. 7 loke. *lordis. * pe. 1° kestes you. 1! Gawayfi pe goode, shal hit not. '? honde, 1 hizt. 4 woll”, 15 pe. '° Om. "7 Om. 38 by. XXXVII.—! A large portion of this and the commencement of the succeeding stanza has been torn away in the Lincoln MS. and is here supplied from MS. D. 2 And herden. 3 Thre. + Pei. [fol. 159». ] 118 THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. XXXVIII. The [king comaunded Krudely, pe erles fofi of Kent, ] Curstaysly in þis case, take kepe to þe knight.] With riche daynteths' þ** day, he dynede in his tente, 470 'With birdes bakefi in brede, of brynte golde* bryghte ; And‘ fythefi ‘vn to dame’ Wayne’ full’ wyesely he wente, ‘And lefte with hir in’ warde his worthily wyghte. ‘And thaii thies hathetts full hendely þaire horffes hase* hent, ‘At the lycence of the lorde, bat lordely gui” lyghte, 47 ‘Aife bot thir beryns”, bouldefte of blode. The kynges chayere was” sette, — 'A-bowne on a chaffelett” ; —— For Gawayne the gude. —- And” many a" gaylyarde grett,—— XXXIX. Gawayne and Gallerofi ‘dyghtis þaire' stedis, Alte of? glet?ande golde, fulf* gaye was þaire* gere ; Twa’ lordes be-lyfe ‘to thaire lystes thayim’® ledis, With many sergeauntes’ of mace ; it* was f° manere. 485 The 'beryns broches þaire* blonkes, ‘to þaire sydes" bledis ; Aythire freke appoii felde hafe ‘fichede thaire" spere ; Schaftis ‘of schene** wode pay fcheu’ede” in {chides ; XXXVIII.—! dayntees. 2? or. 5 After bufkes him in a brene, pat burnefhed was. * Om. °to. 5 Om, 7 He laft in here. * After aither in high hot horses pei. 9 And at pe liftes, off pe lande, lordely do. 10 Bothe pes two burnes. 1 is, 12 Quene ofi a chacelet. '* Om. '* Om. XXXIX.—! gurden her. ?in. 5 Om. ‘here. 5 Pe. © hom to lift. 7 seriant. 3 as. 9 burnes broched pe. 1° pat pe side. '' folde has fastned his. '2 in shide. 13 shindre. THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. 119 So jolyly those" gentiff mefi” justede one were! Schaftis thay 'schew?, in schydes full” schene ; Sythe”, wt brandes fulf'* bryghte,— Riche mayles thay righte ; ————; W* Gawayne, one grene. — ‘Thus enconterde” the knyghte— XL." Gawayne was graythely* graythede one? grene, 495 With griffofis* of golde, engrelede full gaye ; ‘Trayfolede w* trayfoles*, and trewluffes by-twene ; One a stirtande* stede he’ strykes one straye. [pat oper in] his turnyge’® he talkis with’ tene ;— [** Whi drawes }" pe] one dreghe, & makis '{wilke delay'??” ww [He swapped hi yi at pe] schuldir”, wt a swerde kene ; [That greued f GawayA, to] his dede" day. [The dyntes of pat dougtity were do]wttous by-dene ;— [Fyfte mayles, and mo, ———— The fwerde swapt in two, The canel-bone also, Ant ef Rial dd hens, ALL” [He clef forgh pe canteil, pat couered pe knizt, Thorgh pe shinand* shelde, a fhaftmofi, and mare ; 4 pes. 15 Om. 15 shindr in sheldes fo. !7 And fipe. '* Om. 1° There encontres. XL.—! The imperfections in MS. L. in this stanza are supplied from MS. D. as marked by brackets. * gaily. 3 in. * his griffons. * Trifeled with tranes. © stargand. 7 pat. * ttnaying, °in. » siche deray. |! swyre. 1° dep. XLI.—' A leaf in the Lincoln MS. here appears unfortunately to be lost, and the stanzas from XLI. to XLVI. inclusive, with part of XLVIT. are printed from the other copy. * shiand MS. 120 THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. And þefi fe lady loude lowe vppoii hight, 510 And Gawayii greches Þw*, & gremed ful fare :— ©* I fhal rewarde pe pi route, if I cofi rede right !” He folowed in ofi fe freke, with a frefffi fare ; Porgh blafofi, and brene, pt burnefhed wer? brizt, With a burlich bronde, thorgh him he bare ; 515 The bronde was blody, pat burnefhed was brit. Then gloppened pat gay ;S——— Hit was no ferly, in fay ; —~ In ftiropes === pe sturne strike off stray, XLII. Streyte in his steroppes, stoutely he strikes, And waynes at f Wawayn, als he were wode ; peti his lémafi on lowde skirles, and skrikes', Wheii pat burly burne blenket off blode ; Lordes and ladies of pat laike likes, 525 And þonked God fele sithe for Gawayfi the gode. With a swap of a fwerde, pat swaþel him swykes, He stroke of fe stede hede, streite þere he stode ; The faire fole fondred, and fel to the grounde. Gawayfi gloppened in hert, Of he were hasty and smert ; Out of sterops he ftert, + Fro Griffett be goode. — XLUIL. ‘* Griffeit,” q9 Gawayfi, © gon is, God wote ! He was þe burlokest blonke, that eu? bote brede ! 535 XLII.— skirkes, MS. THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. 121 By him, pat in Bedeleem was borne, eu? to bei &' bote, I shatt venge pe to day, if I cofi right rede! Go fecche me my frefofi, fairest ofi fote, He may stonde pe in {toure, in as mekle stede ; No more for pe faire fole thefi for a rifff—i rote, 540 But for doel of pe dombe best, þ* pus shuld be dede ; I mone for no montur?, for I may gete mare.” — Als he stode by his stede, Pat was so goode at neede, ———| So siked he fare ————- Ner Gawayfi wax wede, ——_—_——_ XLIV. Thus wepus for wo, Wowayfi pe wighit, And wenys him to quyte, pat wonded is fare ; Pat oper droz hi on drezt, for drede of be knizt, And boldely broched his blonk, ofi the bent bare. 550 pus may pei‘ dryve forthe þe day, to fe derke night ; The fofi was passed, by pat, mydday and mare ; With in pe liftes fe lede lordly dofi ligfit ; Touard the burne, with his bronde, he bufked him fare. To bataile bey bowe, with brondes fo bright; Shene fheldes wer? fhred, Bright brenes by-bled, —-——— So ferfely pei fight! ———- Many dou3ti were a-dred, XLV. Thus pei feght ofi fote, ofi pat fair? felde, as As fresst as a lyofi, pat fautes þe fille ; XLIV.—! pi, MS. R 122 THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. Wilele pes wigtit mefi, pair? wepenes þey welde, * * * * * * * * He bronched him yi with his bronde, vnder pe brode shelde, Porgti the waast of pe body, and wonded him ille ; pe swerde stent for no stuf, hit was so wel steled ; £65 pat oper startis of bak, and stondis stofi stille. Though he were stonayed pat stonde, he strike ful fare ; He gurdes to £ Gawayii, — Thorgh ventaile, and pefayti; ——| Þe brede of afi hare. He wanted no3t to be slayfi XLVI. Hardely pefi pes hapelefe on helmes fey hewe, pei betefi downe beriles, and bo'dures bright ; Shildes ofi shildres, þ* shene were to shewe, Fretted were in fyne golde, pei failefi in fight ; 575 Stones of iral bey strenkel, and strewe, Stipe stapeles of stele þey strike doi stizt ; Burnes bannefi be tyme pe bargafi was brewe, The dougiiti with dyntes fo delfully were dight. Thefi gretes Gayno*, w* bothe her? gray ene ; — For po dou3ti pat fizt, — Were manly mached of migfit, — As al mefi fene. ——— —- With oute refoii, or right, XLVI. Thus gretis Gayno', with bope her? gray yene, 585 For gref of £ Gawayii, grisly was wounded ; XLV.—! A line is wanting in the MS. (fol. 160.] THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. 123 The knigtit of corage was cruel and kene, And with a {tele bronde, pat sturne oft" stonded ; Al pe cost of [the*] knyght he carf downe clene, Þorgh pe riche mailes, bat ronke were, and rounde ;] 590 'Swylke a touche at pat tyme’ he taughte hym in tene, He girdede* f Gallerofi growelynge one grownde. 'Gallerofi full greuoufely granes on °° grene ; And° als wondede als’ he was, ‘Swyftly vpe* he rafe, ———————_|_W‘ a swerde {chene”. And folowde ‘in fafte on his faas?,— XLVIII. Clenly pat crewette cou’de hy’ on highte, And wt! a caste* of þ®* care, in kautette he strykes ; ‘Full 3erne he wayttis f Wawayne þ** wighte, 600 Bot hym lympede þ* werfe,—and pat me wele lykis. He etyltde with a slynge hafe slayne hym w* fleghte ; The swerde '{leppis on slante*, & one the mayle flydys’ ; And f° Gawayne by þ* colere clekis? the knyghte ;— Than his lemane ‘so lowde fkremes” and skrykis. 605 ‘Scho grete” one dame” Gayno’, wt 'granes fo” grytte, ‘And faide™, ‘‘lady! makles of myghte, | i wilt.” Hafe now” mercy one one” knyghte, | Giffe it be th Þat es so dulefully dyghte, XLVII.—! oft, MS. 2 This word is not in the MS. 3 With a teneful touche, MS. D. +*gurdes. © Grifly of gronde he groned ofi, © Om. 7 as. 5 Sone buredely. ° fast on his tras. 1° kene. XLVIII.—! Om. *? cas. 35 Om, + And waynes at fir Wawyi, p' worpely. 5 in, 5 swapped off his fwange. 7 slikes. * Om. ® keppes. ° offi loft skrilles. 11 Ho gretes. '* Om. '* gronyng. '* Om. ' Om, ‘© yondre. R 2 124 THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. XLIX. "Than wilfully! dame Wayno' ‘vn to’ be kynge went, Scho* caught of hir coronalte, & knelyde hy tit ;— «« Als p" erte roye* ryalte, and’ recheste of rent, And I thyii’ wyfe, weddid at my’ awefi wilt, ‘zone beryns in zone batette, þ* bledis one 3one* bent, 616 pay are? wery, I wysse, and wondide fult iif ; Thurgti [her?”?] schene schildis faire” schuldirs are {chent ; [The grones of f Gawayfi dos my hert grille.) The granes of f Gawayne greuys” me futt” fare ; 'Wolde p", lufly* lorde, ———— | ‘Gare the" knyghtis accorde, Titt® alte p' here” ware.” It ware grete'” comforde = L. ‘Bot pan hy spake' Gallerofi to Gawayne þ* gude : © T wende no* wy, in this werlde, ‘were haluendeife’ so wyghte. Here I make the relese 'in my rentis*, by þe rode ! And 'by-fore thiefe ryaite, resynge* the my ryghte ; And fythefi I* make the manredefi, w' a mylde mode, ‘Als to mane in this medilerthe” makles of myghte.” [fol.160°.] He talkes to-warde p* 'knyghte, one heghte* þere he stode, 630 XLIX.— Wisly. *to. 3 Ho. * ioy (sic.) 5 Om. % pi. 7 pi. * Pefe burnes in pe bataile, so blede on pe. 9 arfi. '° Omitted in MS.L. ‘her. '* This line is wanting in MS. L. ** greuefi. '* Om. *'5 Woldest pou leve. '5 Make pes. 17 a grete. 18 For. 29 pef. L.—' Then spak fir. * never. ® had befi half. + renke. © by rial reyfofi relefe. © Om. 7 As mafi of medlert. * king, on hie. THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. 125 He? bedde þ* burely his brande, þ* burneschede was bryghte:— ** Of renttis and reches I make the relese.” Dowiie 'knelis pat” knyghte, —— | And'carpis thies” wordes one highte;4 And 'comandis þ*"* pees! The kyng ftude vp-ryghte, LI. Þ* kynge ‘comandis p*' pefe, and cryes’ one highte ; And Gawayne was gudly, and lefte for his fake ; And’ pafi ‘to þ* lystis p* lordis leppis* fuff lyghte, f ‘Owayne fyt3-Vryene, and Arrake, fuit rathe’ ; 640 'Marrake, and Menegalte®, þat maste were of myghte. Bathe pafe trauelde 'knyghtes trewly pay taghte’ ; Vnnethes* myghte ‘thofe knyghtes? stande vp ryghte ; ‘pay were for-bett, & for-blede, paire wedis wexe blake, [Her? blees were brofed, for beting of brondes."’] W' owttefi more lettynge, ‘Was dighte there thiere femblynge”;- And” helde vpe þair'* handes. By-fore pat’? comly kynge, ————- LII. << ' gyffe to the’, f Gawayne,” 'quode þ* kynge, ©tresoure*, and golde, 'Glamorgans lafidis*, with greuys fo grene ; Þ* wirchipe of Wales, ‘to welde and to* wolde, 9 And. 9 kneled pe. 1! carped. '? cOmaunded. LI.—! comaunded. 2 cried. 5 Om. + lordes to listes pey lopen. »* Ewayii fiz Eriafi, & Arrak fiz Lake. © sir Drurelat, and Moylard. 7 mefi pey truly vp take. 5 Vnneth, 9 þo sturne. 9 What for buffetes and blode, hef blees. '' This line is wanting in MS. L. '* Dizte was here saztlynge. ‘pe. '* Pei. 5 her. LII.—' Here I gif. * wt gerfoni. * Al pe Glamergaii londe. + at wil and at. 126 THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. With Gryffoiis castette*, kirnelde fo’ clene ; ‘And þ* Hufters Haulte’, to hafe, and to holde, ‘Wayfurtlie, and Wakfelde, wallede*, I wene ; 655 Twa baronryse in Burgoyne’, w* burghes fo balde, That ‘are moted” abowte, and byggede fult bene. I salt ‘endowe fe als" a duke, and dub the w* myfi* hande, —— —— —— With pip’ saughtittw''3one” gentiltknyghte,— That es so hardy and wyghte, —————— And relefe hym thi“ ryghte, — ——— And graunte hy his lande.” | LI. << "Now, and here I gyffe hy,” quod Gawayne', © w' owttyfi ony gyle, Alte Þ* landes, & Þ* lythes, fra Lowyke* to Layre; ‘Commoke, and Carrike?*, Conyghame, and Kylle, 665 ‘Als the cheualrous knyghte hafe chalandchede als ayere* ; ‘The Lebynge, the Lowpynge, þ* Leveastre Ile’, Bathe*® frythes, and forestes, ‘frely and’ faire ; [Vnder 30° lordeship to lenge þe* while, And to pe Rounde Table ‘to make? repaire ; I shal refeff him in felde, i foreste fo fair? *.”] Than" þ* kynge, and þ* quene, — And afte the doghety by-dene, — To Carlele pay kayre. —— Thorow þ* greuys so grene, > castelles. © ful. 7 Eke Viftur halle. 8 Wayford, and Waterforde, i Wales. 9 Bretayne. '° arfi batailed. '' dizt pe. '? Om. 1 pe. 1 his. LII.—' Here gif sir Galeron, q* G. * Lauer. * Connoke, and Carlele. + Originally in MS, D. Pet if he haf cheualry, and chalange hit for are, but altered by a second hand to Pet if he of cheualry, chalange ham for aif. » Pe Lother, pe Lémok, pe Loynak, pe Lile. In MS. L. the last word was at first written helle, then Ile, and lastly 1 lee. © With. 7 and fosses, * So written by the first hand, but altered to heren by a second. ® By the second hand ; the first has only a. '° The last word was originally written fare; hence Pinkerton's text to fare. These lines within brackets are wanting in MS. L. " Bope. (fol. 161.] THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. 127 LIV. The kyng to Carelele es comefi, wt knyghttis so kene, ‘To halde his' Rownde Tabitt, one ryatte arraye ; ‘Thofe knyghtes’, þ* were* wondede fult* wathely, als’ I wene, Surgeoiis ‘sanede thayii°, fothely to saye. Bothe 'comforthede thaym thai”, the kynge and the qwene, «0 Thay ware dubbyde dukes bothe one a daye ; ‘And ther f Gallerofi* weddid his wyfe, 'þ* femly & {chene’, With gyftis, and ‘gerfoiis, of f Gawayne" the gaye. ‘And thus those hathetts" wt haldis that hende; And” whefi he was saned”, and fownde, Pay made ‘hym sworne to f Gawane 1” þ* fomnde, ‘Vn tift hislyuesende. ‘And sythefi®, a knyghte of þ* Tabitte Rownde, LV. ‘Dame Gayno’ garte besyly' wryte i° to þ* wefte, To ‘alte ‘man?e of* relygeous, to rede and to synge ; 690 Pristes with proceffyofis* [to py were prest, Wt a myliofi of*] messis, to make hir* menyge ; 'Dukes, erles, barouns, and” bechoppes of* the beste, 'Thurghie ‘atte Yglande scho garte make menynge’. ‘And thus this ferlyes by-fette in a” foreste, 695 Vndir an” holte fo bare”, at an” hunttynge ; LIV.—' And al pe. * Pe wees. 3 werefi, *so. 5 Om. © fone faued. 7 confortes pe knightes. 5 There he. ° flonkeft [read wlonkeft], I wene. '° garfons, sir Galerofi. 2! Pus pat hapel in hiz. '? Om. 15 faued. '* Om. 1 fir Galerofi. 16 Om. 17 To. LV.— Wayno' gared wisely. ? Om. * pe. * processiofi. ° The words within brackets are omitted in MS. L. 6 pe. 7 Boke-lered mefi, * Om. » al Bretayne besely pe burde gared rynge. '® Pis ferely bifelle in Englond. " a. !2 hore. 3 a. 128 THE AWNTYRS OF ARTHURE. Swylke' hunttynge in 'holtis sulde noghte befi* hyde :— —— Thus to 'þ* forestes* pay fure, Steryfi” knyghttis ‘and sture®* ;—— This awntir by-tyd. And” in þ* tym of Arthure This ferly by-felle, futt sothely to sayne, In Yggillwode foreste, at þ* Ternwathelayne’. Expticit. 14 Suche a. ?* haaft is nozt to be. 6 forest. 7 Pes sterne. '® in store. 1° Om. 1 These two lines are not in MS. D. The Knightly Tale of Golagros and Gawane, The Anightly Tale of Golagros and Gawane. i. N the tyme of Arthur, as trew men me tald, I The king turnit on ane tyde towart Tuskane, Hym to feik our pe fey, that faiklefe wes fald, The fyre pat fendis all feill, futhly to fane ; With banrentis, baronis*', and bernis full bald, Biggast of bane and blude, bred in Britane. Thai walit out werryouris, with wapinnis to wald, The gayeft grumys on grund, with geir pat my* gane, Dukis, and digne lordis, douchty and deir ; Sembillit to his samovne, Renkis of grete renovne, Of gold pat wes cleir. Cumly kingis with crovne, Il. Thus the royale can remove, with his Round Tabill, Of all riches maift rike, in riall array ; 1 baroms, ed, 1508. s 2 132 THE KNIGHTLY TALE OF Wes neuer fundun on fold, but fenzeing or fabill, Ane farayr floure on ane feild of fresch men, in fay, Farand on thair stedis, stout men and stabill ; Mony sterne our the streit stertis on stray. Thair baneris schane with the fone, of siluer and fabill, And vthir glemyt as gold, and gowlis so gay ; Of siluer and faphir schirly pai schane ; Ane fair battell on breid, Merkit our ane fair meid, Our fellis, in fane. With fpurris spedely pai speid, Hi. The king faris with his folk, our firthis and fellis, Feill dais or he fand of flynd or of fyre ; Bot deip dalis bedene, dovnis and dellis, Montains and marresse, with mony rank myre ; Birkin bewis about, boggis and wellis, Withoutin beilding of blis, of bern, or of byre ; Bot torris, and tene wais, teirfull quha tells. Tuglit and travalit thus trew men can tyre, Sa wundir wait wes the way, wit ye but wene ; And all thair vittalis war gone, That thay weildit in wone ; p*' fuld thair bute ben. Reffet couth thai find none, IV. As thay walkit be the fyde of ane fair well, Throu pe schynyng of the fon ane ciete thai fe, 1 Tht, ed. GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. 133 With torris and turatis, teirfull to tell, Bigly batollit about with wallis fa he ; The yettis war clenely kepit with ane castell ; Myght none fang it with force, bot foullis to fle. 45 Than carpit king Arthur, kene and cruel], ‘‘T rede we send furth ane faynd’ to yone ciete, And afk leif at the lord, yone landis fuld leid, That we myght entir in his toune, For his hie renoune, For money to meid.” To by vs vittale boune?, V. Schir Kay carpit to the king, courtes and cleir, ** Grant me, lord, on yone gait graithly to gay, And I fall boid-word, but abaid, bring to you heir, 55 Gif he be freik on the fold your freynd, or your fay.”— ** Sen thi will is to wend, wy, now in weir, Luke that’ wifly thow wirk, Crifte were the fra wa !” The berne bovnit to the burgh, with ane blith cheir ; Fand the yettis vnclofit, and thrang in full thra ; 60 His hors he tyit to ane tre, treuly that tyde ; Syne hynt to ane hie hall, That wes astalit with pall ; And payntit with pride. 6 Weill wroght wes the wall, VI. The fylour deir of the deife dayntely wes dent, With the doughtyest in thair dais dyntis couth dele ; 1 fend, ed. 2 bonne, ed. 3 pot, ed. 134 THE KNIGHTLY TALE OF Bright letteris of gold blith vnto blent, Makand mécioune quha maist of manhede couth' mele ; He saw nane levand leid vpone loft lent, Nouthir lord, na lad, leif ye the lele. The renk raikit in the faill, riale and gent, pt wodir wifly wes wroght, with wourschip & wele ; The berne befely and bane blenkit hym about ; He faw throu ane entre, Charcole in ane chymne, Birnand full stout. Ane bright fyre couth he fe, VIL. Ane duergh braydit about, befily and bane, Small birdis on broche* be ane bright fyre ; Schir Kay rufchit to the roift, and reft fra the fwane, Lightly claught’, throu lust, the lym fra the lyre ; To feid hym of that fyne fude the freik wes full fane ; Than dynnyt the duergh, in angir* and yre, With raris, quhil the rude hall reirdit agane. With that come girdand, in grief, ane wounder* grym fire ; With stout contenance & sture he {tude thame beforne ; With vefage lufly and lang, Body stalwart and strang, Of berne that wes borne. That sege wald sit with none wrang, 1 couh, ed. 2 brothe, ed. 3 clanght, ed. 1 augir, ed. 5 wound, ed. 8) GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. VIII. The knyght carpit to {chir Kay, cruel and kene, * We think thow fedis the vnfair, freik, be my fay ! Suppofe thi birny be bright, as bachiler fuld ben, Yhit ar thi latis vnluffum, and ladlike, I lay.” Quhy has thow marrit my ma, with maistri to mene ? Bot thow mend hym that mys, be Mary, mylde may, Thow fall rew in thi ruse, wit thow but wen, Or thou wend of this wane wemeles away !” Schir Kay wes haisty, and hate, and of ane He will ; Spedely to hym spak, *« Schort amendis will I mak, Traist wele thair till.” Thi {chore compt I noght’ ane caik ; IX. Thair vith the grume, in his grief, leit gird to schir Kay, Fellit the freke with his fift, flat in the flure ; He wes fa aftonayt with the straik, in stede quhare he lay Stok {till as ane stane, the sterne wes fa fture! The freik na forthir he faris, bot foundis away ; The topir drew hym on dreigh, in derne to the dure ; Hyit? hym hard throu the hall, to his haiknay, And sped hym on spedely, on the spare mure. The renk reftles he raid to Arthour the king ; Said, ‘‘ lord, wendis on your way, Yone berne nykis yow with nay ; It helpis na thing.” To prife hym forthir to pray, 1 noghr, ed. * Byit, ed. 136 THE KNIGHTLY TALE OF » 2 Than spak schir Gawane the gay, gratious and gude, « Schir, ye knaw that schir Kay is crabbit of kynde ; I rede ye mak furth ane man, mekar of mude, 120 That will with fairnes fraist frend{chip to fynd ; Your folk ar febill and faynt, for falt of thair fude ; Sum better boid-word to abide, vndir wod lynd.”— ** Schir Gawyne, graith ye that gait, for the gude rude! Is nane' fa bowsum ane berne, brith for to bynd.” 125 The heynd knight at his haist held to the tovne; The yettis wappit war wyde, The knyght ca raithly in ryde ; Quhé he ves lightit* doun. Reynit his palfray of pryde, XI. Schir Gawyne gais furth the gait, þ* graithit wes gay, The quhilk that held to the hall, heyndly to fe ; Than wes the fyre in the faill*, with renkis of array, And blith birdis hym about, that bright wes of ble. Wourthy schir Gawyne went on his way ; 135 Sobirly the fouerane faluft has he,— ‘‘T am fend to your self, ane charge for to fay, Fra cumly Arthur, the king, corteffe and fre ; Quhilk prays for his faik, and your gentrice, That he might cum this toun till, 140 To by vittale at will, Payand the price.” Alfe deir as fegis will fell, 1 naue, ed. 2? lighit, ed. 3 pe, ed. 2 faill, ed. GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. XII. Than faid the fyre of the faill and the fouerane, *© I will na vittale be fauld your senyeour vntill.” ‘That is at your avne will,” said wourthy Gawane, * To mak you lord of your avne, me think it grete skill.” Than right gudly that grome anfuerit agane, ‘* Quhy I tell the this taill, tak tent now thair till ; Pafe on thi purpos, furth to the plane ; For all the wyis I weild ar at his avne will, How to luge, and to leynd, and in my land lent ; Gif I fauld hym his awin, It war wrang to be knawin, Baldly on bent. Than war I wourthy to be drawin, XII. © Thare come ane laithles leid air to this place, With ane girdill ourgilt, and vthir light gere ; It kythit be his cognifance ane knight that he wes, Bot he wes ladlike of laite, and light of his fere ; The verray cause of his come I knew noght the cace, Bot wondirly wraighly he wroght, and all as of were. Yit wait T noght quhat he is, be Goddis grete grace ! Bot gif it happin that he be ane knyght of youris here, Has done my lord to difpleife, that I hym faid ryght, And his prefence plane, I fay yow in certane', As I am trew knight!” He falbe fet agane, 1 tertane, ed. T 138 THE KNIGHTLY TALE OF XIV. Schir Gavyne gettis his leif, and grathis to his steid, And broght to the bauld king boid-word of blis,— © Weill gretis yow, lord, yone lufty in leid, And fays hym likis in land your langour to lis ; All the wyis and’ welth he weildis in theid Sall halely be at your will, all that is his.” Than he merkit with* myrth our ane grene meid, With all the beft, to the burgh, of lordis, I wis ;— The knight kepit the king, cumly and cleir ; With lordis and ladyis of eftate, Met hym furth on the gate, With ane blith* cheir. Syne tuke him in at yate, XV. He had that heynd to ane hall, hiely on hight, With dukis, and digne lordis, doughty in deid ;— * Ye ar welcum, cumly king,” said the kene knyght, * Ay, quhil you likis and list, to luge in this leid. Heir I mak yow of myne maister of myght, Of all the wyis and welth I weild in this fteid ; Thair is na ridand roy, be resoun and right, Sa deir welcum this day, doutles but dreid. I am your coufin* of kyn, I mak to yow knawin ; This kyth and this caftell, Firth, forest, and fell, Ressaue as your awin. Ay, quhill yow likis to duell, 1 in, ed. 2? witht, ed. 3 bligh, ed. + cousing, ed. GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. XVI. ‘““T may refrefch yow with folk, to feght gif you nedis, With thretty thoufand tald, and traiftfully tight, Of wise, wourthy, and wight, in thair were wedis, _ Baith with birny and brand to strenth you ful stright, Weill stuffit in steill, on thair stout stedis.” Than faid king Arthur hym self, seymly be sight, ‘* Sic frendschip I hald fair, that forffis thair dedis ; Thi kyndnes falbe quyt, as I am trew knight !” Than thay bufkit to the bynke, beirnis of the best ; The king crovnit with gold, Dukis deir to behold, Gladit his geft. Allyns the banrent bold, XVII. Thair myght feruice be fene, with fegis in faill, Thoght all felcought war foght, fra the fon to the fee ; Wynis went within þ* wane, maift wourthy to vaill, In coupis of cleir gold, brichteft of blee ; It war full teir for to tell, treuly in taill, The feir courffis that war fet, in that femblee ; The meriest war' menskit on mete, at the maill, With menstralis myrthfully makand thame glee. Thus thay folaift thame selvin, futhly to fay, Al thay four dais to end ;— The king thankit the heynd, And went on his way. Syne tuke his leve for to wend, 1 wai, ed. T2 140 THE KNIGHTLY TALE OF XVIIL. Thus refreschit he his folk, in grete fusioun, With outin wanting in waill, wastell, or wyne ; Thai turssit vp tentis, and turnit of toun, The roy with his Round Tabill, richest of ryne. Thay drive on the da deir, be dalis & doun, And of the nobillest be-name, noumerit of nyne ; Quhen it drew to þe dirk nycht, and þe day yeid doun, Thai plantit doun pauillonis, proudly fra thine. Thus iournait gentilly thyr cheualroufe knichtis, Ithandly ilk day, Throu mony fer contray, Holtis and hillis. Our the mountains gay, XIX. Thai passit in thare pilgramage, þe proudeft in pall, The prince provit in prese, that prise wes and deir ; Syne war pai war of ane wane, wrocht with ane wal, Reirdit on ane riche roche, beside ane riveir, With doubill dykis be-dene drawin our all ; Micht nane pame note with invy, nor ny* pame to neir. The land wes likand in large, and’ luffum to call ; Propir schene schane pe fon, feymly and feir. The king stude vefiand þe wall, maift vailyeand to fe ; On pat river he faw, Cumly towris to knaw ; Thretty and thre. The roy rekinnit on raw, 1 aud, ed. By GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. 141 XX. Apone pat riche river, randonit full evin, The fide-wallis war set, fad to ye see; Scippis faland pame by, sexty and fevyn, 250 To send, quhen þame self list, in feir cuntre ; That al pai that ar wrocht vndir fe hie hevin, Micht nocht warne fame, at wil to ifche, nor entre. Than carpit pe cumly king, with ane lowd stevin, * Yone is pe feymliaft ficht, pat ever couth I fe. 255 Gif þair be ony keyne knycht, þat can tell it, Quha is lord of yone land, Lusty and likand, Fayne wald I wit.” 260 Or quham of is he haldand, XXI. Than schir Spynagrose with speche spak to ye king, — * Yone lord’ haldis of nane leid, that yone land aw, But euer-lefting but legiance, to his leving, As his eldaris has done, enduring his daw.” *+* Hevinly god !” faid the heynd, © how happynis this thing? 65 Herd thair euer ony sage fa felcouth ane saw ! Sal neuer myne hart be in faill, na in liking, Bot gif I loiffing my life, or be laid law, Be the pilgramage compleit I pas for faull prow, Bot dede be my deftenyng, = He fall at my agane cumyng, I mak myne avow !” Mak homage and oblissing, 1. lordis, ed. 142 THE KNIGHTLY TALE OF Ny XXII. * A! lord, sparis of sic speche, quhill ye speir more, For abandonit will he noght be, to berne that is borne ; Or he be strenyeit with ftrenth, yone sterne for to schore, Mony ledis falbe loiffit, and liffis forlorne. Spekis na fucceudry, for Criftis fone deir ! Yone knicht to scar w*' skaitht, ye chaip nocht but scorne. It is full fair for to be fallow and feir To the’ best that has bene brevit* you beforne ; The myghty king of Massidone, wourthiest but wene, Thair gat he nane homage, For all his hie parage, Nor neuer none sene. Of lord of yone lynage, XXIII. “The wy that wendis for to were, quhen he wenys best, All his will in this warld, with welthis, I wys, Yit fall be* licht as leif of the lynd left, That welter€ doun with the wynd, fa wauerand it is ;— Your mycht and your maiefte mefure, but mys.” * In faith,” said the cumly king, ‘‘ trou’ ye full traist, My hecht fall haldin be, for baill or for blis ; Sall neuer my likame be laid vnlaiffit to fleip, Quhill I haue gart yone berne bow, As I haue maid myne auow, Ful wraithly fal weip !” Or ellis mony wedou, 1 wp', ed. 2 thee, ed. 3 beevit, ed. + he, ed. 5 throu, ed. GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. XXIV. Thair wes na man that durst mel to the king, Quhan' thai saw that mighty sa mouit in his mynde ; The roy rial raid, withoutin resting, : And focht to the ciete of Criste, our the salt flude. With mekil honour in erd he maid his offering, Syne buskit hame the samyne way, that he before yude ; Thayr wes na spurris* to spair, fpedely thai fpring ; Thai brochit blonkis’ to thair fidis brist of rede blude. Thus the roy and his rout, restles thai raid, Ithandly ilk day, Our the mountains gay’ ; Withoutin mare abaid. To Rome tuke the reddy way, XXV. Thai plantit doun ane pailyeoun, vpone ane plane lee, Of pall and of pillour that proudly wes picht ; With rapis of rede gold, riale to see, And grete ensenyes of the samyne, semly by sicht ; Bordouris about, that bricht war of ble, Betin with brint gold, burely and bricht ; Frenyeis of fyne silk, fretit ful fre, With deir dyamonthis bedene, þ* dayntely wes dicht. The king cumly in kith, couerit with croune, Callit knichtis fa kene, Dukis douchty bedene,— How best is to done.” <« ] rede we cast ws betuene, 1 Quhy, ed. 2 fpeirris, ed. 3 bloukis, ed. + pay, ed. 144 THE KNIGHTLY TALE OF XXVI. Than spak ane vight weriour, wourthy and wise, *© I rede ane fayndis-man ye fend to yone senyeour, Of the proudeft in pall, and haldin of prise, Wile, vailyeing, and moist of valour. Gif yone douchty in deid wil do your deuise, Be boune at your bidding, in burgh and in bour, Reffaue him reuerendly, as resoun in lyis ; And gif he nykis you with nay, yow worthis on neid, For to affege yone caftel, With cant men and cruel, Euer quhill ye speid.” Durandly for to duel, XXVII. Than fhir Gauane the gay, grete of degre, And fhir Lancelot de Lake, without lefing, And auenand fchir Ewin, thai ordanit that thre, To the {chore chiftane chargit fra the kyng. Spynagros than spekis ; said, ‘‘ lordingis, in le, I rede ye tent treuly to my teching ; For I knaw yone bauld berne better than ye, His land, and his lordschip, and his leuing. And ye ar thre in this thede, thriuand oft in thrang ; War al your strenthis in ane, In his grippis and ye gane, Yone fterne is fa strang. He wald ourcum yow ilkane, GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. XXVIII. And he is maid on mold meik as ane child, Blith and boufum that berne, as byrd in hir bour ; Fayr of fell, and of face, as flour vnfild, Wondir staluart, and strang, to ftriue in ane stour. Thairfore meikly with mouth mel to that myld, And mak him na manance, bot al mesoure ; Thus with trety ye cast yon trew vndre tyld, And faynd his frendschip to fang, with fyne fauour. It hynderis neuer for to be heyndly of speche ; He is ane lord riale, Ane’ feymly fouerane in fale, Throu all this varld reche.” Ane wourthy wy for to wale, XXIX. ‘* Thi counfale is convenabill, kynd, and courtefe, Forthi ws likis thi lair liftin and leir.”— Thai wyis, wourthy in weid, wend on thair ways, And caryis to the caftell, cumly and cleir ; Sent ane faynd to the fouerane fone, and hym fais, Thre knichtis fra court cum thay weir. Than the ledis belife the lokkis vnlaiffis ; On fute frefchly thai frekis foundis, but feir ; The renkis raithly can raik in to the round hald ; Thair met thame at the entre, Ladys likand to fe, That blith war and bald. Thretty knichtis and thre, 1 Has, ed 146 THE KNIGHTLY TALE OF XXX. Thai war courtes, & couth, thair knyghthed to kyth, Athir vthir wele gret, in gretly degre ; Thai bowit to the bernys, that bright war and blith, Fair in armys to fang, of figure fa fre ; Syne thay sought to the chalmer, swiftly and fwith, 380 The gait to the grete lord femely to fe ; And falust the fouerane fone, in ane sith, Courtefly inclinand, and kneland on kne. Ane blithar wes neuer borne, of bane nor of blude ; All thre in certane, 385 Salust the souerane, Hatles, but hude. And he inclynand agane, XXXI1. Than schir Gawayne the gay, gude and gracius, That euer wes beildit in blis, and bounte embrafit ; 390 Joly, and gentill, and full cheuailrus, That neuer poynt of his prife wes fundin defafit ; Egir, and ertand, and ryght anterus, Iluminat vith lawte, and with lufe lafit, Melis of the message to schir Golagrus ; 395 Before the riale on raw the renk wes noght rafit ; With ane clene contenance, cumly to knaw, Said, ‘‘ our souerane Arthour Gretis the with honour, His message to schaw. Has maid ws thre as mediatour, 490 GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. XXXII. He is the rialleft roy, reuerend, and rike, Of all the rentaris to ryme, or rekin on raw; Thare is na leid on life of lordschip hym like, Na nane fa doughty of deid, induring his daw ; Mony burgh, mony bour, mony big bike, Mony kynrik to his clame, cumly to knaw ; Maneris full menfkfull, with mony deip dike ; Selcouth war the fevint part to fay at faw’. Thare anerdis to our nobill, to note, quhen hym nedis, Tuelf crovnit kingis in feir, With all thair ftrang poweir, Worthy in wedis. And mony wight weryer, XXXIII. It has bene tauld hym with tong, trow ye full traift, Your dedis, your dignite, and your doughtynes ; Brevit throu bounte for ane of the best, That now is namyt neir, of all nobilnes, Sa wyde quhare wourfcip walkis be weft ; Our feymly fouerane hym felf, forfuth, will noght cefe, Quhill he haue frely fangit your frendschip to fest ; Gif pament, or praier, mught mak that purchefe, For na largefe my lord noght wil he neuer let, Na for na riches to rigne ; I mak you na lefing, Your grant for to get.” It war his maift yarnyng, 1 faw, ed. u 2 148 THE KNIGHTLY TALE OF XXXIV. Than faid the fyre of the fail, with fad sembland, « T thank your gracious grete lord, and his fade wil ; Had neuer leid of this land, that had bene leuand, 430 Maid ony feute before, freik, to fulfil, I fuld fickirly myfelf be confentand, And feik to your fouerane, feymly on fyll. Sen hail our doughty elderis has bene endurand, Thriuandly in this thede, unchargit as thril, 435 If I, for obeifance or boift, to bondage me bynde, I war wourthy to be, Hingit heigh on ane tre, To waif with þ* wind. 440 That ilk creature might se, XXXV. Bot fauand my senyeoury fra fubiectioun, And my lordscip vn-lamyt, withoutin legiance, All that I can to yone king, cumly with croun, I fall preif all my pane, to do hym plefance ; Baith with body and beild, bowfum and boun, 445 Hym to menfk on mold, withoutin manance. Bot nowthir for his senyeoury, nor for his f{ummoun, Na for dreid of na dede, na for na distance, I will noght bow me ane bak, for berne that is borne ; Quhill I may my wit wald, 450 I think my fredome to hald, Has done me beforne.” As my eldaris of ald GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. XXXVI. Thai lufly ledis at that lord thair leuis has laught ; Bounit to the bauld king, and boidword him broght. Than thai schupe for to affege segis vnfaught, Ay the manlyeft on mold, that maift of myght moght ; Thair wes reftling, and reling, but reft that raught, Mony fege our the fey to the cite focht ; Schipmen our the streme thai stithil full straught, With alkin wappyns, I wys, p' wes for were wroght. Thai bend bowis of bras, braithly within ; Pellokis paifand to pafe, Gapand gunnys of brafe, That maid ful gret dyn. Grundin ganyeis thair wafe, XXXVI. Thair wes blauing of bemys, braging, and beir ; Bretynit doune braid wod, maid bewis full bair ; Wrightis welterand doune treis, wit ye but weir, Ordanit hurdys ful hie, in holtis fa haire, For to greif thair gomys, grameft that wer ; To gar the gayeft on grund’ grayne vndir geir. Thus thai schupe for ane falt, ilk fege feir ; Ilka fouerane his enfenye shewin has thair ; Ferly fayr wes the feild, flekerit and faw With gold, and goulis in greyne, Schynand scheirly & {cheyne ; In scheildis thai {chaw’. The fone, as criftall fa cleyne, 1 gruud, ed. 2 schair, ed. 150 THE KNIGHTLY TALE OF XXXVIIL. Be it wes mydmorne and mare, merkit on the day, Schir Golagros mery men, menfkful of myght, In greis and garatouris, grathit full gay, Seuyne score of scheildis thai {chew at ane sicht ; Ane helme fet to ilk fcheild, fiker of affay, With fel lans* on loft, lemand ful light ; Thus flourit thai the fore front, thair fays to fray, The frekis, that war fundin ferse, and forssy in fight. Nk knyght his cunyfance kithit full cleir ; Thair names wrictin all thare, Quhat berne that it bare, Might wit quhat he weir. That ilk freke quhare he fare, XXXIX. ** Yone is the warliest wane,” faid the wife king, ©© That ener I vist in my walk, in all this warld wyde ; And the straitest of stuf, with richese to ring, With vnabasit bernys bergane to abide ; May nane do thame na deir with vndoyng, Yone houfe is fa huge hie, fra harme thame to hide. Yit fal I mak thame vnrufe, foroutin refting, And reve thame thair rentis, with routis full ride, Thoght I fuld fynd thame new notis for this ix yeir ; And in his avne prefence, Heir fall I mak refidence, With ftrenth me to steir !” Bot he with force* mak defence, ; ’ laus, ed. 2 forte, ed. GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. XL. ** Quhat nedis,” said Spinagrus, © sic notis to nevin Or ony termis be turnit, I tell you treuly ? For thair is segis in yone faill* wil set vpone fevin, Or thay be wrangit, I wis, I warne you ilk wy ; Nane hardiar of hertis vndir the hevin, Or thay be dantit with dreid, erar will thai de ; And thai with men vpone mold be machit full evin, Thai falbe fundin right ferfe, and full of cheualrie. Schir, ye ar in your maiefte, your mayne, & your myght, Yit within thir dais thre, The sicker* futh fall ye fe, And how thai dar fight.” Quhat kin men that thai be, XLI. As the reuerend roy wes reknand vpone raw, With the rout of the Round Tabill, that wes richest, The king crounit with gold, cumly to knaw, With reuerend baronis, and beirnis of the best, He hard ane bugill blaft brym, and ane loud blaw, As the feymly fone filit to the reft.— Agane gais to ane garet, glisnand* to schaw, Turnit to ane hie toure, that tight wes full treft ; Ane helme of hard steill in hand has he hynt, Ane scheld wroght all of weir, Semyt wele vpone feir ; And furth his wais wynt. He grippit to ane grete speir, 1 faill, ed. 2 filker, ed. 3 glifnand, ed, $10 $15 152 THE KNIGHTLY TALE OF XLII. ‘« Quhat fignifyis yone schene fcheild ?” said the senyeour, < The lufly helme, and the lance, all ar away, The brym blast that he blew, with ane stevin {tour ?” Tha faid fir Spynagrus with speche, ‘‘ the futh’ fall I fay. Yone is ane freik in his forte, and frefch in his flour, To fe that his schire weid be sicker of affay ; He thinkis provefe to preve, for his paramour, And prik in your prefence, to purchefe his pray. Forthi makis furth ane man, to mach hym in feild, That knawin is for cruel, Doughty dyntis to dell, With schaft and with scheild.” That for the maistry dar mell, XLIII. Than wes the king wondir glaid, & callit Gaudifeir ; Quhilum in Britane that berne had baronyis braid ; And he gudly furth gais, and graithit hif geir, And bufkit hym to battell, without mair abaid ; That wy walit, I vis, all wedis of veir, That nedit hym to note, gif he nane had. Bery broune wes the blonk, burely and braid, Wpone the mold, quhare thai met, before the myd-day ; With lufly lancis and lang, Ane faire feild can thai fang, Baith blanchart & bay. On ftedis ftalwart and ftrang, 1 such, ed. GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. XLIV. Gaudifeir and Galiot, in glemand fteil wedis, As glauis glowand on gleid, grymly thai ride ; Wondir sternly thai steir on thair stent stedis, Athir berne fra his blonk borne wes that tide. Thai ruschit vp rudly, quha fa right redis ; Out with suerdis thai swang fra thair schalk side ; Thair with wraithly thai wirk, thai wourthy in vedif, Hewit on the hard steil, and hurt thame in the hide. Sa wondir freschly thai frekis fruschit in feir, Throw all the harnes thai hade, Baith birny and breist-plade, Wit ye but weir. Thairin wappynis couth wade, XLV. Thus thai faught vpone fold, with ane fel fair, Quhill athir berne in that breth bokit in blude ; Thus thai mellit on mold, ane myle way and maire, Wraithly wroht, as thei war witlefe and wode ; Baith thai fegis, forsuth, sadly and fair, Thoght thai war aftonait, in þ* stour stithly thai stude. The feght fa felly thai fang, with ane fresch fair, Quhil Gaudifeir and Galiot baith to grund yhude ; Gaudifeir gat vp agane, throu Goddis grete mightis ; Abone him wichtely he wan, With f° craft’ that he can ; Þ* king and his knightis. Thai louit God and fanct An, { craft, ed. x 154 THE KNIGHTLY TALE OF XLVI. Than wes Galiot the gome hynt in till ane hald ; Golagrus grew in greif, grymly in hart, And callit schir Rigal of Rone, ane renk that wes bald,— ** Quhill this querrell be quyt, I cover neuer in quert ! With wailit wapnis of were, evin on yone wald, On ane sterand steid, that sternly will ftert, I pray the, for my faik, that it be deir fald ; Was neuer fa vnsound fet to my hert !” That gome gudly furth gays, and graithit his gere ; Blew ane blaft of ane horne, As wes the maner beforne ; Away with his spere. Scheld and helm has he borne. XLVII. The king crovnit with gold this cumpas wele knew, And callit fchir Rannald', cruell and kene,— ‘* Gif ony preffis to this place, for proves to perfew, Schaip the evin to the schalk, in thi schroud* schene.” The deir dight him® to the deid, be the day dew ; His birny, and his bafnet, burnift full bene; Baith his horfe, and his geir, wes of ane hale hew, With* gold and goulis fa gay graithit in grene ; Ane fchene scheild, & ane fchaft, that scharply was sched ; Thre ber-hedis he bair, As his eldaris did air, Of his blude bled. Quhilk beirnis in Britane wair, 1 Raunald, ed. 2 schrond, ed. 3 hun, ed. + wich, ed. GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. XLVIII. Quhen the day can daw, deirly on hight, And the fone in the {ky wes schynyng fo schir, Fra the caftell thair come cariand ane knight, Clofit in clene steill, vpone ane courfyr. Schir Rannald to his riche fteid raikit full riht’, Lightly* lap he on loft, that lufly of lyre ; Athir laught has thair lance, that lemyt fo light, On twa stedis thai straid, with ane sterne schiere. Togiddir freschly thai frekis fruschit, in fay ; Thair speris in fplendris sprent, On scheldis schonkit & schent, In feild fir away. Euin our thair hedis went, XLIX. Thai lufly ledis belife lightit on the land, And laught out suerdis, lufly and lang ; Thair stedis stakkerit in þ* stour, and stude stimerad, AI to-stiffillit and stonayt, the strakis war fa strang ! Athir berne braithly bet with ane bright brand ; On fute freschly thai frekis feghtin thai fang ; Thai hewit on hard steil, hartly with hand, Quhil the spalis, and the sparkis, spedely out sprang. Schir Rannald raught to f° renk ane rout wes vnryde ; Clenely in the collair, Fifty mailyeis & mair, Ane wound þ* wes wyde. Euin of the schuldir he schair, 1 rihht, ed. 2 lighly, ed. 156 THE KNIGHTLY TALE L. Thus thai faucht on fute, on the fair feild ; The blude famyt thame fra, on feild quhare thai fond ; All the bernys on the bent about that beheild, For pure forow of that fight thai fighit vnfound ; Schire teris schot fra schalkis, schene vndir scheild', Quhen thai foundrit ane fel fey to the grund ; Baith thair hartis can brist, braithly but beild, Thair wes na staluart vnstonait, fo sterne wes Þ* stoad ! Schir Rannaldis body wes broght to the bright tent ; Syne to the castel of stone, Thai had schir Regal of Rone ; Away with him wet. With mekil murnyng and mone, LI. Thus endit the auynantis, with mekil honour, Yit has men thame in mynd, for thair manhede ; Thair bodeis wes beryit baith in ane hour ; Set fegis for thair faullis to fyng and to reid. Tha Gologrus graithit of his me, in glisnand* armour,— Ane fchir Louys the lele, ane lord of that leid ; Ane vthir heght Edmond, that prouit paramour ; The thrid heght {chir Bantellas, the batal to leid ; The ferd wes ane weryour, worthy and wight, His name wes fchir Sanguel, Cumly and cruel ; Foundis to the feght. Thir four, treuly to tell, | scheid, ed. 2 olifnand, ed. GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. 157 LIE. Schir Lyonel to schir Louys wes leuit, with ane lance ; Schir Ewin to schir' Edmond, athir ful euin ; Schir Bedwar to fchir Bantellas, to enschew his chance, That baith war nemmyt in neid, nobil to neuin ; To schir Sangwel foght gude Gyromalance.— 665 Thus thai mellit, and met, with ane stout steuin, Thir lufly ledis on the land, without legiance ; With seymely scheildis* to schew, thai fet vpone feuin, Thir cumly knightis to kyth ane cruel course maid. The frekis felloune in feir, 670 Wondir stoutly can steir, Rudly thai raid. With geir grundin ful cleir, LIN. Tha thair hors vith thair hochis fic harmis couth hint, As trasit in vnquart quakand thai stand ; 675 The frekis frefchly thai fure, as fyre out of flynt, Thair lufly lancis thai loiffit, and lichtit on the land ; Right styth, stuffit in steill, thai stotit na stynt, Bot buskit to battaille, with birny and brand ; Thair riche birnys thai bet derfly with dynt, 680 Hewis doun in grete haift, hartly with hand ; Thai mighty men vpon mold ane riale courfe maid, Quhill clowis of clene maill, Hoppit out as the haill ; Sa bauldly thai baid ! Thai beirnys in the bataill, bes i shir, ed. 2 scheidis, ed. 158 THE KNIGHTLY TALE OF LIV. Thai bet on fa bryimly, thai beirnys on the bent, Briftis birneis with brandis, burnift full bene ; Throu thair schene scheildis thair fchuld?is var schent, Fra schalkis schot schire blude, our scheildis fo schene ; Ryngis of rank steill rattillit, and rent, Gomys grisly on the grund granis’ on the grene. The roy ramyt for reuth’®, richist of rent’, For cair* of his knightis, cruel and kene, Sa wondir frefchly thair force thai freft on the feildis ! Sa huge wes the melle, Wes nane fa futell couth fe, Bot God that al weildis. Quhilk gome fuld gouern the gre’, LV. The wyis wroght vthir grete wandreth and weuch, Wirkand woundis full wyde, with wapnis of were ; Helmys of hard fteill thai hatterit, and heuch, In that hailsing thai hynt grete harmys & here ; All to-turnit thair entyre, traistly and tewch, Burnist bladis of steill throw birneis they bere ; Schort suerdis of scheith smertly thay dreuch, Athir freik to his fallow, with fellonne affere ; Throw platis of polist steill thair poyntis can pase, — All thus thai threw in that thrang, Stalvart® strake, and strang ; Thai doughtyis on dase. With daggaris derfly thay dang, 1 grams, ed. 2 renth, ed. 3 reut, ed. + thair, ed. 5 gee, ed. 6 Scalvart, ed. GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. EYE? Schir Lyonell schir Lowes laught has in hand, And sesit is Sangwell with Giromalans' the gude ; Schir Evin has fchir Edmond laid on the land, Braithly bartynit with baill, bullerand in blude ; Schir Bedwar to fchir Bantellas yaldis vp his brand, In that stalwart stour, thay styth men in stude. Wes nane forffy on fold, that wes feghtand, Wamaglit and marrit, myghtles in mude ; Wes nane fa proud of his part, that prifit quhen he yeid ; Bedwer and Lyonell War led to the castell ; To Arthour thay led. The cumly knight Sangwell, EVIL Schir Edmond loiffit has his life, and laid is full law? ; Schir Evin hurtis has hynt, hidwife and fair ; Knightis caryis to the corse, wes cumly to knaw, And had hym to the castell, with mekill hard cair ; Thai did to that doughty as the dede aw. Wthir four of the folk foundis to the fair, That wes dight to the dede, be the day can daw ; Than faid bernys bald, brym as bair,— ‘* We fal evin that is od, or end in the pane!” Thai ftuffit helmys in hy, Breift-plait and birny ; All geir that’ myght gane. Thay renkis maid reddy, 1 Giromalaus, ed. 2 lay, ed. 3 that, ed. 160 THE KNIGHTLY TALE OF LVIIL Schir Agalus, schir Ewmond, honest and habill, Schir Mychin, schir Meligor, men of grete estait ; Than stertis out ane sterne knyght, stalwart and stabill, Ane berne that heght schir Hew, hardy and hait. Now! wil I rekkin the renkis of the Round Tabill, That has traistly thame tight, to governe that gait ; Furth faris the folk, but fenyeing or fabill, That bemyt war be the lord, luffum of lait ; Schir Cador of Cornwel, cumly and cleir, Schir Owales, schir Iwell, Schir Myreot, mighty emell ; Foundis in feir. Thir four, treuly to tell, LIX. Thair wes na trety of treux, trow ye full traist, Quhé thai myghty can mach, on mold quhair thai met ; Thai brochit blonkis to thair fydis out of blude braift, Thair lufly lancis thai loiffit, and lightit, but let ; Sadillis thai temyt tyt, thir trew men and traist, Braidit out brandis, on birnys thai bet ; As fyre that fleis fra the flynt, thay fechtin fa fast, With végeand wapnis of were throu wedis thai wet. It war teirfull to tell treuly the tend Of thair strife fa strang?, The feght fo fellely thai fang ; Yit laght? it ane end. poght it leftit neuer fo lang, ! Nov, ed. 2 stcang, ed. 3 laght, ed. GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. LX. Schir Oviles, schir Iwill, in handis war hynt, And to the lufly castell war led in ane lyng ; Thair with the stalwartis in stour can stotin, and stynt ; And baith {chir Agalus, & {chir Hew, wes led to the kyng. Than schir Golografe, for greif, his gray ene brynt, Wod wraith as' the wynd his handis can wryng ; Yit makis he mery magry, quhasa mynt,— Said, ‘‘I fal bargane abyde, & ane end bryng ; To morne, fickirly, my self fall feik to the feild.” He bufkit to ane barfray, Twa smal bellis rang thay ; Wes fchene vndir fcheild. Than feymly Arthur can fay, LXI. «© Quhat fignifyis yone rynging?” said the ryale ; Than said Spynagros, with speche, “‘ schir, fenf peir’, That fall I tell yow with tong, treuly in taill; The wy þ* weildis yone wane, I warn you but weir, He thinkis his aune self shall do for his dail ; Is nane fa prouit in* this part of pyth is his peir. Yow worthis wifly to wirk, ane wy for to wail, That fal duchtely his deid do with yone deir ; He is þ* forfieft freik, be fortoune his freynd, That I wait leuand this day.” Than schir Gawine f° gay pt he myght furth weynd. Prayt for f° iournay, | ad, ed. 2 fen speir, ed. 3 is, ed. Y 76h 162 THE KNIGHTLY TALE OF LXII. The king grantit þ* gait to schir Gawane, And prayt to f° grete God, to grant him his grace, Him to faue, and to falf, þ* is our fouerane, As he is makar of man, and alkyn myght haife. Than schir Spynagros, Þ* freik, wox ferly vnfane ; Murnyt for schir Gawyne, and mekil mayne maife ; And faid, ‘‘ for his faik, þ* faiklefe wes flane, Tak nocht yone keye knight to countir, in this hard cais. Is nane fa stalwart in stour, with stoutnes to stand ; Of al þ* langis to the king, The mair is my murnyng, Hynt vpone hand. Ye fuld this fell fechting, LXIII. Sen ye ar fa wourfchipfull, and wourthy in were, Demyt with the derreft, maift doughty in deid ; Yone berne in the battale wil ye noght forbere, For al þ* mobil on the mold, merkit to meid.”— * Gif I de doughtely, the les is my dere, Thoght he’ war Sampsone himself, fa me Crifte reid! I forfaik noght to feght, for al his grete feir, I do the weill for to wit, doutlefe but dreid.” Than faid schir Spynagrose, ‘‘ fen ye will of neid Be bovn to the battale, Wirkis with counfale, And do it in deid. It fall right gret avale, ' the, ed. GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. LXIV. Quhen ye mach hym on mold, merk to hym evin ; And bere ye your bright lance in myddis his scheild ; Mak that courfe cruel, for Cryftis lufe of hevin ! And fyne wirk as I wife, your vappins to weild. Be he stonayt, yone sterne, stout beis his stevin ; He wourdis brym as ane bair, that bydis na beild ; Noy you noght at his note, that nobill is to nevin, Suppose his dyntis be deip dentit in your scheild. Tak na haift vpone had, quhat happunys may hynt, Bot lat the riche man rage, And fecht in his curage, Syne dele ye your dynt. To swyng with fuerd quhil he suage ; LXV. Quhen he is stuffit, thair strike, and hald hym on fteir, Sa fal ye stonay yone stowt, suppole he be strang ; Thus may ye lippin on the lake, throu lair p' I leir ; Bot gif ye wirk as wise, you worthis that wrang.” The king and his knihtis, cumly and cleir, In armour dewly hym dight, be the day sprang ; Than wes schir Kay wondir wo, wit ye but weir, In defalt of ane freik, the feghting to fang. That gome gudely furth gais, and graithit his geir ; Evin to the cafteil he raid, Huvit in ane dern flaid ; Anairmit of weir. Sa come ane knight as he baid, 164 THE KNIGHTLY TALE OF LXVI. That knight bufkit to schir Kay, one ane steid broune, Braiffit in birneis and basnet, full bene ; He cryis his enfenye, and conteris hym full foune, And maid ane courfe curagioufe, cruell and kene ; Thair lufly lancis thai loiffit, and lightit baith doune, And girdit out fuerdis, on the grund grene, And hewit on hard steill, hartlie but houne ; Rude reknyng raise thai’ renkis betuene. Thair mailyeis with melle thay merkit in the medis ; The blude of thair bodeis Throw breift-plait & birneis, Our ran thair riche vedis. As roife ragit on rife, LXVII. Thus thai faught vpone fute, without fenyeing ; The fparkis flaw in the feild, as fyre out of flynt ; Thai lufly ledis in lyke, thai layid on in ane ling ; Delis thair full doughtely mony derf dynt ; Dufchand on deir wedis, dourly thai dyng ; Hidwife hurtis, and huge, haiftely thai hynt. That knight carpit to fchir Kay, of difcomforting,— ** Of this stonay, and stour, I rede that ye stynt. I will yeild the my brand, fen na better may bene ; Quhair that fortoune will faill, Thair may na befynes availl.”— That clofit wes clene. He braidit vp his ventaill, 1 thair, ed. GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. LXVIII. For to reffaue the brand the berne wes full blith, For he wes byrfit, and beft, and braithly bledand ; Poght he wes myghtles, his mercy can he thair myth, And wald þ* he nane harm hynt, with hart, & with had. Thai caryit baith to the kynge', cumly to kyth ; Thair lancis war loiffit, and left on the land. Than faid he loud vpone loft, ‘‘ lord, will ye lyth, Ye fall nane torfeir betyde, I tak vpone hand ; Na myfliking haue in hart, nor haue ye na dout ; Oft in romanis I reid, Airly sporne late speid.”— The knight that wes stout. The king to the pailyeoun gart leid LXIX. Thai hynt of his harnefe, to helyn his wound ; Lechis war noght to lait, with sawis fa fle. With that mony frefch freik can to the feild found, With Gologras in his geir, grete of degre ; Armyt in rede gold, and rubeis fa round, With mony riche relikis, riale to fe ; Thair wes on Gologras, quhair he glaid on the ground, Frenyeis of fine filk, fratit full fre. Apone fterand ftedis, trappit to the heill, Sexty schalkis full schene, Cled in armour fa clene, All stuffit in fteill. No wy wantit, I wene, 1 kynde, ed. 166 THE KNIGHTLY TALE OF LXX. That berne raid on ane blonk, of ane ble quhite, 895 Blyndit all with bright gold, and beriallis bright ; To tell of his deir weid war doutles delite, And alfe ter for to tell the travalis war tight. His name, & his nobillay, wes noght for to nyte ; Thair wes na hathill sa heich, be half ane fute hicht ; 900 He lanfit out our ane land, and drew noght ane lyte, Quhair he fuld fraftyn his force, and fangin his fight. Be that schir Gawyne the gay wes graithit in his gere ; Cummyng on the ta fyde, Hovand battale to abyde, With schelde, and with spere. All reddy famyne to ryde, LXXI. Thir lufly ledis on the land left be þame allane, Tuke nowthir fremyt nor freyndis, bot found tham tra ; Twa rynnyng renkis raith the riolyse has tane, 910 Ilk freik to his feir to frestin his fa. Thai gird one tva grete horfe, on grund q’hil thai grane ; The trew helmys, and traift, in tathis thai ta ; The rochis reirdit vith the rafch, quhé thai famyne ran ; Thair speris in the feild in flendris gart ga. 915 The stedis stakerit in the stour, for streking on stray ; The bernys bowit abak, Sa woundir rude wes the rak, Couth na leid fay ! 920 Quhilk that happynnit the lak, GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. 167 LXXII. Thai brayd fra thair blonkis, befely and bane, Syne laught out fuerdis, lang and lufly ; And hewit on hard steill, wondir hawtane, Baith war thai haldin of hartis heynd and hardy. Gologras grew in greif at schir Gawane ; 925 On the hight of the hard steill he hyt hym, in hy ; Pertly put with his pith at his pefane, And fulyeit of the fyne maill ma' pan fyfty. The knight ftakrit with the straik, all stonayt in {toad ; Sa woundir fcharply he schair, 930 The berne that the brand bair ; Can to his faa found. Schir Gawyne, with ane fell fair, LXXIIL. With ane bitand brand, burly and braid, Quhilk oft in battale had bene his bute, and his belde, 935 He leit gird to the grome, with greif that he had, And claif throw the cantell of the clene schelde ; Throw birny, and breift-plait, and bordour, it baid ; The fulye of the fyne gold fell in the feild. The rede blude with the rout folowit the blaid, 940 For all the wedis, I wise, that the wy weild, Throw claspis of clene gold, and clowis sa cleir ; Thair with schir Gologras the syre, In mekill angir and ire, Leit fle to his fer. Alfe ferfe as the fyre, 946 1 may, ed. 168 THE KNIGHTLY TALE OF LXXIV. Sic dintis he delt to that doughty, Leit hym destanyt to danger, and dreid ; Thus wes he handillit full hait, that hawtane, in hy, The scheld in countir he kest our his cleir weid ; Hewit on hard fteill, woundir haiftely ; Gart beryallis hop of the hathill, about hym on breid. Than the king vnto Criste kest vp ane cry, Said, ‘‘ Lord, as thow life lent to levand in leid, As thow formit all frute, to foster our fude, Grant me confort this day, As thow art God verray!”'— For Gawyne the gude. Thus prais the king in affray, LXXV. Golagras at Gawyne in sic ane grief grew, As lyoune, for falt of fude, faught on the fold ; With baith his hadis in haist that haltane couth hew ; Gart stanys hop of the hathill, that haltane war hold ; Birny and breist-plait, bright for to schew ; Mony mailye and plait war marrit on the mold. Knichtis ramyt for reuth, schir Gawyne thai rew, Þ* doughty delit with hym fa, for dout he war defold ; Sa wondir {charply he schare throu his schene schroud ; His scheild he chopit hym fra, In tuenty pecis and ma ; Witlese and woud. Schir Wawane writhit for wa, s$oLacR0s AND Fix. = i LXXVI. Thus wourthit schir Gawyne wraith,’ and wepand, And ftraik to that ftern knight, but stynt; : All engreuit the grome, with ane bright > wg And delt thairwith doughtely mony derf * Throw byrny, and breistplait, bordour, and SY $ He leit fle to the freke, as fyre out of flynt ; "He hewit on with grete haift, hartly with hand ; Hakkit throw the hard weid, Eg the hede hynt ; Throw the stuf with the straik? stapalis and stanis, Schir Wawine, wourthy in wail, * Half ane span at ane spail, He hewit attanis ! Quhare his harnes wes hail, ; rite _ LXXVII. * Thus raithly the riche berne raffit his array ; The tothir stertis ane bak, the sterne that wes stout ; Hit schix Gawayne on þ* gere, quhil greuit wes the gay, Betit doune the bright gold, and beryallis about ; Scheddit his schire wedis scharply away ; Ke That lufly lappit war on loft, he gart thame law lout. The sterne ftakrit with the straik, and stertis on stray ; Quhill neir his resoune wes tynt, fa rude wes the rout! The beryallis on the land of bratheris gart light, Rubeis, and fapheir, Precious stanis p' weir ; . That dantely wes dight. Thus drefe thai wedis fa deir, : Y a P .. 170 THE KNIGHTLY TALE ou} LXXVIIL. Thai gyrd on fa grymly, in ane grete ire, Baith schir Gaving,the grome, and Gologras the knight, The sparkis flew ‘the feild, as fagottis of fire, Sa wndir frely thai fre angis the fight ; Thai luschit and laid on, thai luflyis of lyre. King Arthur Thesu besoght, seymly with fight,— « As thow, art fouerane God, sickerly, and fyré, That’ thow wald warys fra wo Wauane the wight, And grant the frekis on fold farar to fall, he Baith thair honouris to faif.” At Crist with credéce thai craif, And thus pray thay all. 7 Knight gþyar, and knaif ; . LXXIX. Thai mellit on with malice, thay myghtyis in mude, Mankit throu mailyeis, and maid thame to mer ; Wraithlyswroght, as thai war witlefe and wod, Be that %ehir Wawane, the wy, likit the wer ; The og bright weid wes bullerand in blude. Thair the nobill in neid nyghit hym ner, Straik hym with ane a brad, in stede quhare he stude ; The scheld in fardellis-can fle, in feild away fer ; The topir hyt hym agane with ane hard swerd. * ” As he loutit our ane bra, i + : ee feit founderit hym fra ; «. Grulingis to erd. *Schir Gologras graithly can ga ss ft 1 At. ed. wedi. a. £04505 AND GAWANE. LXXX, Or euer he gat vp agane, gude schir Gawane Grippit to schir Gologras, on the grund grenc oy Thair of gromys wes glaidygudly and gage ; Lovit Crifte of that cafe, with hartis sa @he. Ane daggar dayntely dight that doughty has drawne ; Than he carpit to the knight, cruel and kene, *3* Gif thou luffis thi life, lelely noght to layne, Yeld me thi bright brand, burnift fa bene ; I rede thow wirk as I wise, or war the betide.” The topir anfuerit-fchortly, * Me think farar to dee, Ane sclander to byde. Than schamyt be, verralie, LXXXTI. Wes I neuer yit defoullit, nor fylit in fame, Nor nane of my eldaris, that ever I hard nevin ; Bot ilk berne has bene vnbundin with blame, a 4 Ringand in rialte, and reullit thame self evin. Sall neuer fege vndir fon fe me with schame, . Na luke on my lekame with light, nor with levin', Na nane of the nynt degre haue noy of my*name, I {were be futhfaft God, that fettis all on sevin ! Bot gif that wouffchip of were win me away, I trete for na favour, "7 Do furth,thi devoir ; Doutles this day.” Of me gettf# thou na more, 1 leme, ed. i *F 2 2 172 THE KNIGHTLY TALE OF LXXXII. Lordingis and ladyis in the castell on loft, uhen thai a liege lord laid on the landis, iy Mony sweit t of sware ne nit full oft, - Wyis wourthit o to wrist hair handis ; Wes nowthir cola nor fang, r sorow to soft, 1055 Ane fayr stonay and stour at thair hartis standis ; On Crifte cumly thay cry, ‘‘ on croce as thou coft, With thi blissit blude' to bring ws out of bandis, Lat neuer our fouerane his cause with schame to écheif! Mary, fareft of face, = 1060 Befeik thi fone in this cace, He grant ws to geif!” Ane drop?of his grete grace, LXXXIILI. Thus the ledis on loft in langour war lent ; The lordis on the topir side for liking thay leugh ; 1065 Schir Ggpryne tretit the knight to turn his entegt, For he wes wondir wa to wirk hym mare wugh. ‘* Schir, fay for thi self, thow feis thou art schent ; It may nocht mend the ane myte to mak it fo teugh. Rife, and raik to our roy, richeft of rent ; 1070 Thow falbe newit at neid, with nobillay eneuch, And dukit in our duchery, all the duelling.” — <* Than war I woundir vnwis, To purchefe proffit for pris, * All my leuing. Quhare schame ay euer lyis, 1075 I 1 hlude, ed. GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. 173 LXXXIV. pe sege þ* schrenke for na schame, p* schent might hy sched, That mare luffis his life than lois vpone erd ; _. Sal neuer freik on fold, fremmyt freynde, - Gar me lurk for ane luke, lawit MW... ; # For quhafa with jwourfchip fall his warld Bac, Thair wil nane wyis, that ar wis, wary the werd. For ony trety may tyde, I tell the the teynd, I wil noght turn myn entent, for all this warld brerd, Or I pair of pris ane penny-worth in this place, 1085 For befandis, or beryell ; I knaw myne avne quarrell, To dee in this cace !” I dreid not the pereill, # LXXXV. Schir Gawyne rewit the renk, þ* wes riale, 1090 And faid to þ* reuerend, riche, and rightuis, « How may I fuccour þ* found, femelygin fale, Before this pepill in plane, and pair noght thy pris ?” *© That fall T tel þ* with tong, trewly in tale, "TY Wald yow denye þ* in deid to do my deuis ; "ws Lat it worth at my wil, þ* wourschip to wale, As IFad wonnyn f° of were, wourthy and wis ; Syne cary to þ* caftel, quhare I haue maift cure. Thus may yow faif me fra fyte ; | As I am cristynit perfite, And fauf thyn honoure.’ I fall thi kyndes quyte, > o 'F wie 174 THE KNIGHTLY, TALE OF LXXXVI. © That war hard,” faid þ* [E's “fa have I gude hele ! Ane wounder peralous poynt, partenyng grete plight, To soner in thi gentrice, but signete or sele, Px 105 And I before fai be neuer, fickerly, with fight’ ; To leif in thiJaute#and thow wa¥vnlele,. Than had I cassin in cair mony kene knight. Bot I knaw thou art kene, and alse cruell ; Or thow be fulyeit fey, freke, in þ* fight, 1110 I do me in thi gentrice, be Drightin fa deir !” He lenyt vp in p* place”; hay The topir raithly vpraife ; In feild of his feir ! 115 Gat neuer grome sic? ane grace, __ wg LXXXVII. # Than thei nobillis at neid yeid to thair note new ; Freschly foundis to feght, all fenye, and thair fair ; ” Tua schort suerdis of {ch mertly thai drew, Than thai mellit on moldWne myle way® and mare ; Wes newpþir cafar, nor* king, thair quentance p* knew, 1120 It femyt be thair contenance þ* kendillit wes care. Syne thai traift in Þ* feild, throu trety of trew ; Put up thair brandis fa braid, burly and bair. Gologras and Gawyne, gracious and gude, Yeid to the caftel of ftane, F 1125 As he war yoldin & tane ; Sair murnand in mude. The king precious in pane” 5 aa 1 fight, ed. 2 fit, ed. . 3 wa, + gor, ed. © GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. * 175 LXXXVIII. x The roy ramand ful raith, p* reuth wes to fe, And raaléit full redles to his riche tent ; 1130 Thewatter wet his chekis, p' schalkis myght fe, As all his welthis in warld had bene away went ; And othir bernys, for barrat, plakynnit thair ble, Braithly bundin in baill, thair breftis war blent.— ‘The flour of knighthede is caught throu his cruelte ! * 1s Now is þ* Round Tabil rebutit, richest of rent, Quhen wourfchipfull Wawane, þ* wit of our were, Is led to ane prefoune’ ; Now failyeis gude fortoune !” Grat rftony falt tere. The king, cumly with croune, 140 as Quhen þ* Gawyne the gay, grete of degre, Wes cummyn to þ* caftel, cumly and cleir, Gromys of p' garifoune maid gamyn arfdigle, And ledis lofit thair lord, lufly of lyere ; 1145 Beirdis beildit in blise, brightest of ble ; * The tothir knightis maid care, of Arthuris here ;— Al thus with murnyng and myrth thai maid melle. Ay, int p* segis war fet to the fuppere, The feymly fouerane of þ* fail marschel he wes ; 1150 He gart schir Gawyne vpga, His wife, his doghter alfua, War fet at þ* des. And of pt mighty na ma, 7 fe $1 presonne##d. . 176 THE KNIGHTLY TALE OF XC. He gart at ane fete burd }* strangearis begin, The maist feymly in fale ordanit thame fete ; Ilk knyght ane cumly lady, þ* cleir wes of kyn ; With kynde contenance the renk couth thame rehete, Quhen thai war machit at mete, þ* mare and fe myn, And ay the meryeft on mold marfchalit at mete. - Than faid he lowd vpone loft, the lord*of þ* in, To al þ* beirnys about, of gre pt wes grete, ** Lufly ledis in land, lythis me til!” He straik the burd with ane wand, The quilk he held-in hand ; Sa war thai' all stil. Thair wes na wotd muuand, + . » + XCT- ‘* Heir ye ar gaderit in grosle, al the gretest, Of gomys that grip has vndir my gouernyng? ; Of baronis, and burowis, of braid land þ* best, And alfe the meryeft on mold has intrometting. Cumly knightis, i in this cace I mak you request, Freyndfully, but falffet, or any fenyeing, That ye wald to me, treuly and traift, . Tell your entent, as tuiching this thing That now hingis on my hart, fa haue I gude hele ! It tuichis myne honour fa neir, Ye THe plane anfueir ; I may noght concele. Thairof I you requeir, 2 & ‘eee 4 1 thair, ed. 2 goduernyng, ed. bo ae GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. 177 XCII. Say me ane chois, þ* tane of thir twa, Quhethir ye like me lord, laught in the feild, Or ellis my life at þ* lest lelely forga, And boune yow to sam berne, þ* myght be your beild ?” The wourthy wyis, at pt word wox woundir wa, 1185Tha thai wist thair fouerane wes schent vnder scheild ;— ** We wil na fauour here fenye, to frende, na’ to fa; We like yow ay as our lord, to were, and to weild ; Your lordschip we may noght forga, alse lang as we leif ; Ye fal be our gouernour, 1190 Quhil your dais may endure, For chance þ* may cheif.” In eife and honour, XCUL. Quhen this auenand and honest had maid this ansuer, And had tald thair entent trewly him till, 1195 Than fchir Gologras the gay, in gudly maneir, Said to thai fegis, semely on fyll, How wourfchipful Wavane had wonnin him on weir, To wirk him wandreth or wough, quhilk war his wil ; How fair him fell in feght, fyne how he couth forbere ;— 1200 < Tn sight of his fouerane, this did þ* gentill ; He has me fauit fra fyte, throw his gentrice, It war syn, but recure, Þ* knightis honour suld smure, Quhilk maift is of pice. That did me this honoure, 1205 1 nar, ed. 178 THE KNIGHTLY TALE OF XCIV. I aught as prynce him to prise, for his prouese, That wanyt noght my wourschip, as he Þ* ai wan, And at his bidding full bane, blith to obeise, This berne full of bewte, þ* all my baill:blan:; I mak þ* knawin, and kend, his grete kyndnes, The countirpas to kyth to him, gif-T can.” He raikit to schir Gawine, right in ane race, Said, ‘‘ schir, I knaw be conquest: thou art ane kynd man ; Quhen my life and my dede wes. baith at thi will, Thy frendfchip frely I fand ; Now wil I be obeyand, As right is, and skill. And make þ* manrent with hand, XCV. Sen fortoune cachis the cours, throu-hir quentys ; I did it noght for nane dreid, þ* I had to de, Na for na fauting of hart, na for na fantife ; Quhare Crifte cachis þ* cours, it rynnis quently; May nowthir power, nor pith, put him to prife. Quha on-fortone quhelmys þ* quheil, thair gais: grace by, Quha may his danger endure, or deftanye difpife,. That led men in langour, ay lestand-inly, The date na langar may endure na Drightin deuinis. 7 Itk man may kyth, be his cure, Baith knyght, king, & empriour, & mater maift mine is. And mufe in his myrrour, GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. XCVI. Hectour, and Alexander, and Julius Cefar, Dauid, and Jofue, and Judas the gent ; Sampfone, and Salamon, þ* wife and wourthy war, And þ* ryngis on erd, richest of rent ; Quhen thai met at þ* merk, than might thai na mair, To speid thame our f° spere-feild enfpringing thai {p’nt ; Quhen fortune worthis vnfrende, tha failieis welefair, Thair ma na tresour ourtak, nor twyn hir entent. , All erdly riches, and ruse, is noght in thair garde ; Quhat menis fortoune be skill, Ane gude chance or ane ill ; Is worth his rewarde. Ilkane be werk, and be will, XCVIL. Schir Hallolkis, schir Hewis, heynd and hardy, Schir Lyonel lufly, and alfe schir Bedwere, Schir Wawane þ* wife knight, wicht and wourthy, Carys furth to þ* king, cumly and clere ; Alfe my felf fall pafe with yow reddy, My kyth, and my caftel, compt his conquere.” Thai war arait ful raith, that ryale cumpany, Of lordis and ladis, luffum to lere ; With grete lightis on loft, þ* gaif grete leime ; Sexty torcheis ful bright, Before schir Gologras }° knyght ; In ony riche reime. That wes ane femely fyght, 180 THE KNIGHTLY TALE OF XCVIII. All effrayt of þ* fair wes the fresch king ; Wend the wyis had bene wroght all for the weir ; Lordis laught thair lancis, and went in ane lyng, And graithit thame to þ* gait, in thair greif geir. Spynok spekis with speche, said, © moue you na thing, It femys saughtnyng thai feik, I fe be thair feir ; Yone riche cimis arait in riche robbing, I trow this deuore be done, I dout for na deir. I wait schir Gawane þ* gay has grathit this gait ; Betuix schir Gologras and he Gude contenance I se, Lussum of lait.” And vthir knightis so fre, XCIX. The renk raikit to þ* roy, with his riche rout, Sexty {chalkis þ* schene, feymly to schaw ; Of banrenttis, and baronis, bauld hym about, In clathis of cleyne gold, cumly to knaw. To þ* lordly on loft þ* lufly can lout, Before Þ*' riale renkis, richest on raw ; Salust þ* bauld berne, with ane blith wout, Ane furlenth before his folk, on feildis fo faw. The king crochit with croune, cumly and cleir, Tuke him vp by the hand, With ane fair fembland ; Did to Þ* deir. Grete honour p' auenand 1 pt, ed. GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. 18] C. Than þ* seymly be sight said to þ* gent, 1285 Wes vailyeand, and verteous, foroutin ony vice, ** Heir am I cumyn at this tyme, to your present, As to þ* wourfchipfulleft in warld, wourthy, and wife ; Of al þ* ryngis in erd richest of rent, Of pyth, and of proues, peirles of prife. 1290 Heir I mak yow ane grant, with gudly entent, Ay to your prefence to perfew, with al my feruice ; Quhare euer ye found or fair, be firth, or be fell, I fal be reddy at your will, In alkin refoune’ and skill, Treuly to tell.” As I am haldin thairtill, CI. He did the conquerour* to knaw all the cause quhy, That all his hathillis in þ* heir, hailly on hight ; How he wes wonnyn’ of wer with Wawane þ* wy, 1300 And al the fortoune* þ* freke befell in þ* fight ; The dout, and þ* danger, he tauld him quently. Than faid Arthur him seluin, semely by sight, *« This is ane foueranefull thing, be Ihesu ! think I, To leif in sic perell, and in fa grete plight ; 1305 Had ony preiudice apperit, in þ* partyce, It had bene grete perell ; Bot fen þ* lawte is lell, The mare is thi price. 1310 That thow my kyndness wil heill, 1 refonne, ed. 2 conquer, ed. 3 wounen, ed. 4 fortonne, ed. 182 THE KNIGHTLY TALE OF CII. I thank the mekill, schir knight,” said the ryall, * Tt makis me blythar to be than all thi braid landis ; Or all the renttis fra thyne vnto Ronfiwall, poght I myght reif thame with right, rath to my hadis.” Than faid the senyeour in fyth, semely in faill, ** Because of yone bald berne, that broght me of bandis, All that I haue wndir hewyne, I hald of you haill, In firth, forest, and fell, quhare ever that it standis. Sé vourfchipfull Wawane has wonnyn to your hadis The fenyory in gouernyng, Cumly conquerour, and kyng, As liege lord of ladis. Heir mak [I] yow obeising, CII. And fyne fewte I yow feft, without fenyeing, Sa p' the cause may be kend, and knawin throw {kill ; Blithly bow and obeife to your bidding, As I am haldin to tell treuly thair till.” Of schir Gologras grant blith wes the king, And thoght þ* fordward wes fair, freynd{chip to fulfil. Thair schir Gawane the gay, throu requiring, Gart þ* fouerane him self, semely on {aill, Cary to Þ* castel, cleirly to be hald, With all þ* wourthy þ* were, Erll, duke, and douch-spere, That blyth war & bald. Baith banrent and bachilere, GOLAGROS AND GAWANE. CIV. Quhen þ* femely fouerane wes fet in þ*® faill, It wes felcouth to fe the feir feruice ; Wynis wifly in wane, went full grete waill Amang the pryncis in place, peirles to price. It war teir for to tel, treuly in tail, To ony wy in this warld, wourthy, I wife. With reualing and reuay all the oulk hale, Alfo rachis can ryn vndir the wod rife, On Þ* riche river of Rone ryot thai maid ; And fyne, on Þ* nynte day, The renkis rial of array, With outin mare baid. Bownyt hame thair way, CV. Quhen the ryal roy, maift of renoune, With al his reuerend rout wes reddy to ryde ; The king, cumly with kith, wes crochit with croune, To schir Gologras p* gay, faid gudly p* tyde,— © Heir mak I the reward, as I haue refoune, Before thir’ fenyeouris in fight, semely beside, As tuiching þ* téporalite, in toure, and in toune, In firth, foreft, and fell, and woddis fo wide ; I mak releifching of pin allegiance ; But dreid I fall þ* warand, Baith be fey and be land, With outin distance.” Fre as I the first fand, .. 1 their, ed. Hetr endis the Knightly Tale of Golagros and Gawa ne, in the south gait of Edinburgh, be TUalter Chepman and Androw Millar, the viit. day of Ap'ile, the phere of God, M.CCCCC., and viii. pherts. Appendix, Syre Gawene and the Carle of Carelyle. [MS. Porkington, fol. 12.] No. I. YSTENNYTH, lordyng”, a lyttytt ftonde, Of off pt was sekor? and founde, And douzgty in his dede ; He was as meke as mayde in bour?, And þ to ftyfe in eu’y ftour’, Was nofi fo dou3tty in dede. Ded? of arm?, wtt! out lefe, Seche he wolde in war” & pees, In mony a ftronge lede ; Sertayfily wtt outtyfi fabuit, He was wtt Artt? at pe Rounde Tabutt, In romans as we reede, His name was fyr’ Gawene, Moche worfchepe in Bretté he wai, And hardy he was and wy3te ; The yle of Brettayh i-cleppyde ys, Betwyf Skotlond & Ynglonde, I wys, In ftorry i-wryte a-ry3te. Wallys ys af anguit of pt yle, At Cardyfe foiornde þ* kynge a whylle, Witt mony a gentyit kny}te ; 1 Sic, for w* or with, passim. 2B 2 a [fol. 12°.) [fol.13.] ae ne Po S That wolde to Ynglonde, to honte, As grete lordys dothe, and be wonte, Wtt hardy lordys and wyg3te. Kynge Arttor? to his lordis gafi faye, As a lorde ryatt pt welt maye, * Do vs to haue a mafse ; Byschope Bawdewyh schatt hit doi, The to p* forreft woll we gon, Att that evyr? her” ys. For nowe ys grece tyme of pe! 3eer”, That bariis bolde schulde hont þ* der’, And reyfe hem of her’ refte ;?— Woder® glad was fyr’ Mewreke, So was þ* knyjt fyr” Key Citocke, And op? mor’ and lafe. Glade was Launccelet de Lacke, So was f Percivait, I vndor-take, And Lanfalle, I wene ; So was fyr’ Eweyfi pe Vytt yan, And syr? Lot of Laudyafi, That hardy was & kene. Syr? Gaytefer?, and fyr Galerowne, Syr’ Costantyfi, and fyr Raynbrowfi, The knyjt of arm? grene ; Syr Gawefi was stwarde of pé halle, © He was mast? of hem alt, And bufkyde hem be-dene. The kyng? vncull fyr’ Mordrete, Nobuit kny3tt? wtt hym gafi lede, In romans as meh rede ; Syr? Yngeles, pt genttyle knyjte, Wit hym he lede houndys wyg3t, That well coude do her? dede. Syr? Le Byus Dyskonts was pare, | pi, MS. SYRE GAWENE AND THE [tol. 13b.] CARLE OF CARELYLE. Wert proude mefi les & mare, To make þ* doune der” blede ; Syr Petty-pas of Wynchylse, A nobuft kny3t of cheualre, And stout was ofi a stede. Syr Grandofi, & syr Ferr’-vnkowp*®, Meryly they fewyde wtt mouthe, Wtt houndys pt wer? wy3t; Syr Blancheles, and Iron-fyde, Mony a doughty pt day cof ryde, Ofi hors fayr? and ly3te. Trouf-fyde, as I wene, Gat þ* kny3t of armus grene, Oh a lady bryg3t ; Sertenly, as I wndur”-ftonde, The fayr’ may of Blanche-lofide, In bour?, pt louely wy3te. Irofi-syde, as I wene, I-armyd he wolde ryde futt clene, Wer þ* foufi nevyr’ fo hoot'; In wyntt? he wolde arm? bere, Gyantt? & he wer eu? at were, And ait way at p® de-bate. Fabele-honde hy3t ys ftede, His armys and his odir? wede, Futt fayr’ and goode hit was; Of afur for? fothe he bare, A gryffyfi of golde fuit feyr’, I-set fult of golde flourr?. He coude mor’ of venery & of wer’, The aft þ* kyng?? pt wer ther’, Futt oft a-fay heii he wolde ; Brennynge dragons hade he slayfi, And wylde bull? mony wof, 1 hate? 2 knyjtes ? [fol.14.] [fol. 14.] SYRE GAWENE AND THE That grefely wer i-holde. 90 Byge barrons he hade i-bonde, A hardyer kny3t my3t not be fonde, Futt herdy he was, and bolde ; Therfor he! was callyd, as I hard fay, The kyng® fellowe, by his day, 95 Wit worthy knyztt? i-tolde. A lyofi of golde was his crefte, He spake reyfon out of refte, Lystyfi, and ze may her’ ; Wher eu? he went, be eft or weste, 100 He nold for”-sake mafi nor? best, To fy3t fer or? ner’. Knyjtt? kene fast they rane, The kynge followyd wtt mony a ma, V. C. and moo, I wene; 105 Folke followyd wtt fedyrt flofi?, Nobutt archarr® for p* nons, To fell pe fallow der? fo cleyfi. Barrons gafi her hornn® blowe, The der cam reykynge oft a rowe, 110 Bothe hert and eke heynde ; Be that tyme was pryme of þ* day, V. C. der” dede ofi a lond lay, Alonge vndur? a lynde. The sy1? Gawefi & fyr” Key, 115 And befchope Bavdewyh, as I yow fay, Aft? a rayfi-der” they rode; Frowe þ* tyim was prym of þ* day, Ty] myde vndur’-nofi, as I yow faye, New? ftyll hit abode. 120 A myft gafi ryfe in a mor’, Barrons blowe her hornis ftore, Meche mofi fyr Key made ; 1 he®, MS. * =. 15.7 Fade of DR oo The reyne-der? wolde not dwelle, Herkon what avet? hem befelle, Herbrow pey wolde fayf haue hade. The fayde þ* gentyit kny3t f Gawefi, “ Alt pis labur ys in wayne, For certen trowe hit me; The dere ys paffyde out of our” syjt, We mete no mor” wtt hy to ny3t, Hende, herkofi to me. I reede pt we of our hors a-ly3t, And byde in pis woode ait ny3t, And loge vndur pis tree ;’— © Ryde we hens,” quod Keye a-non, “ We schatt haue harbrowe or” we gofi, Dar no mafi wern hit me.” The fayd p* befchope, © T knowe hit well, A carle her’ in a castell, A lyttytt her” ner honde; The Karl of Carllytt ys his nam, He may vs herborow, be sent Jame ! As I vndur-ftonde. Was p” nevyr” bari fo bolde, That eu? my3t gaystyn in his holde, But evyll harbrowe he fonde ; He fchall be bette, as I harde fay, And 3efe he go wtt lyfe a-way, Hit wer but godd? fonde. Nowe ryde we þedyr? aft pre,”— Ther to fayd Key, “I grant hit þ*, Also mot I well far? ! And as p" seyst hit schatt be holde, Be þ* Carle neu? fo bolde, I count hy not worthe an har. And 3eyf he be neu? fo ftovte, We woll hy bette att a-bowt, And make his beggynge bar” ; CARLE OF CARELYLE. [fol. 15>.] (fol. 17.] SYRE GAWENE AND THE Suche as he brewythe seche schatt he drenke, He schatt be bette pt he fchatt stynke, And a-zenst his wyll be ther?” Syr Gawen fayd, “fo hav I blyse, I woll not geystyn p” magreys, Thow I my3t neu? fo well; 3efe any fayr’ word? may vs gayn, To make þ* lorde of vs fuit fayn, In his oun caftett. Key, let be thy bostfult fare, Thow goft a-bout to warke care, I fay, fo haue I helle! I wott pray þ* good lorde, as I yow faye, Of herborow tyll to-morrow daye, And of met & melle.” Ofi her? way fast they rode, At p® castett-zat pey a-bode, The portt? callyd pey fchulde ; Ther? hynge,a homyr by a cheyn, To knocke p’ at fyr’ Key toke dayn!, The homyr? a-way he wold haue pold. The portt? come wtt a p’wey fare, And hem fonde he ther’, He axid what they wolde ; The fayd Gawen curttefly, “ We be-feche þ* lorde of herbory, The good lorde of pis holde.” The portt? anfwerd hé a-gayn, “ Your” message wold I do futt fayn, And 3e have harme, panke hyt not me ; Ze be fo fayr’, lyme and lythe, And þ? to coly, glad per? wtt, That cémely byt ys to fee. . My lorde can no corttessye, ' dedayn? (fol. 17b.] CARLE OF CARELYLE ; '* “Fe prot notte 'wtt out a wellony, Truly trow ze mee; "&. Me seer aa sor? ze came pis waye, ‘And ar’ 3e go fo woll 3e fay, But 3efe mor’ grace be.” « Portt?,” fayde Key, “let be thy care, Thow feft we mey no forp” fare, Thow jappyft, as I wene ; But p" woit on our’ message! gofi, The kyng® keyis woll we tane, And draw hem doufi c’teyn.” The portt? fayde, “fo mot I pryfe, Ther” be not pre knyjtt? a-lyve, That dorft do hit, I wene; Wyft my lorde your? wordys grete, Some your” lyvys ze schold for?-lete, Or ell? fuit fast to-flen.” The portt? went in to þ* hait, Wit his lord he mett wit aft, That hardy was & bolde ;— Carl of Carllhyll, gode loke þ*! At þ* 3att be barun? pre, Semley arm? to welde. To knyitt? of Art?ys in, ‘ A befchope, & no mor’ men, Sertayn as they me tolde ;”’— Thé fayd þ* Carle, be fent Myghett, That typing? lykyth me ryjt well, Seyth pi pis way wolde.” Whé they came be-for? pat fyr’, They fond iiij. whelp? lay about his fyer’, That grefly was for” to see; A wyld bole, & a fellon boor? A lyofi, pt wold bytte for’, | mffage, MS. 2c [fol. 18.] (fol. 18>.] SYRE GAWENE AND THE Ther? of they had ae ferly. A bege ber” lay loufe vn-bounde, Seche iiij. whelp® p” pey foiide, A-bout þ* Carll? kne ; They rose, & came þ® knyjtt? a-gayn, And sofi pi wold he haue sleyf, The Carle bade hé let bee. “ Ly doun,” he fayd, © my whelpys four,” The þ* lyon be-gan to lour’, And glowyd as a glede; The ber? to ramy, þ* boole to groun, The bor he whett his toskos fouh, Faft and pat good fpede. The fayd þ* Carle, © ly style, hardyh !” They fett a-doun for? fer? of hyme, So for? pey gan hyme drede; For a word p® Carle gan fay, Vnd? pe tabutt they crepyd a-way, Ther’ of fyr Key toke hede, The Carle þ* knyjtt? can be-holde, Wit a stout vesage & a bolde, He femyd a dredfuit maf ; Wit chek? longe, & vefage brade, Cambur? nose, & aft futt made, Be-twyne his brow? a large spane. Hys mozth moche, his berd graye, Ou? his breft his lock® lay, As brod as anny fane ; Betwen his schuldors, whos ry3t ci rede, He was ij. tayllors 3ard° brede,— Syr Key merweld gretly pafi. Ix. taylloris 3erd° he was hy3thét, And } to legg® longe and wyjtht, Or ell? wondor? hit wer ; Ther was no post in pt hait, Grettyst growand of hem aif, "230 [fol. 19.] CARLE OF CARELYLE. But his ptys wer’ »pycker’. His arm? wer” gret, wtt outyn lefe, His fyng’is also, I wys, ‘As any lege pt we ber’; - Whos ftond a ftroke of his honde, He was not wecke, I vndur’-ftond, That dar? I fafly fwer’. Then fr? G. be-gan to cnele, The Carle fayd he my3t be kny3t wylle, And bad hyme ftond vpe a-non ; “ Lett be p! knellynge, gétyit kny3t, Thow logost wtt a carit to-ny3t, I fiver? by fefit Johfi! For? her? no cortteffy þ* schalt have, But carll° cortteffy, fo god me fave! For? sertt? I can nofi;?— He bad brynge wyn, in gold fo der?,' A-non hit cam i copp? cler?, As any fouf hit fchon. ii. gallons held a cop, and more, He bad brynge forthe a grettor”,— « What schait pis lytyll cope douh ? This to lyttyft a cope for? me, Whe I sytt by pe fyr’ off hy, By my self a-loun. Brynge vs a grett? bolle of wynfi, Let vs drenke, & play fethyh, Tyll we to fopp goun ;” The butteler? broujt a cope of golde, 1x. gallons hit gane holde, And toke hit þ* Carle a-non. IX. gallons he hyld, and mare, He was not weke pt hit bare, In his wof honde ; The kny3tt? dronkon fast a-bout, And fethe a-rofe, & went hé out, 2c 2 195° (fol. 19Þ.] (fol. 20.] SYRE GAWENE AND THE To fe her? hors ftond. Corne and hey Þ had reydy, A lyttyll folle ftod hem bye, Wtt her hors faft ettand ; The beffchope put p* fole a-way,— “ Thow schalt not be fellow wtt! my palfray, Whyit I am beschope in londe.” The Carll pé cam wit a gret spede, And afkyde “who hathe dof pis dede ?” The befchope feyd, © pt was I ;?— “Ther for” a bofett þ® schalt have, I fwer®, fo god me fave! And hit schatt be sett wytterly.” “ I ame a clarke of ordors hyze,” — “ 3ett cannyst p" nozt of cortteffy3e, I fwer’, fo mott I tryue !” He 3afe þ* beffchope a boffett p°, That to p® ground he gan goo, In? sonynge he gann ly3e. Sy?” Key came in þ* fam cas, To fe his stede per’ he was, The foll fond he hym by; Out att pe dor’ he drof hy out, And of: þ® backe 3afe hy a clovt, The Carle fe pt wtt hys y3e. The Cartt 3affe hym feche a boffett, That fmertly of þ* grond hy fett, In fonynge gan he ly3e; “ Euyll tav3t knyjtt?,” pe Carl gan fey, « I fchait teche þ*® or? p* wend a-way, Sum of my cortteffye.” Thé pey a-rofe, and went to hatt, The befchope, and f Key wit ait, That worthy was i-wrog3t ; 1 fellowtt, MS. 27, MS, [fol. 20Þ.] CARLE OF CARELYLE. Syr Gawé axyd w? pey had byne, They feyd, © our? horffys we have fene, And vs for? for? -thoght.” Thé ansswerd G. fult curttefly, « Syr?, wtt your? leyf pe wyll 1,” The Carll knewe his thought ; Hett reynnyd, & blewe storm? felle, That well was by, be bocke & belle, The herborow hade cav3t. Wtt out pe stabutt dor’ pe foll gi stond, G. put hyme in a-gayn wtt his honde, He was aft wett, I wene; As Þ* foll had ftond in rayne, Thé keu’yd he hym fyr Gawene, Wtt his mattell of grene. G.! “ ftond vpe fooll, & eette thy mette, We spend her” pat thy mast? dothe gett, Whyll pt we her? byne ;” The Carle ftode hym faft by, And pankyd hy fuit curtteflye, Manny fythis, I wene. Be pt tyme her fop was redy dy3t, The tabull? w? hovfe vpe afi hyit, I-cowert they wer” fuit tyte ; Forth wtt pi wolde not blyne, The besschope ga p* tabull begynne, Wit a gret de-lytte. £ Key was fett ofi þ* top” fyde, A-3enft þ* Carll? wyfe fo futt of pryde, That was fo feyr’ & whytte; Her? arm? smatt, her? mydyll gent, Her? yzen grey, her? brow” bente, Of curtteffy sche was pfette. Her? roode was reede, her? chek® rounde, 1G. sayd? [fol.21.] (fol. 21.] SYRE GAWENE AND THE A feyrror my3t not goo ofi grounde, Ne lowelyur? of syite; Sche was fo gloryis & foo gay, I can not rekon her’ a-raye, Sche was fo gayly dy3te. Alas! thoug’ht Key, p" lady fre, That p" schuldyst pus! i-pefchde be, Wit feche a foulle we3tht!” « Sytt ftyll,” quod p* Carl, © & eete pi mette, Thow pinkoft mor? pé p* darft fpeke, Sertten I the hy3t.” I do yow ait weit to wette, Ther? was noo mi bade G. fitte, But in þ® halle flor” gan he ftonde ; The Carle sayde, © fellowe, a-nof, Loke my byddynge be well i-donfi, Go take a fper’ in thy honde. And at p¢ bottre dor goo take thy passe, | And hitt me evyn in the face, | Do as I the commande; And 3eyfe p* ber? me a-zenft þ* watt, Thow schalt not hort me wit alle, Whyll I am gyaiit in londe.” Syr’ Gawefi was a glade man wtt pt, At þ® bottre dor’ a sper? he gatte, And in his honde hit hente ; Syr G. came wit a gret ire, Doun he helde his hede pat fyre, Tyll he hade geue his dentte?. He 3afe p* ftoh watt feche a rappe, That pe goode fper’ ait to-brake, The fyer? flewe out of þ* flente ; The Carl fayde to hym ful fofie, « Gentylt kny3t, þ® hast weit donne.” 1 pis, MS. 2 dette, MS. (fol. 22.] CARLE OF CARELYLE, And be þ* honde hyme hente. A cher? was fette, for? £ Gawene, That worthy knyzt of Bryttayne, Befor’ pe Carll? wyfe was he sett ; So moche his love was on her” lyjt, Of ait pe fop he ne my3t, Nodyr? drynke nor? ette. The Carle fayde, © G. comfort þ*, For fynn ys swete, & pt I fe, Serten I the hete ; Sche ys myfi p" woldyst w’ thynn, Leve feche po3tt®, & drenke þ* wynne, For her’ p" schalt nott geytt.” Syr G. was a-fchémyde i his pow3t, The Carll? dovitt? forthe was brovit, That was fo feyr’ and bry3t ; As gold wyre schynyde her? here, Hit cost a Mli. and mar’, Her? a-parrett pertly py3te. Wit ryche stonn® her clop® w? fett, Utt ryche perll? a-bout her” frete, So femly was that fy3te ; Ouyr? ait pe hatt gafi {che leme, As hit wer’ a son®-beme, That stonn® schone fo bry3t. Then seyde þ* Carle to pt bry3t of ble, * Uher ys pi harpe p" schuldist have bro3t wt þ*, 7 p Uhy hast p" hit for-gette ?” A-non hit was fett in to þ* haft, And a feyr? cher? wit aft, Be-for? her? fador was fett. The harpe was of maser? fyne, The pynys wer? of golde, I wene, Serten wtt out lett; Furft fche harpyd, & fethe fonge, Of love, & of Artorr? arm? a-monge, [fol. 22Þ.] [fol. 23.] SYRE GAWENE AND THE How pey to-geydor? mett. Uhé they hade fovpyde, & mad hem glade, The befchope i to his chambur’ was lade, Utt hym £ Key þ*® kene ; They toke f G. wit out leffynge, To pe Carl? chab? pi ga hy brynge, That was fo bry3t and schene. They bade £ G. go to bede, Utt clothe of golde fo feyr? fprede, That was fo feyr? and bry3t ; Uhé þ*® bed was made wtt wynne, The Carle bade his oun lady go in, That loufefom was of fy3te. A squyer? came wit a p’wey far’, And he vn-armyde Gawen per’, Schaply he was vn-dy3t ; The Carle feyde, “ fyr Gawene, Go take my wyfe i pi arm? tweyne, And kys her’ in my fy3te.” Syr G. anffwerde hyme a-non, “ Syr, p' byddynge fchait be donne, Sertaynly in dede ; Kyit, or fley, or laye a-doune,”— To the bede he went futt fone, Faft and that good fpede. For foftnis of pt ladys fyde, Made G. do his wytt pt tyde, Ther of G. toke pe Carle goode hede ; Uhé G. wolde haue dof þ* p’vey far”, Thé feyd pe Carle, © whoo ther’ ! That game I þ* for-bede. But G. fethe p" haft do my byddynge, Som kyndnis I most schewe p* i any pinge, As fer’ forthe as I maye ; Thow fchalt have wonn to fo bry3t, Schatt play wtt þ* alt pis nyjte, (fol. 23b,] CARLE OF CARELYLE. Tytt to-morrowe daye.” To his douztt? chambur he went futt ryjt, And bade her” a-ryse, & go to þ* kny3t, And wern hyme nott to playe ; Sche dorst not a-zenst his byddyng? dofi, But to G. sche cam futt fone, And ftyle doun be hyme laye. * Now G.” q’ pe Carle, © holft p* well payde >” “ 3e, for gode, lorde,” he sayde, “ Ry3t weit as I my3te;” “ Nowe,” q’ þ* Carle, “I woll to chambur? go, My bleffyng’ I geyfe yow bouthe to, And play to-geydor att pis ny3t.” A glad man was fyr Gawen, Sertenly as I yowe fayne, Of pis lady bry3t ; Serten fothely for to fay, So I hope was pat feyr? maye, Of pt genttytt kny3t. “ Mary, mercy !” poujt pt lady bry3te, “ Her come neu’ fuche a kny3t, Of ait that her” hathe befie ;—” Syr Key a-rose vppon p® morrowh, And toke his hors, & wolde a-gofie, Homwarde, as I wenne. “ Nay, f Key,” þ* befchope gan seye, « We! woit not fo wende our’ waye, Tytt we £ G. have fene ;” The Carit a-rofe, of morrow a-nof, And fond his byddynge reddy doune, His dyner” i-dy3t fuit cleyne. To a mas they lett knelle, Syr? G. a-rofe, & went per’ tytt, And kyft pat lady bryjt & cler” ; 1 Ne, MS. 2D [fol. 24. (fol. 24Þ.] SYRE GAWENE AND THE “ Mare, mice !”” feyde pt lady bry3t, “ Uber” I schatt fe enny mor” pis kny3t, That hathe ley my body fo ner” 2” Uhé þ* mese was doune to ende, Syr’ G. toke his leve to wende, And ponkyde hym of his cher? ; “ Furst,” fayde þ* Carle, “3e schalt dynfi, And on my bleffynge wende home fyne, Homward al yn fere?. Hit is xxt. wynt? gof,” fayde pe Karle, © nowe, That god I make a-vowe, Ther’ fore I was fulle fad; Ther” fchulde nev’ man logge i my won”, But he fcholde be flayne, I wys, But he did as I hym bad. But he wolde do my byddynge bowne, He schulde be flayne, & layde a-downe, Whedir’ he wer” lorde or lad’; Fonde I neu’, G. none but the, Nowe gode of heuyfi yelde hit the, Ther” fore I am fulle glade. He yelde p*,” fayde pe Carle, © pt pe dere bouzte ! For al my bale to blyffe is brouzte, Throuze helpe of Mary quene ;” He lade G. yn to a wilfome won”, There as lay x. fodir” of dede mefi bonys, Al yn blode, as I wene; Ther” hynge many a blody ferke, And eche of heme a dyuers marke, Grete doole hit was to fee*. “This slowe I, G. and my helpis, I and alfo my four’ whelpis, For fothe as I the fay ; 1 This line is by a second, but coeval hand. 2 sene? [fol. 25.]; CARLE OF CARELYLE. Nowe wulle I forsake my wyckyd lawys, p” schatt no mo men her’ be slawe, I wys, As fer? forthe as I may. G. for the love of the, Al schal be welcome to me, Þt comythe her? by this way ; And for alle these fowlys I vndirtake, A chauntery her? wul I lete make, x, preftis fyngynge til domys-day.” Be that tyme her? dyner? was redy. dy3te, Tables wer” hovyn’ vp an hy3te, I-keuerid pei were fulle clene ; Syr G. and þ* lady dere, They were i-fuyd bothe i-fer’, Myche myrthe was theme bytwene. Ther” fore pe Carle was futt glade, The byschop & f Kay he bad, Mery pt pei scholde bene ; He 3afe p® bischop to his bleffynge, A cros, a myter, & a rynge, A clothe of golde, I wene; He 3af £ Kay, p* angery knyghit, A blode-rede stede, and a whight, Suche on had he new” fene. He 3af £ G. fothe to fay, His douzter, & a whizte palfray, A somer i-chargid wt golde ; Sche was so gloryous & so gay, I kowde not rekyn here a-ray, So bry3te was alle her? molde! « Nowe ryde forp®, G. on my bleffynge, And grete wel Artyr, þ* is yo kynge, And pray hym pt he wolde ; For his loue pt yn Bedlem was borne, 1 ferth, MS. 2D2 © 555 [fol. 25Þ,] SYRE GAWENE AND THE That he wull dyne wt me to-morne,” G. feyde he fcholde. Then pei rode fyngynge a-way, Wt ps yonge lady on her” palfray, pt was fo fayr? & brygitite ; They tolde kynge Artir wher’ pei had bene, And what wondirs pei had fene, Serteynly in her? fyght. « Nowe thonkyd be god, cofyn Gawyf, pt p" scapift a-lyve vn-flayne, Serteyne, wt alle my mygtit ;’— « And I, f kynge,” fayd £ Kay a-gayne, “That eu? I feapid a-way vn-flayne, My hert was neuyr” fo lyght. pe Carle p’yde you for his love pt yn Bedlé was borne, That ye wolde dyne wt hy to-morne,”— Kynge Art’ fone hym hyght ; In þ* dawnynge forpe pey rade, A ryalle metynge per? was i-made, Of many a ientylle knygitt. Trompettis mette hem at pe gate, Clarions of siluer? redy per’ ate, Serteyne wythoutyn lette ; Harpe, fedylle, and fawtry, Lute, geteroh, & merely, In to þ* halle knyghtis hem fett. The Carle knelyd’ downe on his kne, And welcomyd’ pe kynge wurthyly, Wt wordis ware and wyfe ; When þ* kynge to pe halle was brought, Nothynge per” ne wanty@ nought, That any man kowde deuyfe. The wallys glemyd as any glaffe, Wt dyapir colour” wrou3te hit was, Of golde, asur?, and byfe ; Wet tabernacles was pe halle a-bouzte, [fol.26.] [fol. 26.] CARLE OF CARELYLE. We: pynnacles of golde, sterne and ftoute, Ther? cowde no man hem preyfe. Trompettys trompid vp in grete hete, The kynge lete fey gfce, & wente to mete, And was i-fuyde wt oute lette ; Swannys, fefaitys, & cranys, Partrigis, plouers, and curlewys, Be-fore pe kynge was fette. The Carle feyde to pe kynge, © dothe gladly, Here get ye no nopir’ curtefy, As I vndir-ftonde ;” Wt pat come yn bollys of golde fo grete, Ther was no knyght fat at pe mete, Myght lyfte hem wt his on honde. The kynge swore by feynte Mygtielle, “This dyner” lykythe me as welle, As any pat euyr? Y fonde ;” A dubbyd hym-knyght on the morne, The contre of Carelyle he 3efe hym fone, To be lorde of pat londe. « Her? I make pe, yn pis ftownde, A knyght of pe Table Rownde, Karlyle pi name schalle be ;” On the morne, when hit was day-lyght, Syr G. weddyid’ pat lady bryght, That femely was to fe. Than pe Carle was glade and blythe, And thonkyd pe kynge fele fythe, For fothe as I yow fay ; A ryche fefte had’ he i-dygtit!, That laftyd holy a fortenyght, Wt game, myrthe, and playe. The mynstrellis had yeftys fre, That pey myght pe better be, ' i.dygh, MS. [fol. 27.] SYRE GAWENE AND THE CARLE OF CARELYLE. To spende many a day ; And when pe feste was brouzte to ende, Lordis toke here leve to wende, Homwarde on her? way. : A ryche Abbey þe Carle gan make, To fynge and rede! for goddis fake, In wurschip of our? lady ; In the towne of mery Carelyle, He lete hit bylde ftronge & wele, Hit is a byschoppis fee. And per? yn monkys gray, To rede and fynge tille domys-day, As men tolde hit me; For the men pt he had flayne, I wis,— Jhi Cryste, brynge vs to thy blis, Aboue in heuyfi, yn thy see! AMEN. : redee, MS. (ALS. Douce. fol. 15.] No. II. The Jeaste of Spr Gawayne, * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * And fayde, “TI dreede no threte ; I haue founde youe here in my chase,” — And in hys armes he gan her brace, With kyssynge of mowthes sweete. There Syr Gawayne made such chere, That greate frendeshyp he founde there, With that fayre lady fo gaye; Suche chere he made, and fuche femblaunce, That longed to loue he had her countenaunce, With oute any more delaye. He had not taryed with her longe, But there came a knyght tall and ftronge, Vnto the pauylion he wente ; He founde Syr Gawayne with that lady fayre,— « Syr knyght, thow makest an euyll repayre, That wyll make the shente. Yt ys my doughter that thow lyest by, Thowe hast done me great vyllanye, Amende yt mayst thou nought ; Thou haste greate fortune with that dame, [fol. 15d.) [fol. 16.] THE JEASTE OF SYR GAWAYNE. Tyll nowe neuer man coulde for shame, I see, Syr knyght, that thou hast wrought. Wherefore I see fortune ys thy frynde, But haftely vnto harnes nowe thou wynde,” Than fayed that bolde knyght ; “ Thou hast done me mnche dyfhonoure, And may not amende yt, by Mary floure ! Therefore hastelye the dyght.” Than befpake Syr Gawayne, and thus he fayde, “JT suppose I haue the loue of the mayde, Suche grace on her haue I founde; But and youe be her father deere, Syr, amendes nowe wyll I make here, As I am to knyght-hode bounde. Nowe all forewardes I wyll fullfyll, And make amendes youe vutyll, And lette me pafse quyte ;” “ Naye,” fayed the olde knyght than, « Fyrst wyll we afsaye oure myghtes as we can, Or else yt were a dyspyte.” Nowe fayde Gawayne, “I graunte yt the, Sythe yt none otherwife wyll be, [Here is inserted a drawing.] Nedes muft that nedes fhall ;” He toke hys ftronge horfe by the brydle, And lyghtly lepte in to the faddle, As a knyght good and royall. He toke a spere that was greate and ftronge, And forthe he wente, a large furlonge, And turned hys horfe with mayne ; They feutred theyr speares, these knyghtes good, And russhed together with eger moode, Aboue on the mountayne. Gawayne smotte thys knyght so foore, That hys horse with strenght he ouerthrewe thore, And on the grounde he laye vpright ; [fol. 16.] THE JEASTE OF SYR GAWAYNE. 209 Syr Gawayne turned hys horfe agayne, And sayde, © syr knyght, wyll ye any more fayne?” “ Naye,” he fayed, for he ne myght. «I yelde me, Syr knyght, in to thy hande, For thou arte to ftyffe for me to ftande, 60 My lyfe thou graunte me ;” “On thys couenaunte,” Syr Gawayne fayde, “That ye do no harme vnto the mayde, I am a-greed that yt so be. Alfo ye shall swere on my fwerde here, 65 That none armes agaynst me ye fhall beare, Neyther to daye nor to nyght ; And then take your horfe, and wende your waye, And I fhall do the beft that I maye, As I am a trewe knyght.” 70 There thys knyght fware, and dyd pafse, Syr Gylbert called he was, A ryche earle, styffe and! stoure ; He fayde, © Syr knyght, take good kepe, For better fhalt thou be afsayled or thou flepe, 75 With many a sharpe shoure.” Than fayd Gawayne, “I beleue right well, Whan they come, youe fhall here tell Howe the game fhall goo; I am nowe here in my playnge, 80 I wyll not go awaye for no threatynge, Or that I will feele more woo.” Than Syr Gylberte wente hys waye, Hys horfe was gone downe the valaye, On foote he must hym abyde ; 85 He yode downe, without wordes more, The ftrokes greaued hym full foore, That bated muche hys pryde. i Syr Gawayne had fmytten hym in the f HERESY ‘in? [fol. 17.] & THE JEASTE OF SYR GAWAYNE. After hys walkynge the blode out shade, He rested hym vnder a tree ; He had not rested hym but a lyttell space, But one of hys fonnes came to that place, Syr Gyamoure called was he. « Father,” he fayde, © what ayleth youe nowe ? Hathe any man in thys forrest hurte youe ? Me thynke full faste ye blede ;” < Yea, fonne,” he fayde, © by goddes grame ! A knyght hath done me spyte and shame, And lost I haue my {tede. Alfo he hath layne by thy syster, by the rode! That greueth me more than fhedynge of my blode, And the defpyte was well more; And he hath made me to sweare, That to daye none armes fhall I beare, A-gaynst hym, by goddes ore !” « Father, nowe be of good chere, And I shall rewarde hym, as ye shall here, As I am a trewe knyght! He shall beate me, or I shall beate hym, I shall hym beate be he neuer fo grymme, And hys death to-dyght.” “Lett be, fonne Gyamoure, nowe I the praye, Thou fpeakest more than thou maye, That shalt thoue feele soone ; There fhalt thoue mete with a knyght ftronge, That wyll paye hys lyueray large and longe, Or thy iovrney be all done.” OWE farewell, father,” Gyamoure fayde, He toke the waye to hys fyster the mayde, As fast as he myght on the gate; Vnto the pauylion he toke the waye, There as Syr Gawayne and hys fyster laye, That thought on no debate. [fol.17>. [fol.18.] THE JEASTE OF SYR GAWAYNE. “ A-ryfe,” he fayed, “ thou knyght ftronge of hande, And geue me battaylle on thys lande, Hye the fast anone right ; Thou hast hurte my father to-daye, And layne by my fyster, that fayre may, Therfore thy deathe ys dyght.” Than fayde Gawayne, “though yt be fo, A-mendes I wy]ll make or that I goo, Yf that I have mysdone ; l Betier yt ys nowe to accorde right, Than we two nowe in battayll shulde fyght, 'Thet fore go from me soone.” “ Nay,” fayed Gyamoure, “ that shall not bee, That daye, knyght, shalt thow neuer see, For to suffer suche a skorne ; A-ryse in haste, and that anone, For with the wyll I syght alone, As god lett me be borne !” Gawayne fawe no better bote, And wyghtelye he lepte on foote, Hys horfe was fast hym bye ; In to the faddle wightelye he fprente, And in hys hande hys fpeare he hentte, [Here is inserted a drawing.] And loked full egerlye. Eyther turned hys horfe than a-waye, A furlonges lenght, I dare well faye, Aboue on the mountayne ; They ranne together, thofe knightes good, That theyr horfes fydes ranne on bloode, Eyther to other, certayne. What nedeth nowe more tale to tell ? Gawayne fmotte hym with hys fpeare fo well, That he fell flatte to the grounde ; Hys horfe was fyers, and went hys waye, And hurte was the knyght there as he laye, (fol. 18>] THE JEASTE OF SYR GAWAYNE. Syc Gawayae asked hym in that ftounde. « Syr knight, wyll ye any more >” « Naye,” he fayde, “ I am hurte fo fore, I maye not my felfe welde ; I yelde me, fyr knyght, and faue my lyfe, For with the I wyll no more stryffe, For thowe hast wonne the felde.” “ Syr, on thys couenaunte I the graunte, So ye wyll make me faythe and warraunte, To-daye agaynst me no armes to beare ; Sweare thys othe on my fwearde bright.”— “ Yes,” he sayde, “I wyll, as I am trewe knight, That thys daye I wyll not youe deare. Nowe fare well, knyght, fo god me amende! For I fee fortune ys thy greate frende, That sheowith in the to-daye ; There ys no bote to ftryde! agayne, For thou arte a knyght full ftronge of mayne, Fare well, and haue good daye.” Thus Gyamoure wente downe the mountayne hye, On foote he wente full werelye, Hys father foone hym fpyed ; “A! wellcome,” he fayed, “my sonne Gyamoure, Me thynke thou hast not spede well thys stoure, That full well I fee thys tyde. Thou went on horfe-backe, lyke a good knyght, And nowe I fee thou arte dolefully dyght, That maketh all my care ;” “ Father,” he fayde, “yt wyll none otherwise be, Yonder knyght hath wonne me in warre fo fre, And hathe wounded me full fore. Forfothe,” fayde Gyamoure, © I wyll not lye, He ys a ftronge knyght, bolde and hardye, Of Arthures courte I trowe he ys ; | ftryve? (fol. 19.] THE JEASTE OF SYR GAWAYNE. I suppose on of the Rounde Table, For at nede he ys both stronge and hable, So haue I founde hym, withouten myfse.” Right fo as they fpake the one to the other, There came to them the feconde brother, Syr Tyrry was hys name; He came rydynge on a iolye courfyer, Dryvinge by leapes, as the wylde fyer, The knyght was of good fame. He was not ware of hys father deare, But hys brother called hym neare, And fayde, “ Syr, nowe abyde ;” He than turned hys horse, that knyght so gaye, By leapes out of straye, Hys hearte was full of pryde. Than founde he hys father all blodye, And hys brother was wounded fyckerlye, In hys hearte he began to be syke : “ A! syr, who hath wounded youe ?” quod he, « A-venged on hym nowe wyll I be, That fhall hym myflyke.” “T wys, fonne, yt ys a knyght stronge, That hath done vs thys wronge, Aboue on the mountayne ; He hath me wounded pafsynge foore, And I trowe thy brother he hathe well more, And by thy syster he hathe layne. Therfore go nowe, as a knyght good, And auenge the fhedynge of thy fathers blood, As faste as euer thou maye; Loke that thou fayle not for no cowardyfe, But mete hym in the myghtyest wyfe, For he ys good at a-faye.” “T fee well, father, he ys a knyght ftronge, But he hathe done youe greate wronge, Yt woulde be harde hym to wynne; 214 THE JEASTE OF SYR GAWAYNE. But neuer the later I shall do my myght, 230 Hys strenght assaye nowe I shall in fyght, Yf he were of the deuyls kynne.” HYS knyght Sys Terzy turned hys horse, And vp the mountayne he rode with force, As fast as he myght dryue; - 235 He came to the pauylion, with greate pryde,— * Haue done, syr knyght, thy horse hefuryde, For with the I am at ftryue.” Syz Gawayne loked out at the pauylyon doore, And fawe thys knyght armed hym before, 240 To hym he fayed verelye; “Sy, yf I haue ought to youe offended, [fol.19.] IT am ready to make yt to be amended, By mylde mother Marye !” « Naye, Syr knyght, yt maye not fo »., 245 Therfore make the ready faste to me, In all the haste that thou maye; For be god that me dere bought, Make a-mendes mayest thou nought, Therfore nowe lett vs playe.” Gawayne sawe none other bote than, Hys horse he toke as a worthye man, And into the saddle he fprente ; He toke hys horse with a greate randone,— «“ Nowe, Syr knyght, lette me haue done, 255 What in youre hearte ys mente.” “Lo! here I am,” fayde Syr Terrye, “ For to the I haue greate enuye,” And together gan they dafshe; . They rufshed to-gether with fuche debate, 260 That marueyll yt was howe that they fate, They gaue fuche a crafshe! Syr Terrye fpake in that place, And Gawayne fought faste in that race, [fol.20.] [fol. 20. THE JEASTE OF SYR GAWAYNE. And throughe the sholder hym pyght; And caste hym ouer the horse backe, That in the earth hys helme stacke, That nyghe hys death he was dyght. Syr Gawayne than fayed on hyght, “ Syr knyght, wyll ye any more fyght ?” He aunfwered hym, © naye, I am fo foore hurte I may no more stande, Therfore I yelde me in to thy hande, Of mercye I the praye.” [Here is inserted a drawing.] «© What,’ sayde Gawayne, © ys that youre boast greate ? I wende youe woulde haue foughten tyll ye had fweate, Ys youre ftrenght all done ?” “Yea, fyr, in fayth, fo god me nowe save! Of me thou mayste no more craue, For all my myght ys gone. Thou haste to-day wonne thre knyghtes, The father, and two fonnes, that well fyghtes, Worthy pfullye vnder thy fhyelde ; And yf thou maye wynne our eldest brother, I call thee the best knyght, and none other, That euer fought in fyelde. For he ys full wyght, I warne youe welle, He endureth better than! doth the fteele, And that fhalte thou foone fee ; But he be thy matche I can not knowe, Of knyghthode thoue haste no felowe, On my fayth I enfure thee.” « Nowe,” quod Gawayne, © lette hym be, And, Syr knyght, make an othe to me, Yt ys daye thou do me no greue ; And thou fhalt pafse fro me all quyte, Where as ys nowe thy moste delyght, ' that, MS. THE JEASTE OF SYR GAWAYNE. With oute any moore repreue.” Syr Terrye sayde, © therto I graunte, Fare well nowe, God be thy warrante,”— Full weykelye he wente on foote ; He lefte neuer tyll he came there, Where as hys father and Gyamoure were, That carefull heartes had, god wote. Than befpake Gyamoure, hys yongest brother, “ Syr, thou hast gotten as we haue, and non other, That knewe I well yt fhoulde fo be ;” “By god!” fayde Syr Terrye, © so nowe yt ys,’ He ys a deuyll, forfothe ywys, And that ys proued on me.” « Yea,” quod Syr Gylbart, that Earle fo olde, “ He ys a knyght bothe ftronge and bolde, And fortune ys hys frende ; My doughters loue he hath clene wanne, Therfore I dare well faye he ys a manne, Where euer that he wende.” As they thre ftode thus talkynge, {fol. 21.] They hearde a manne full loude fynge, That all the woode ronge ; — “That ys my fonne Brandles fo gaye, Whan he feeth vs in fuche araye, He wyll leaue hys fonge.” By than they fawe the knight comynge, A grene boughe in hys hande he dyd brynge, Syttynge on a ioylye courfyere ; Hys horfe was trapped in redde veluett, Many ouches of golde theron was fette, Of knyghthode he had no peere. Alfo hys horfe was armed before, The headde and the brest, and no more, And that in fyne fteele ; Hym felfe was armed pafsynge fure, In harneys that woulde ftrokes endure, THE JEASTE OF SYR GAWAYNE. 217 That had bene proued right wele. . Thys knyght bare on hys hedde a pomell gaye, 335 Syttynge on hys horfe, ftertynge oute of the waye, By leapes he came aboute ; A fhyelde he had, that was of renowne, He bare theryn a blacke fawcowne, The fhyelde was of syluer withoute. 340 Alfo in hys hande a fpere he bare, Bothe ftronge and longe, I make youe ware, And of a truftye tree ; There was an headde theron of fteele wrought, The beft that myght be made or bought, 345 And well afsayed had be. Theron of pleasaunce a kercheyf dyd honge, I wote yt was more than thre elles longe, Enbrodered all withe golde ; (fol.21Þ.] He was a knyght of large and lenght, 350 And proued well of muche ftrenght, Afsaye hym who fo woulde. Spurres of golde alfo he had on, And a good fwerde, that wolde byte a-bone, Thus came he dryuynge; 355 Tyll he came there as hys father was, Whan he all fawe, he fayde, “alas! [Here is inserted a drawing.] [fol. 22.] Thys ys an euyll tydynge.” Whan he fawe hys father all blodye, And hys two brethern hurte full fyckerlye, 360 « Alas!” fayde Brandles than, « Who hath done youe suche a dyspite ? Tell me in haste, that I maye yt quyte, For my hearte ys wo begone.” Than faide the father, © sonne, I shall the tell, 365 All thys hathe done a knyght full fell, And layne by thy syster also; He beete me fyrst, and them all, 2 F [fol. 22Þ.] THE JEASTE OF SYR GAWAYNE. And made vs swere that we ne shall, Thys daye do hym no wo.” Nowe faide Brandles, “thys ys yll come, I enfure youe by my holydome, I fhall proue hys myght ; Were he as stronge as Sampson was, In fayth shall I neuer from hym pas, Tyll the one of vs to death be dyght.” « Yea, fonne Brandles, thou shalt not foo, Thoughe he haue done wronge, lett hym goo, The knyght ys passynge sure ; I wyll not for more than I wyll sayne, See the, Syr Brandels, there flayne, For I warraunte the he wyll endure. The knyght ys stronge, and well fight can, And when he hathe at hande a man, He wyll do hym none yll; But gentle wordes fpeake agayne, And do hym no harme ne mayne, Thus gentyll he ys in fkyll.” es N OWE lette hym be,” sayde Brandles than, “ Sone shall we fee yf he be a manne,” And fayed © haue good daye ;” Streyght to the pauylyon he rode, That fawe the mayden as fhe ftode, That yt was her brother gaye. “ Syr knyght,” fhe fayde, “here cometh one, Yt wyl be harde hym to ouergone, Beholde nowe and fee ; Yonder cometh one wyll dure in fyght, I warraunte ye fawe neuer a better knight, Than ye fhall fynde hym, fyckerlye. Beholde nowe my brother, Syr Brandles, He ys in warre full slye, y-wys, And that thowe fhalt fynde ; [fol. 23.] THE JEASTE OF SYR GAWAYNE. Me thynke hym passynge lyke a knyght, Haue no drede ye shall fynde hym wight, Nowe vnder thys lynde.” « By god !” fayde Gawayne,'“ he ys full lyke, To abyde a buffette, and to ftryke, And of hys handes a man ; I fawe not or nowe thys yeares thre, A man more lyke a man to be, By god and by Saynt Johan !” Right so Syr Brandles, the knyght gaye, Spake on hyghe, and thus gan saye, “Where arte thou, good Squyer ? Come forthe in haste,” he sayde on hyght, “ For with the will I fyght, A newe game thoue shalt leere. Thou haste done me dysworship greate, And mayst not nowe amendement gette, Yt ys no tyme of peace to speake ;” Syr Gawayne faide, “ Syr, I the praye, Let me make a-mendes, and youe maye, Or thou begynne thys wreke. Syr, and I have ought mysdone, Tell me, and it shalbe amended foone, All gentlenes to fullfyll ; I haue bene be-ftad to daye full foore, Shame yt were to proue me any moore, But here I am at youre wyll.” “Ywys,” quod Brandles, © that ys fothe, But I must nedes holde myne othe, Thou haste done so yll; My father and my brethren thou hast beaten bothe, To accorde with the I were therof lothe, My worshippe to full-fyll.” Nowe sayed Gawayne, © sythe yt ys so, I muste nedes me dryue ther to, Thys daye god lende me grace; 2 F 2 [fol. 23d.] [fol. 24.] THE JEASTE OF SYR GAWAYNE. For my worde shall do none aduauntage, Let vs fee howe well we can outrage, Yf I maye dare ought in thys trace.” “ Gramarcy,” fayde Brandles, © in good faye, Nowe fhall youe fee me make good playe, Of knight-hode thou hast no peere ; I am right gladde thou hast myght, But forye I am we lacke the daye-lyght, But a-mended ys my cheere.” They fought together, thofe knightes good, Throughe theyr haburgeons ran out the redde blode, That pytte yt! was to fee; They fought together with fuche yre, [Here is inserted a drawing.] That after flamed out the fyre, They spake of no mercye. Thus full longe than gan they fyght, Tyll at the laste they wanted lyght, They wyste not what to done ; Than fayde Syr Brandles, that knyght fo gaye, « Syr knyght, we wante lyght of the daye, Therfore I make my mone. Yf we fyght thus in the darke together, Throughe myfhappe the one myght fle the other, And therefore by myne afsent ; Lett vs fweare on oure fweardes bothe, Where that we mete for leyfe or lothe, Yf that we mete in prefent, Neuer to leaue the battayll tyll the one be slayne,” — «I afsent me therunto,” than fayde Gawayne, « And ye wyll that yt fo be ;” Than fayde Syr Brandles, “I may none other do, For fuche promefse I made my father vnto, Therefore thys othe make we. 1 ys, MS. [fol 24D.) 1 moch shame, parde, ed. Petyt. fragm. 2 syr Gawayne, THE JEASTE OF SYR GAWAYNE, I wotte there ys no stroke that thou gauest me, But I shall quyte yt full syckerlye, And thou arte not in my debte ; Full large of lyueray thou arte, Syr knyght, Neuer none that proued fo well my myght, We bene euen as we mette. Lett vs make an othe on our swerdes here, In that place we mete, farre or nere, Kuen there as ether other may fynde ; Kuen fo we shall do the battayle vtterlye,”— «I holde,” fayde Gawayne, “by mylde Marye ! And thus we make an ende.” Syr Gawayne put vp hys swerde than, « Syr knight, be frende to that gentle woman, As ye be gentle knyght ;” “ As for that,” sayde Brandles than, “ She hathe caused to day, ‘pardye, much shame, Yt ys pyttye she hathe her syght.” « Syr knyght,” fayde Gawayne?, © haue good daye, For on foote I haue a longe waye, And? horse were wonders‘ deare ; Some tyme good horfes I haue good wone, And® nowe on foote ‘I muste nedes® gone, God in haste amende my chere !” Syr Gawayne was armed pafsynge heavy, On fote myght he not endure, trewely, Hys knyfe he toke in hande? ; Hys armure good he cutte hym fro, Els on foote myght he not goo, Thus with care was he bande®. [Here is inserted a drawing.] 3 an. + me wonder. 5 But. 6 nedes must 1. 7 honde. s bonde. 22] [fol. 2.] j THE JEASTE OF SYR GAWAYNE. EAUE we nowe of! Syr ‘Gawayne in wo, And speake we more of Syr Brandles tho, When he with hys syster mette ; He fayed, © fye on the harlot stronge ! Yt ys pyttie thou? lyuest fo longe, Strypes harde I wyll the? fette.” He? bete her® bothe backe and fyde, And than woulde he not a-byde, But to hys father ftreight he wentte ; And® he asked” hym how he fared, He fayde, © sonne, for the haue I cared, I wende thou® haddest be? fhente.” Brandles fayde, “ I haue beate my syster, And the knyght, I made hym fweare, Than!° whan we mete a-gayne ; He and I wyll together fyght, Tyll that?! we haue fpended our”? myght, And that one of vs be flayne.” So home they went all foure!® together, And eche of them helped other, As well as they myght go; Than the lady gate her a-waye, They sawe her neuer after that daye, She went wandrynge to and fro. Alfo Syr Gawayne on" hys partye, On foote he went full werylye, Tyll he to the courte came home ; All ‘hys aduentures” he fhewed the kinge, That with thofe foure knyghtes he had fyghtynge, And eche after other alone. 1 Om. 2 that thou. 3 Om. 5 the. 6 Then. 7 axed. 9 ben. 10 That. 1 Om. 13 Om. 14 in. 15 this aduenture. THE JEASTE OF SYR GAWAYNE. 223 And! after that tyme they neuer mette more, Full gladde were thofe knyghtes? therfore, [fol.25°.] So ‘there was? made the ende ;— 535 I praye god geue vs‘ good reste, And thofe that haue harde thys lyttell Jeste, And in hye heauen to® be dwellynge ; And that we all maye®, vpon domes-daye, Come to the blyfse that lasteth aye, 540 Where we maye here thy” Aungels fynge. AMEN. ‘Here endeth the Jeaste of Syr Gawayne®. 1 Om. 2 these partyes. 5 was there. * veal. 5 for to. 6 Om. 7 the. 8 Om. No. III. The Grene Knight. IST, when! Arthur he was K : Le asd He had att all his leading” The broad Ile of Brittaine ; England & Scottland one was, & Wales stood in the same case, The truth itt is not to layne. He driue allyans? out of this Ile, Soe Arthur liued in peace a while, As man? of mickle maine; Kes stronge of their degree, Web of them hyest shold bee, Therof Arthur was not faine. Hee made the Round Table for their behoue, Yt none of them shold sitt aboue, But all shold sitt as one; The K: himselfe, in state royall, Dame Gueneuer, our Queene, wth all, Seemlye of body & bone. 1 wen, MS. 2? allyance, MS. 3 men, MS. THE GRENE KNIGHT. Itt fell againe the Christmase, Many came to yt Lords place, To yt worthye one ; Wrih helme, & head, & brand bright, All y* tooke order of kt, None wold linger att home. There was noe Castle, nor man” free, Y* might harbour yt companye, Their puissance was soe great ; Their tent€ vp they! pight, For to lodge there all yt night, Therto were sett to meate. Messengers there came [&] went, Wrih much victualls, verament, Both by way & streete ; Wine & wildfowle thither was brought, Writ in they spared nought, For gold, & they might itt gett. Now of K: Arthur noe more I mell, But of a venterous kt I will yo" tell, Y* dwelled in the west Countrye ; S' Bredbeddle for sooth he hett, He was a man of mickle might, & Lo: of great bewtye. He had a lady to his* wiffe, He loued her deerlye as his liffe, Shee was both blyth & blee ; Because St Gawaine was stiffe in stowre, Shee loued him priuilye par amour, & shee new’ him see. the, MS, 2 wis, MS, 226 THE GRENE KNIGHT. Itt was Aggteb yt was her mother, Itt was witchcraft, & noe other, Yt shee dealt wth all; x * * * * * * * * * * * * * x x x +! Shee cold transpose kte & swaine, Like as in battaile they were slaine, Wounded both lim & lighth ; Shee taught her sonne the kt alsoe, In transposed likenesse he shold goe, Both by fell & frythe. Shee said, © thou shalt to Arthurs hall, For there great aduentures shall befall, [p. 204.] That euer saw K: or kt, * X* + * * * * * * * * * * X* x * * % 2? All was for her daughters sake, Y* the witch® soe sadlye spake, To her sonne in law the kt. Because $ Gawaine was bold & hardye, & therto full of curtesye, To bring him into her sight. The knight said, © soe mote I thee, To Arthurs court will I mee hye, For to praise thee right ; & to proue Gawaines points 3. & yt be true yt men tell me, By Mary, most of might !” 1 Three lines are here wanting. * Three lines again are missing. 5 they w%, MS. THE GRENE KNIGHT. 227 Earlye soone as itt was day, The kt dressed him full gay, 80 Vmstrode a full good steede ; Helme & hawherke both he hent, A long fauchion, verament, To fend them in his neede. Yt was a jolly sight to seene, 85 When horsse & armour was all greene, & weapon y* hee bare; When y* burne was harnisht still, His countenance he became right well, I dare itt safelye sweare. Y: time at Carleile lay our K: Att a castle of Flatting was his dwelling, In the Forrest of Delamore ; For sooth he rode, the sooth to say, To Carleile he came on Christmas day, 95 Into yt fayre countrye. When he into yt place came, The porter thought him a maruelous groome, He saith, © S*, wither wold yee?” Hee said, © T am a venterous kt. 100 & of yo" K: wold haue sight & other Lo’: yt heere bee.” Noe word to him the porter spake, But left him standing att the gate, & went forth, as I weene ; 105 & kneeled downe before the K : Saith, “in lifes dayes, old or younge, Such a sight I haue not seene. THE GRENE KNIGHT. For yonder att yo" gates right, He saith hee is a venterous kt, All his vesture is greene ;” Then spake the K: proudest in pall}, Saith, © bring him into the hall, Let vs see what hee doth meane.” When the Greene Kt came before the K : He stood in his stirrops strechinge, & spoke wth voice cleere ; &-saith, © K: Arthur, god saue thee, As thou sittest in thy prosperitye, & maintaine thine honor. Why thou wold me nothing but right, I am come hither, a venterous [knight], & kayred thorrow countryes farr ; To proue poynts in thy pallace, Yt longeth to manhood in eu ye case, Among thy Lo*: deere.” The K: he sate? full still, Till he had said all his will, Certein thus can he say ; “ As I am true kt and K: Thou shalt haue thy askinge, I will not say thee® nay. Whether thou wilt on foote fighting, Or on steed-backe iusting, For loue of ladyes gay ; If & thine armor be not fine, I will giue thee pt of mine,”— “ Godamercy Lo:” can he say. 1 all, MS, 2 sayd, MS. 5 thy, MS. [p-205.] THE GRENE KNIGHT. * Here I make a challenging, Among the Lords, both old & younge, Y* worthy beene in weede ; W of them will take in hand, Hee yt is both stiffe & stronge, & full good att need. I shall lay my head downe, Strike itt of, if he can, Writ a stroke to garr itt bleed ; For this day 12 monthe another at his, Let me see who will answer this, A knight y* is doughtye of deed. For this day 12 monthe, the sooth to say, Let him come to me, & feicth! his praye, Rudlye, or ew’ hee blin; Whither he come I shall him tell, The readie way to the Greene Chappell, Yt place I will be in.” The K: att ease sate full still, & all his Lords said but litle, Till he had said all his will ; Vpp stood S" Kay, yt crabbed kt, Spake mightye words yt were of height, Yt were both loud & shrill. “J shall strike his necke in tooe, The head away the body froe,” They? bade him all be still; Saith Kay, © of thy dints make noe rouse, Thou wottest full litle what thou does, Noe good but mickle ill.” 1 fetch? 2 The, MS. THE GRENE KNIGHT. Eche man wold this deed haue done, Vp start St Gawaine soone, Vpon his knees can kneele ; . He said, © yt were great villanye, Wit out yo" put this deede to me, My Leege, as I haue sayd. Remember I am yo" sisters sonne,” The K: said, “I grant thy boone, But mirth is best att meele ; Cheere thy guest, & giue him wine, & after dinner to itt fine, & sett the buffett well.” Now the Grene Kt is set att meate, Seemlye! serued in his seate, Beside the Round Table ; To talke of his welfare nothing he needs, Like a kt himselfe he feeds, Writ long time reasnable. When the dinner itt was done, The K: said to St Gawaine soone, With outen any fable; He said, “ an? yo" will doe this deede, I pray Jesus be yo" speede, This kt is nothing vnstable,” The Greene K* his head downe layd, S' Gawaine to the axe he braid, To strike wth eger will ; He stroke the necke-bone in twaine,- The blood burst out in eu’ye vaine, The head from the body fell. ! Seenlye, MS. 2 on, MS. [p.206.] THE GRENE KNIGHT. The Greene Kt his head vp hent, Into his saddle wightilye he sprent, Spake words both loud & shrill ; Saith, “ Gawaine, thinke on thy couenant, This day 12 monthes see thou ne want, To come to the Greene Chappell.” All had great maruell yt they! see, Yt he spake soe merrilye, & bare his head in his hand ; Forth att the hall dore he rode right, & yt saw both K: and knight, And Lords that were in land. Writ out the hall dore, the sooth to saine, Hee sett his head vp on againe, Saies, © Arthur, haue heere my hand; When soeu’ the kt cometh to mee, A better buffett sickerlye, I dare him well warrand.” The Greene Kt away went, All this was done by enchantment, Y*t the old witch had wrought ; Sore sicke fell Arthur the K: & for him made great mourning, That into such bale was brought. The Q: shee weeped for his sake, Sorry was S™ Lancelott du Lake, & other were dreery in thought ; Because he was brought in great pil, His mightye manhood will not availe, Yt before hath freshlye fought. 1 the, MS. St Gawaine comfort K: and Q: & all the doughtye there be-deene, He bade they! shold be still ; Said, “of my deede I was neu” feard, THE GRENE KNIGHT. Nor yett I am nothing adread, I swere, by St Michaell ! For when draweth toward my day, I will dresse me in mine array, My promise to fullfill ; S”” he saith, “as I haue blis, I wott not where the Greene Chappell is, Therefore seeke itt I will.” The royall Court”, verament, All rought S* Gawaines intent, They thought itt was the best ; They went forth into the feild, Kite y* ware both speare and sheeld, They priked® forth full prest. Some chuse them to justinge, Some to dance, karoll*, & singe, Of mirth they® wold not rest ; All they swore together in fere, Yt and St Gawaine ou?-come were, They® wold bren all the west. Now leaue wee the K: in his pallace, The Greene Kt come home is, To his owne Castle ; His folke frend, when he came home, What doughtye deeds he had done, Nothing he wold them tell. 1 the, MS. * keuell, MS. 2 Couett, MS. 5 the, MS. 3 The priced, MS, 6 the, MS. THE GRENE KNIGHT. Full well he wist in certaine, Yt his wiffe loued S' Gawaine, Yt comelye was vnder kell ; Listen Los & yee will sitt, & yee shall heere the second Fitt, What aduentures St Gawaine befell. 2d. PARTE. The day is come yt Gawaine must gone, Ktes & Ladyes waxed wann, Yt were wth out in yt place; The K: himselfe siked ill, The Q: a swounding almost fell, To yt jarney when he shold passe. When he was in armour bright, He was one of the goodlyest ktes Yt ew’ in Brittaine was borne ; They brought St Gawaine a steed, Was dapple gray, & good att need, I tell, wth outen scorne. His bridle was wth stones sett, Wrib gold & pearle ou’ frett, & stones of great vertue ; He was of a furley kind, His stirropps were of silke of Ynd, I tell yo" this tale for true. 2u [p. 207.] THE GRENE KNIGHT. When he rode ou? the mold, His geere glistered as gold, By the way as he rode; Many furleys he there did see, Fowles by the water did flee, By brimes & bankes soe broad. Many furleys there saw he, Of wolues & wild beasts sikerlye, On hunting hee tooke most heede ; Forth he rode, the sooth to tell, For to seeke the Greene Chappell, He wist not where indeed. As he rode in an euening late, Riding downe a greene gate, A faire Castell saw hee; Y* seemed a place of mickle pride, Thitherward St Gawaine can ryde, To gett some harborrowe. Thither he came in the twylight, He was ware of a gentle kt, The Lo: of the place was hee; Meekly to him St Gawaine can speake, & asked him for K: Arthurs sake, : Of harborrowe I pray thee. ' « T am a far labored knight, I pray yo" lodge me all this'night,” He sayd him not nay; Hee tooke him by the arme, & led nen to me hall, A poore child can hee call, Saith, “ dight well his palfrey.” THE GRENE KNIGHT. Into a chamber they! went; a full great speed, There they! found all thinge readye att need, I dare safelye swere ; Fier in chambers burning bright, Candles in chandlers burning light, To supp they! went full yare. He sent after his Ladye bright, To come to supp wth y* gentle kt, & shee came blythe wth all; Forth she came then anon, Her maide following her. eche one, In robes of rich pall. As shee sate att her supp, . Eu’ more the Ladye clere, St Gawaine shee looked vpon ; When the supp it was done, Shee tooke her maids [euery one, | And to her chamber will gone. He cheered the kt & gaue him wine, & said, “ welcome, by St. Martine! I pray yo" take itt for none ill ; One thing, S', I wold yo" pray, What yo" make soe farr this way, The truth yo" wold me tell. T am a kt, & soe are yee, Yor concell an yo" will tell mee, Forsooth keepe itt I will; For if itt be poynt of any dread, pehance I may helpe att need, Either lowd or still.” 1 the, MS. 2n2 [p.208.] THE GRENE KNIGHT. For his words yt were soe smooth, Had S' Gawaine wist the soothe, All he wold not haue told ; For yt was the Greene Kt, Yt hee was lodged wth that night, And harbarrowe in his hold. He saith, “as to the Greene Chappell, Thitherward I can yo" tell, Itt is but furlonge 3. The Mr of it is a venterous kt, & workes by witchcraft day & night, Writ many a great furley. If he worke wth new’ soe much frauce, He is curteous as he sees cause, I tell yo" sikerlye ; Yo! shall abyde & take yor rest, & I will into yonder forrest, Vnder the greenwood tree.” They plight their truthes to be leele!, Either wth other for to deale, Whether it were siluer or gold; He said, “ we 2. both wilbe, Whatsoeu? God send yo" & mee, To be pted on the mold.” The Greene Kt went on hunting, St Gawaine in the Castle beinge, Lay sleeping in his bed ; Vp rose the old Witche wt® hast thowe?, & to her dauhter can shee goe, & said, “ bee not a-dread.” 1 beleeue, MS. 2 throwe, MS. THE GRENE KNIGHT. 237 To her daughter can shee say, * The man y* thou hast wisht many a day, Of him thou maist be sped; 375 For St Gawaine, yt curteous kt, Is lodged in this hall all night,”— Shee brought her to his bedd. Shee saith, “ gentle kt, awake, & for this faire ladies sake, 380 Yt hath loued thee soe deere; Take her body in thine armes, There is noe man shall doe thee harm,” Now beene they both heere. The Ladye kissed him times 3. 385 Saith, © wth out I haue the loue of thee, My life standeth in dere ;” St Gawaine blushed on the lady bright, Saith, © yo" husband is a gentle kt, By him yt bought mee deare ! 390 To me itt were great shame, If I schold doe him any grame, Yt hath beene kind to mee; For I haue such a deede to doe, Yt I can neyther rest nor roe, 395 Att an end till itt bee.” Then spake y* ladye gay, Saith, © tell me some of your journey, Yor succour I may bee ; If itt be poynt of any warr, 400 There shall noe man doe yo" noe darr, & yee wilbe gou ned by mee. THE GRENE KNIGHT. For heere I haue a lace of silke, It is as white as any milke, & of a great value ;” Shee saith, © I dare safelye sweare, There shall noe man doe yo" deere, When yo" haue it vpon you.” S Gawaine spake mildlye in the place, He thanked the lady, & tooke the lace ; & promised her to come againe ;- The kt in the forrest slew many a hind, Other venison he cold none find, But wild bores on the plaine. Plentye of does & wild swine, Foxes, & other ravine, As I hard true men tell ; S' Gawaine swore sickerlye, - “ Home to yo" owne welcome yo" bee, By him yt harrowes hell ”? The Greene Kt his venison downe layd, Then to S* Gawaine thus he said, “Tell me anon in hight!; What noueltyes yt yo" haue won, For heers plenty of venison”,— St Gawaine said full right. St Gawaine sware by St. Leonard, “ Such as God sends yo" shall haue pt,” In his armes he hent the kt; & there he kissed him times 3. Saith, © heere is such as God sends mee, By Mary, most of might !” 1 heght, MS. [p-209.] THE GRENE KNIGHT. Ew’ priuilye he held the lace, Yt was all the villanye yt eu? was, Prooued by S” Gawaine the gay ; Then to bed soone they! went, & sleeped there, verament, Till morrow itt was day. Then S™ Gawaine soe curteous & free, His leaue soone taketh hee, At the ladye soe gaye; Hee thanked her, & tooke the lace, & rode towards the Chappell apace, He knew noe whitt the way. Ew more in his thought he had, Whether he shold worke as the ladye bade, Yt was soe curteous & sheene ; The Greene Kt rode another way He transposed him in another array, Before as it was greene. As St Gawaine rode ou” the plaine, He hard one high vpon a.mountaine, A horne blowne full lowde ; * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * He looked after the Greene Chappell, He saw itt stand vnder a hill, Couered wth euyes about ; He looked after the Greene Kt, He hard him whett® a fauchion bright, Y* the hills rang about. ! the, MS. 2 Three lines here are wanting. 5 wehett, MS. THE GRENE KNIGHT. The kt spake wth strong cheere, Said, “yee be welcome, S[*] Gawaine heere, It behooueth thee to lowte ;” He stroke, & litle perced the skin, Vnneth the flesh wth in, Then St Gawaine had noe doubt. He saith, “ thou shoutest, why dost thou soe?” Then S* Gawaine in hart waxed throe, Vpon his feete con stand ; & soone he drew out his sword, & saith, “ traitor, if thou speake a word, Thy liffe is in my hand. I had but one stroke att thee, & thou hast had onother att mee, Noe falshood in me thou found ; * X* x * * * x X* * X* x x x * * * x + 1 The kt said, © wtb outen laine, I wend I had St Gawaine slaine, The gentlest kt in this land; Men told me of great renowne, Of curtesie thou might haue woon the crowne, Aboue both free & bound. & alsoe of great gentrye, & now 3 poynte be put for thee, Itt is the moe pittye ; S' Gawaine, thou wast not leele, When thou didst the lace conceale, Yt my wiffe gaue to thee. 1. Three more lines are apparently deficient here. THE GRENE KNIGHT. For wee were both wist full well, For thou hadst the halfe dele, Of my venerye ; If the lace had neu? beene wrought, To haue slaine thee was neu? my thought, I swere, by God verelye! I wist it well my wiffe loued thee, Thou wold doe me noe villanye, But nicked her wth nay; But wilt thou doe as I bidd thee, Take me to Arthurs court wth thee, Then were all to my pay.” Now are the kes accorded thore, To the Castle of Hutton can they! fare, To lodge there all yt night ; Earlye on the other day, To Arthurs court they! tooke the way, Wyi# harts blyth & light. All the court was full faine, Aliue when they saw St Gawaine, They thanked God abone ; Yt is the matter & the case, Why kts of the Bathe weare the lace, Vntill they haue wonen their shoen. Or else a Ladye of hye estate, From about his necke shall it take, For the doughtye deeds yt hee hath done ; It was confirmed by Arthur the K: Thorrow St Gawaines desiringe, The K: granted him his boone. i the, MS. 242 THE GRENE KNIGHT. (p-210.] Thus endeth the tale of the Greene Kt, God yt is soe full of might, To heauen their soules bring ; Yt haue hard this litle storye, Yt fell sometimes in the west Countrye, In Arthurs days our king. FINIS. [p. 38.] No. IV. The Turke and Gowin, ISTEN lords, great & small, What adventures did befall, In England where hath beene ; Of knights that held the Round Table, Web were doughty & profitable, Of kempys cruell & keene. All England, both East & Weft, Lords & ladyes of the best, They busked & made them bowne ; & when the king fate in feate, Lords served him att his meate, Into the hall a burne there taite?. He was not hye, but he was broad, & like a Turke he was made, Both legg & thye ; & faid, “is there any will, as a brother, To give a buffett & take another, & iff any foe hardy bee?” | 1 Sic MS. [p. 39.] THE TURKE AND GOWIN. Then fpake S™ Kay, that crabbed kt, & said, © man, thou seemest not foe wight, If thou be not adread ; For there beene k** wth in this hall, W* a buffett will garr thee fall, & grope thee to the ground. Gine thou be never foe ftalworth of hands, I fhall bring thee to the ground, Yt dare I safely sweare ;” Then spake St Gawaine, that worthy knight, Saith, “cozen Kay, thou fpeakeft not right, Lewd is thy anfwere. What & that man want of his witt, Then litle worfhipp were to thee pitt, If thou fhold him forefore ;” Then fpake the Turke wth words thraw, Saith, “ come the better of yo" tow, Though ye be brenne! as bore?.” [Half a page is here torn away. | This buffett thou haft............ Well quitt that it fhall be; And yett I fhall make thee as feard, As ever was man in middlearth, | This court againe ere thou see.” 1 breme ? 2 bord, MS. THE TURKE AND GOWIN. Then said Gawaine, © my truth I plight, I dare goe wth thee full right, & never from thee flye ; I will never flee from noe adventure, Justing, nor noe other turnament, Whilest I may live on lee.” The Turke tooke leave of king wth crowne, S™ Gawaine made him ready bowne, His armor, & his fteed ; They rode northward 2 dayes and more; By then St Gawaine hungred fore, Of meate & drinke he had great need. The Turke wift Gawaine had need of meate, & spake to him wth words great, Lawtinge! uppon hee ; Says, © Gawaine, where is all thy plenty ? Yesterday thou waft ferved wth dainty, & noe? yt thou wold give me. But wth buffett thou did me sore. Therfore thou shalt have mickle care, & adventures shall thou fee ; I wold I had K: Arthur heere, & many of thy fellowes in fere, That behaves® to try mastery.” He led S" Gawaine to a hill foe plaine, The earth opened, & closed againe, Then Gawaine was adread ; | The merke was comen, & the light is gone, Thundering, lightning, snow & raine, Therof enough they had. ! Lawghinge ? 2? none? 3 behoves? [p. 40.] THE TURKE AND GOWIN. Then fpake St Gawaine, & fighed fore, “ Such wether saw I never afore, In noe stead where I have beene ; [Half a page is here wanting.] errr cero noe answere, But only unto mee.” To the Caftle they then yode, St Gawaine light beside his steed, For horfe the Turke had none; There they found chamber, bower, & hall, Richly rayled about wth pale, Seemly to looke uppon. A Bord was fpred wthin that place, All manner of meates & drinkes there was, For groomes that might it againe! ; St Gawaine wold have fallen to yt fare, The Turke bad him leave, for care, Then waxt he unfaine. Gawaine faid, “ man, I marvell have, Y¥* thou may none of these vittells? spare?, & here is foe great plentye ; Yett have I more mervaile, by my fay, That I fee neither man nor maid‘, Woman, nor child foe free ; 1 gaine ? 2 vttells, MS. 3 crave? i may? THE TURKE AND GOWIN. 247 I had lever now att mine owne will, 95 Of this fayre meate to eate my fill, Then all the gold in chriftenty ;” The Turke went forth, & tarryed nought, Meate & drinke he forth brought, Was feemly for to fee. 100 He faid, © eate, Gawaine, & make thee yare, In faith or thou gett victalls more, Thou fhalt both fwinke & fweat ; Fate, Gawaine, & spare thee nought,”— St Gawaine eate as him good thought, : 105 & well he liked his meate. He dranke ale, & after wine, He faith, “I will be att thy bidding baine, Without boft or threat ; But one thing I wold thee pray, 110 Give me my buffett, & let me goe my way, I wold not longer be hereatt.” [Half a page wanting.] [p- 41.) There stood a....... C535 8 Gawaine left behind his steed, He might noe other doe; 115 The Turke said to S* Gawaine, “ He fhalbe here when thou comes againe, I plight my troth to thee.” THE TURKE AND GOWIN. Within an hower, as men tell me, They were failed over the sea, The Turke faid, © Gawaine, hoe! ! Here are we, withouten scath, But now beginneth the great othe, When he shall adventures doe.” He lett him see a castle faire Such a one he never saw yare, Noe where? in noe country ; The Turke faid to S™ Gawaine, “ Yonder dwells the K: of Man, A heathen soldan is hee. With him he hath a hideous rout, Of giants strong & stout, & uglie to-looke uppon ; Whosoever had sought farr & neere, As wide as the world were, Such a companye he cold find none. Many aventures thou shalt see there, Such as thou never faw yare, In all the world about ; Thou shalt see a tenisse ball, That never kt in Arthurs hall, Is able to give it a lout; & other adventures there are moe, Wee fhall be affayled ere we goe, Therof have thou noe doute. But & yee will take to me good heed, I fhall helpe yo" in time of need, For ought I can fee ; | | hee, MS. 2 wherin, MS. THE TURKE AND GOWIN. There shall be none fo strong in stower, But I Thall 4 eas cones ens [Half a page wanting.] Ee earn Gawaine...... & stowre, & all his company ; & that Bishopp, S* Bodwine, That will not let my goods alone, But spiteth them every day. He preached much of a crowne of thorne, He shall ban the time yt he was borne, & ever I catch him may ; I anger more att the spiritualty?, In England nor att the temporaltie, They goe foe in theire array. And | purpose, in full great ire, To brenn their clergy in a fire, & punifh them to my pay; Sitt downe, S* Gawaine, at the bord,” — St Gawaine answered at that word, Saith, “nay, thatt may not be. I trow not a venturous kt shall Sitt downe in a kings hall, Adventures or yo" fee ;” The K : said, © Gawaine, faire mot thou? fall ! Goe feitch me forth my teniffe ball, For play will I, and see.” ' spiritually, MS. 2 then, MS. 2k [p. 48.] THE TURKE AND GOWIN. They brought it out, wout doubt, Wrh it came a hideous rout, Of gyants great & plenty ; All the giants were there then, Heire! by the halfe then St Gawaine, I tell yo", withouten nay?. There were ix. giants bold of blood, & all thought Gawaine but litle good?, When they thought wth him to play ; All the giants thoughten then, To have ftrucke out S* Gawaines braine, Help him God, that beft may ! The ball of braffe was made for the giants hand, There was noe man in all England, Were able to............ {Half a page wanting. And fticked a giant in the hall, That gryfly can hee grow? ; The K : fayd, “bray away this axeltree, For such a boy I never see, Yett he shalbe aflayd® better ere he goe. I told yo" foe mote I tho, Wth the 3 adventure, & then no more, Be for me at this tide.” Then there stood amongst them all, A chimney in the® Ks hall, W* barres mickle of pride ; 1 2. e, higher; heires, MS. 2 may, MS. + grone? 5 affayd? 3 goods, MS. ° they, MS. sp. 44.] THE TURKE AND GOWIN. There was laid on in that stond?, Coales & wood that cost a pound, That upon it did abide. A giant bad Gawaine affay, & said, © Gawaine, begin the play, Thou knoweft beft how it fhold be ; & afterwards when thou haft done, I trow yo" fhalbe anfwered foone, Either wth boy or me.” A great giant, I understand, Lift up the chimney wth his hand, & sett it downe againe fairly. St Gawaine was never foe adread, Sith he was man on midle-earth, & cryd on God in his thought ; Gawaine unto his boy can fay, “ Lift this chimney, if yo" may, Yt is foe worthily wrought.” Gawaines boy to it did leape, & gatt itt by the bowler great, & about his head he it flang ; 35 about his head he it fwang, Yt the coales & the red brands, [Half a page wanting. | BES uid aca ae EY of mickle might, & strong were in battell. | stone, MS. 2k 2 THE TURKE AND GOWIN. I have slaine them thorrow my mastery, & now, Gawaine, I will slay thee, & then I have slaine all the flower ; There went never none againe no tale to tell, Nor more shalt thou, thoe thou be fell, Nor none that longeth to K: Arthur.” The Turke was clad inviffible gay?, No man cold see him, withouten nay, He was cladd in fuch a weede ; He heares their talkings, leffe & more, & yet he thought they shold find him there, When they shold do that deed. Then he led him into a steddie?, Wher as® was a boyling leade, & welling uppon hie ; & before it a giant did ftand, Wrihb an iron forke in his hand, Yt hideous was to fee. The giant yt looked foe keene, Yt before St Gawaine had never feene, Noe where in noe country ; The K: faid to his giant thoe, « Here is none but wee tow, Let fee how beft may bee.” When the giant faw Gawaines boy there was, He leapt, &.threw, & cryed alas! Yt he came in that stead; St Gawines boy to him lept, & wi® strenght up him gett, & caft him in the lead. 1 in inviffible gray ? 2 8tede ? 3 werhas, MS. sp. 45.] THE TURKE AND GOWIN. W'» an iron forke made of fteele, He held him downe wonderous weele, Till he was fcalded to the dead; Then St Gawaine unto the K: can fay, « Wibout thou wilt agree unto our law, Eaten 1s all thy bread.” The K : fpitt on Gawaine the kt, W* yt the Turke hent him upright, & into the fyer him flang ; & said to St Gawine, at the last, “ Noe force, Mr’, all the perill! is past Thinke not we tarried too longe.” [Half a page wanting.] He tooke forth a bafon of gold, As an Emperour was he fhold, As fell for his degree. He took a fword of mettle free, Saies, “if ever I did any thing for thee, Doe for me in this ftead ; Take here this sword of fteele, That in battell will bite weele, Therwith ftrick of my head.” « Yt I forefend,” said S" Gawaine, « For I wold not have thee flaine, For all the gold foe red ;” « Have done, S" Gawaine, I have no dread, But in this bason let me bleed, Yt standeth here in this stead. pill, MS. THE TURKE AND GOWIN. And thou shalt see a new play, Wrh helpe of Mary, yt mild mayd, Yt faved us from all dread ;?— He drew forth the brand of steele, That in battell bite wold weele, & there stroke of his head. And when the blood in the bafon light, He stood up a stalwortht kt, Yt day, I undertake ; & fong Te deum laudam’s, “ Worshipp be to our lord Jesus, That faved us from all wracke ! A! 8" Gawaine, bleffed thou be, For all the service I have don thee’, Thou haft well quitt it me ;” Then he tooke him by the hand, & many a worthy man they fand, Yt before they never? fee. He faid, “ St Gawine, witouten threat, Sitt downe boldly at thy meate, & I will eate wth thee; Ladyes all, be of good cheere, Eche ane shall wend to his owne deer, In all hast that may be. First we will to K: Arthurs hall, & soone after yo" husbands send we shall, In country where they beene ; [Half a page wanting.] 1 there, MS. 2 neve, MS. [p. 46.] THE TURKE AND GOWIN. Thus we have brought 17 ladys cleere, Y* there were left in great danger, & we have brought them out.” Then sent they for theire husbands swithe, & every one tooke his owne wife, & lowlye can they lowte ; And thanked the 2 kt* & the K: & said they! wold be at theire bidding, In all England about. St Gromer kneeld upon his knee, Saith, “St K: & your? wilbe, Crowne Gawaine K: of Man ;” S™ Gawaine kneeled downe by, & faid, “lord, nay not I, Give it him, for he it wan. For I never purpofed to be noe K: Never in all my livinge, Whileft I am a living man ;” He said, © St Gromer, take it thee, For Gawaine will never K : bee, For no craft that 1 can.” Thus endeth the tale that I of meane, Of Arthur & his knights keene, Yt hardy were & free; God give them good life, far and neere, That fuch talking loves to heere, Amen, for Charity! Fin[1]s. 1 the, MS. » yo", MS. [p. 448.] [p. 449.] No. V. Carle off Carltle. ISTEN to me a litle stond, Yee shall heare of one yt was sober & found; Hee was meeke as maid in bower, Stiffe & strong in every stoure. Certes, witouten fable, He was one of the Round Table ; The kts name was S' Gawaine, Yt much worfhipp wan in Brittaine. The Ile of Brittaine called is, Both England & Scottland, I wis ; Wales! is an angle to y* Ile, Where K: Arthur foiorned awhile. Wrb him 24 kts told, Befids Barrons & Dukes bold; The K: to his Bifhopp gan fay, “ Wee will have a Maffe to day. Bishop Bodwin* shall itt done, After to the fairest wee will gone ; For now its grafs time of the yeere, Barrons bold fhall breake the deere. 1 Vales, MS. * Bodwim, MS. CARLE OF CARLILE. Faine theroff was St Marroche, Soe was S Kay the kt stout ; Faine was S* Lancelott Du Lake, Soe was S¥ Percivall, I undertake. Faine was S' Ewaine, & & Lott of Lothaine ; Soe was the Kt of armes greene, & alfoe St Gawaine the fheene. S'™ Gawaine was steward in Arthurs hall, Hee was the curteous kt amongft them all; K: Arthur, & his cozen Mordred, & other kts wtbouten lett. St Lybius Disconyus was there, Wt proud archers, leffe & more ; Blanch Faire, & S™ Ironside, & many kts yt day can ryde. & Ironside, as I weene, Gate the knight of armour greene ; Certes, as I underftand, Of a faire lady of Blaunch-Land. Hee cold more of honor in warr, Then all the kts yt wth Arthur weare ; Burning dragons he flew in land, & wilde beafts, as I underftand. Wilde beares he flew y* stond, A hardyer kt was never found ; He was called in his dayes, One of K: Arthurs fellowes. CARLE OF CARLILE. Why was hee called Ironfyde, For ever armed wold he ryde; Hee wold allwais armes beare, For gyants & hee were ever att warr. Dapple coulour was his steede, His armour, and his other weede ; Azure of gold he bare, W* a griffon, leffe or more. & a difference of a molatt, He bare in his creft-algate ; Wherefoever he went, eaft nor weft, He nev’ forsooke man nor beast. Beagles keenely away they! ran, The K: followed affter, wit many a man; The? grayhounds out of the leefhe, They drew downe the deere of graffe®. Fine tents in the feild were fett, A merry fort there were mett ; Of comely k's of kind, Uppon the bent there can they lend‘; & by noone of the fame day, A 1004 harts on the ground they® lay ; Then St Gawaine & St Kay, & Bifhopp Bodwin, as I heard fay ; After a redd deere they® rode, Into a foreft, wyde & brode. 1 the, MS. 2? they, MS. 3 grese ? * lead, MS. 5 the, MS. 5 the, MS. [p. 450.] CARLE OF CARLILE. A thicke mist fell them among, Yt caised them all to goo wronge ; Great moane made then S* Kay, Y* they shold loose the hart yt day. Yt red hart wold not dwell, — Hearken what adventures them beffell ; Full fore they? were adread, Ere they? any lodginge had. Then spake St Gawaine, “ This labour wee have had in vaine ; This red hart is out of fight, Wee meete wth him no more this night. I rede? wee of our horffes do light, & lodge wee heere all this night ; Truly itt is beft, as thinketh mee, To lodge low under this tree.” “ Nay,” said Kay, © go wee hence anon, For I will lodge wherforre® I come; For there dare no man warne me, Of whatt estate foever hee bee.” « Yes,” said the Bishopp, © yt wott I well, Here dwelleth a Carle in a castell ; The Carle of Carlile is his name, I know itt well, by St Jame ! Was there nev’ man yett foe bold, Yt durft lodge within his hold; But & if hee staye w* his liffe away, Hee ruleth him well, I yo" fay.” 1 the, MS. * wede, MS. 3 whersoever ? CARLE OF CARLILE. Then faid Kay, © all in fere, To goe thither is my defire ; For & the Carle be never foe bolde, I thinke to lodge within his hold. For if he iangle, & make itt stout, I shall beate the Carle all about ; & T shall make his bigging bare, & doe to him mickle care. & I shall beate [him], as I thinke, Till he both sweate & ftinke ;” Then faid the Bifhopp, “fo mote I fare, Att his bidding I wilbe yare!”? Gawaine said, “ lett be thy boftlye fare, For thou doft ever waken care; If thou scape? with thy liffe away, Thou ruleth thee well, I dare fay.” Then faid Kay, “that pleafeth mee, Thither let us ryde all three ; Such as hee bakes, fuch fhall hee brew, Such as hee fhapes, fuch fhall hee few. Such as he breweth, such shall he drinke,”— « Yt is contrary,” said Gawaine, “as I thinke ; But if any faire speeche will he® gaine, Wee shall make him Lord w**in his owne. If noe faire speech will avayle, Then to karp on, Kay, wee will not faile ;” Then faid the Bifhopp, “ yt tenteth mee, Thither lett us ryde all three.” 1 ftape, MS. CARLE OF CARLILE. When they came to the Carles gate, A hammer they found hanging theratt ; Gawaine hent the hammer in his hand, & curteouslye on the gates dange. Forth came the Porter, wth still fare, Saying, © who is foe bold to knocke there ?” Gawaine answered him curteouslye, « Man,” hee said, © that is I. Wee be 2 kts of Arthurs inn, & a Bishopp, no moe to min; Wee have rydden all day in the forreft still, Till horffe & man beene like to fpill. For Arthurs fake, yt is our kinge, Wee defire my Lo: of a nights lodginge ; & harborrow till the day at morne, Y* wee may scape! away without scorne.” Then spake the crabbed kt St Kay, “ Porter, our errand I reede the fay ; Or elfe the caftle gate wee fhall breake, & the keyes thereof to Arthur take.” The Porter fayd wth words throe, “Theres no man alive, yt dares doe foe; If? a 1009 such as thou his death had fworne, Yett he wold ryde on hunting to-morne®.” Then answered Gawaine, yt was curteous aye, “ Porter, our errand I pray thee fay ;” Yes,” said the Porter, © witouten fayle, I shall fay yo" errand full well.” ! stape, MS. 2 Of, MS. 3 to-mornes, MS. [p- 451.] CARLE OF CARLILE. As foone as the Porter the Carle fee, Hee kneeled downe upon his knee ;— “ Yonder beene 2 kt5 of Arthurs in, & a Bifhopp, no more to myn. They have roden all day in the forreft ftill, Yt horffe [and] man is like to spill; They defire yo" for Arthurs fake, their K: To grant them one nights lodginge ; & herberrow till the day att morne, Yt they may scape! away wihout fcorne.” “ Noe thing greeves me,” fayd the Carle, © without doubt, But yt the? kts stand foe long without ;” Wib yt the? Porter opened the gates wyde, & the kts rode in yt tyde. Their steeds into the stable are tane, The kts into the hall are gone ; Heere the Carle fate in his chaire on hye, W* his legg cast over the other knee. His mouth was wyde, & his beard was gray, His lockes on his shoulders lay ; Betweene his browes, certaine, Itt was large there a spann. Wh 2 great eyen brening as fyer, Lord! hee was a lodlye fyer ; Over his fholders he bore a bread, 3 taylors yards, as clarkes doe reade. His fingars were like to tedder ftakes, & his hands like breads yt wives may bake; 1 stape, MS. 2? they, MS. CARLE OF CARLILE. 263 50 cubitts he was in height, Lo: he was a lothesome: wight! When St Gawaine yt Carle fee, He halsed' him full curteouflye ; 190 & faith, © Carle of Carlile?, God fave thee, As thou sitteth in thy profperitye |” The Carle said, © as cheif? me fave, Yee fhall be welcome for Arthurs fake ; Yet is itt not my pt to doe foe, 195 For Arthur hath beene ever my foe. He hath beaten my kts & done them bale, & fend them wounded to my owne hall ; Yett the truth to tell I will not leane4, I have quitt him the fame againe.” 200 « Yt is a kind of a knave,” said Kay, © w*out leasing, Soe to revile a noble King ;” Gawaine heard, & made answere, “ Kay, thou fayft more then meete were.” Writ yt they went further into the hall, 205 Where bords were spredd, & covered wth pall ; & 4 welpes of great ire, They found lying by the fire. There was a beare y* did rome, & a bore, y* did whett his tufks fome ; 210 Alfoe a bull, y* did rore, & a lyon, yt did both gape & rore. 1 haltled, MS. 2 Callile, MS. 3 Crist? 4 leave, MS. [p.452.] CARLE OF CARLILE. The lyon did both gape & gren, « O! peace, whelpes,” said the Carle then ; For yt word yt the! Carle did fpeake, The 4 whelpes under the! bord did creepe. Downe came a lady faire & free, & fett her on the Carles knee ; One whiles fhee harped, another whiles fong, Both of paramours & lovinge amonge. « Well were yt man,” said Gawaine, © yt ere were borne, Yt might lye wth yt lady till day att morne ;” « Yt were great shame,” said the Carle free, « Yt thou sholdest doe me fuch villanye.” « Sr,” said Gawaine, © I sayd nought,” — “No, man,” said the Carle, “ more thou thought.” Then ftart Kay to the flore, & faid hee wold fee how his palfrey fore ; Both corne & hay he found lyand, & the Carles palfrey by his fteed did ftand. Kay tooke the Carles palfrey by the necke, & foone he thruft him out att the hecke ; Thus Kay put the Carles fole out, & on his backe he fett a clout. Then the Carle himfelfe hee ftood thereby, And fayd, © this buffett, man, thou shalt aby !” The Carle raught Kay fuch a rapp, Yt backward he fell flatt ; Had itt not beene for a feald of ftraw, Kayes backe had gone in 2. ' they, MS. CARLE OF CARLILE. Then faid Kay, “ & thou were wthout thy hold, Man, this buffett shold be deere sold.” « What !” fayd the Carle, “ dost thou menace me? I fwere by all soules, sikerlye, Man, I fwere further thore, If I heere any malice more, For this one word yt thou hast spoken, Itt is but ernest thou hast gotten.” Then went Kay into the hall, & the Bishopp to him can call ; Saith, © Brother Kay, where have yo? beene ?”?— “To looke my palfrey, as I weene.” Then faid the Bifhopp, “ itt falleth me, Y¥* my palfrey I muft fee ;” Both corne & hay he found lyand, & the Carles palfrey, as 1 understand. The Bifhopp tooke the Carles horffe by the necke, & foone hee thruft him out att the hecke; Thus he turned the Carles fole out, & on his backe he fett a clout. Sais, © wend forth, fole, in the devills way ! Who made the foe bold wth my palfrey 2” The Carle himfelfe he ftood thereby,— « Man, this buffett thou shalt abuy3 ”” He hitt the Bifhopp upon the crowne, Yt his miter & he fell downe; « Mercy,” said the Bifhopp, “I am a clarke, Somewhatt I can of Chrifts werke.” ? yo" have, MS. 3 abay, MS. 2M 266 CARLE OF CARLILE. He faith, © by the clergye I sett nothing, Nor yett by thy miter, nor by thy ringe ; 270 It fitteth a clarke to be curteous & free, By the conning of his clergy.” Wrb yt the Bifhopp went into the hall, & S* Gawaine to him can call; Saith, © brother Bishopp, where have yo" beene ?”— 275 * To looke my palfrey, as I weene.” Then fayd S” Gawaine, © it falleth mee, Yt my palfreye I must needs fee ;” Corne & hay he found enoughe lyand, & the Carles fole by his did stand. 280 The Carles fole had beene forth in the raine, Therof St Gawaine was not faine ; Hee tooke his mantle, y* was of greene, & covered the fole, as I weene. Sayth, © stand up, fole, & eate thy meate, 285 Thy M- payeth for all y* wee heere gett ;” The! Carle himfelfe stood thereby, & thanked him of his curtefye. The! Carle tooke Gawaine by the hand, & both together in the! hall they wend; 290 The Carle? called for a bowle of wine, & foone they fettled them to dine. 70 bowles® in yt bowle were He was not weake yt did itt beare. Then the? Carle sett itt to his chin, 295 & said, © to yo" I will begin.” 1 they, MS. 2 Carles, MS. 3 gallons ? [p.453.] CARLE OF CARLILE. 15 gallons he dranke yt tyde, & raught to his men on every fide. Then the! Carle faid to them anon, “ Sirrs, to supp gett yo" gone ;” Gawaine anfwered the Carle then, “ Sr, att yo" bidding wee will be ben.” “ If yo" be bayne att my bidding, Yo" honor me, witout leafinge ;?— They wafhed all, & went to meate, & dranke the wine yt was foe fweete. The Carle faid to Gawaine anon, « A long fpeare fee thou take in thy hand; Att the buttrye dore? take thou thy race, & marke me well in middeft the face.” A! thought S" Kay, yt y* were I, Then his buffett he shold deer abuy?! “Well,” qt the Carle, “ when thou wilt, thou may, When thou wilt thy strenght assay.” « Well S',” faid Kay, “I said nought,”— « Noe,” said the Carle, © but more thou thought.” Then Gawaine was full glad of yt, & a long spere in his hand he gatt ; Att the buttery dore he tooke his race, & marked the Carle in the middft the face. The Carle saw St Gawaine come in ire, & caft his head under his fpeare ; Gawaine raught the wall fuch a rapp, The fyer flew out, & the fpeare brake. 1 they, MS. 2 doe, MS. 3 a buy, MS, 2m 2 CARLE OF CARLILE. He stroke a foote into the wall of stone, A bolder Barron was there never none; “ Soft,” faid the Carle, “thou was to radd,”— « I did but, St, as yo" me bade.” “Tf thou had hitt me, as thou had ment, Thou had raught me a fell dint.” The! Carle tooke Gawaine by the hand, & both into a chamber they wend; A full faire bed there was fpred, The Carles wiffe therin was laid. The Carle* said, © Gawaine, of curtefye, Gett into this bedd w* this faire ladye ; Kiffe thou her 3°¢ before mine eye, Looke thou doe no other villanye.” The Carle opened the sheetes wyde, Gawaine gott in by the ladyes fyde; Gawaine over he put his arme, Wt yt his flesh began to warme. Gawaine had thought to have made in fare, « Hold!” qt® the Carle, © man, stopp there® ; Itt were greet shame,” qt the* Carle, “ for me, Yt thou sholdest doe me such villanye. But arise up, Gawaine, & goe wt® me, I shall bring thee to a fairer lady then ev’ was shee ;” The? Carle tooke Gawaine by the hand, Both into another chamber they wend, 1 they, MS. 2? Carles, MS. 3 thee, MS. + they, MS. CARLE OF CARLILE, A faire bedd there found they spred, & the Carles daughter therin laid ; Saith, “ Gawaine, now, for thy curtefye, Gett thee to bedd to this faire lady.” The Carle opened the fheetes wyde, St Gawaine gott in by the ladyes fide; Gawaine put his arme over yt sweet thing, “Sleepe, daughter,” fais the Carle, © on my blessing !” The! Carle turned his backe, & went his way, & lockt the dore w* a silver kaye ; On the other morning, when the Carle? rofe, Unto his daughters chamber he goes. “ Rise up, S" Gawaine, & goe wth mee, A marvelous sight I shall lett thee fee ;” The! Carle tooke him by the hand, & both into another chamber they wend. & there they found many a bloody ferke, Web were wrought wit curyous werke ; 1500 dead mens bones® They found upon a rooke att once. “ Alacke |” qth St Gawaine, “ what have bene here ?” Saith, “I & my welpes have flaine all there.” Then S' Gawaine, curteous & kind, He tooke his leave away to wend ; & thanked the! Carle, & the ladyes there, Right as they worthy were ; “ Nay,” faid the Carle, © wee will first dine, & then thou shalt goe w't blessing mine.” 1 they, MS. 2 Carles, MS. 3 a bones, MS. [p. 454.] CARLE OF CARLILE. After dinner, the footh to fay, The Carle tooke Gawaine to.a chamber gay ; Where were hanginge swords a-rowe!, The Carle soone tooke one of tho. & fayd to the kt then, “ Gawaine, as thou art a man, Take this fword, & ftryke of my head,” “Nay,” faid Gawaine, “I had rather be dead. For I had rather fuffer pine & woe, Or ev’ I wold yt deede doe.” The Carle fayd to S* Gawaine, “ Looke thou doe as I thee faine ; & therof be not adread, But fhortly fmite of my head. For if thou wilt not doe itt tyte, Forfooth thy head I will of fmyte ;” To the Carle said S* Gawaine, &« Sir, yo" bidding shall be done.” He stroke the head the body froe, & he stood up a man thoe; Of the height of S" Gawaine, The certaine soothe, witouten laine. The Carle sayd, © Gawaine, God bless thee ! For thou hast deliv’ed mee ; From all falfe? witchcrafft I am deliv’ att the laft. By nigromance thus was I fhapen, Till a kt of the Round Table, 1 swords rowe, MS. 2 halfe, MS. CARLE OF CARLILE. Had wth a sword smitten of my head, If he had grace to doe yt deede. Itt is 40 winters agoe, Since I was tranfformed foe ; Since then none lodged witin this woom?, But I & my whelpes driven them downe, & but if hee did my bidding soone, I killed him, & drew him downe. Every one but only thee, Christ? grant thee of his mercye ! He yt the world made, reward thee this, For all my bale thou hast turned to blisse. Now will I leave yt lawe, There shall no man for me be flawe ; & I purpose for their sake, A chantrey in this place to make ; & 5 preists to sing for aye, Untill itt be doomes-day ; & Gawaine, for the love of thee, Every one fhall bee welcome to mee.” St Gawaine & the young lady clere, The Bifhopp wedded them in fere ; The Carle gave him for his wedding, A ftaffe, miter, & a ringe. He gave St Kay, y* angry kt, A blood-red fteede & a wight ; He gave his daughter, the footh to fay, An ambling white palfrey. 1 woone ? 2 Thrift, MS. CARLE OF CARLILE. The faireft hee was on the mold, Her palfrey was charged wth gold; Shee was foe gorgeous, & foe gay, No man cold tell her array. The Carle comanded S$" Gawaine to wend, & fay unto Arthur our King, & pray him y* hee wold, For his love yt Judas fold, & for his fake yt in Bethelem was borne, If hee wold dine wth him to-morne. St Gawaine fayd the Carle unto, « Forffooth I shall yo" message doe ;” Then they rode finging by the way, Writ the ladye, yt was gay. They were as glad of yt lady bright, As ever was fowle of the day-lyght ; They told K: Arthur where they had beene, & what adventures they had feene. « I thanke God,” fayd the K: © cozen Kay, Y* thou didft on live pt away ;” « Marry !” fayd St Kay againe, “ Of my liffe! I may be faine. For his love yt was in Bethlem borne, Yo" must dine wth the Carle to-morne.” In the dawning of the day they? rode, A merryer meeting was nev’ made ; When they together were mett, Itt was a good thing, I yo" hett. 1 lifte, MS. 2 the, MS. [p.455.] 1 therott, MS. 2 gyttome, MS. 5 has fell, MS. CARLE OF CARLILE. The trumpetts plaid att the gate, Wrib trumpetts of silver theratt?! ; There [was] all manner of minftrelsye, Harpe, gyttorne?, & sawtrye. Into the hall the king was fett?, & royallye in feat was fett ; By then the dinner was readye dight, Tables were covered all on height. Then to wash they wold not blinn, & the feast they can beginn ; There they were mached arright, Every lady against a knight. & minstrells sate in windowes faire, & playd on their instruments cleere ; Minstrells for worshipp at every messe, Full lowd they cry Largesse? ! The Carle bade the K: doe gladlye, « For heere yee gett great curtefye ;” The K: faid, © by St Michaell ! This dinner liketh me full well.” He dubd the Carle a kt anon, He gave him the county of Carlile soone ; & made him erle of all y* land, & after kt of the Table Round. The K: said, “ kt, I tell thee, Carlile shall thy name bee.” 2N + Largneffe, MS. CARLE OF CARLILE. When the dinner was all done, Every kt tooke his leave foone ; To wend forward, foberlye, Home into their owne countrye. He yt made us all w" his hand, Both the fea & the land, Grant us all, for his fake, This falfe world to forfake ; & out of this world when wee fhall wend, To heavens bliffe our foules bringe ; God grant us grace itt may foe bee! Amen! say all, for charitye. FINIS, No. VI. Fragment of the Ballad of King Arthur and the King of Cornwall. [MS. Per- &« OME here my cozen, Gawain, fo gay, oy Pe 24] My fifters fonne be yee ; For yo" fhall fee one of the faireft Round Tables, That ever yo" fee wth yo" eye.” Then befpake [the] Lady Q. Guenever, & thefe were the words faid fhee, «© I know where a Round Table is, thou noble K: Is worth thy Round Table & other fuch 3. The treftle that ftands under this Round Table,” fhe faid, “ Lowe downe to the mould, It is worth thy Round Table, tho" worthy K z Thy halls, & all thy gold. The place where this Round Table stands in, It is worth thy castle, thy gold, thy fee; And all good Litle Britaine,”— « Where may that table be, Lady ?” qtÞ hee, 2N2 [p. 25.] FRAGMENT OF THE BALLAD OF KING © Or where may all that goodly building be?” - “ You shall it seeke,” shee fayd, © till yo" it find, For yo" shall never gett more of me.” Then befpake him noble K: Arthur, Thefe were the words faid hee ; “ Tle make mine avow to God, & alfoe to the Trinity, Tle never fleepe one night, there as I doe another, Till yt Round Table I see; St Marramiles, & S" Trifteram, Fellowes yt ye shall bee. Weele be clad in palmers weede, 5 palmers we will bee ; There is noe outlandifh man will us abide, Nor will us come nye.” Then they rived eaft & they! rived west, | In many a strange country. Then they travelled? a litle further, They saw a battle new sett ; « Now, by my faith,” saies noble K: Arthur, [Half a page is here torn away.| But when he came that castle to, & to the palace gate; Soe ready was ther a proud porter, & met him soone therat. 1 the, MS. « tranckled, MS. of ARTHUR AND THE KING OF CORNWALL. Shooes of gold the porter had on, & all his other rayment was unto the fame ; « Now, by my faith,” faies noble K: Arthur, * Yonder is a minion fwaine.” Then befpake noble K. Arthur, These were the words fays hee, “ Come hither, thou proud porter, I pray thee come hither to me. I have 2 poor rings of my finger, The! better of them Ile give to thee; [To] tell who may be lord of this caftle,” he faies, « Or who is lord in this cuntry >” « Cornewall K:” the porter fayes, “ There is none foe rich as hee ; Neither in Chriftendome, nor yet in heathenneft, None hath foe much gold as he.” & then befpake him noble K: Arthur, Thefe were the words fayes hee, “T have 2 poore rings of my finger, The better of them Ile give thee, If thou wilt greete him well, Cornewall K: & greete him well from me. Pray him for one nights lodging, & 2 meales meate, For his love that dyed uppon a tree ; A bue? ghefting, & 2 meales meate, For his love that dyed uppon a tree. A bue? ghefting, &? 2 meales meate, For his love that was of virgin borne, 1 they, MS. 2 Sic, MS, 3 of, MS. p- 26.] FRAGMENT OF THE BALLAD OF KING & in the morning yt we may scape away, Either without scath or scorne.” 70 Then forth is! gone this proud porter, As faft as he cold hye; & when he came befor Cornewall K: He kneeled downe on his knee. Sayes, “I have beene porter, man, at thy gate, 75 [Half a page is wanting. | hs avin toaenerdelal our Lady was borne, Then thought Cornewall K: thefe palmers had beene in Britt. Then befpake him Cornewall King, Thefe were the words he faid there ; « Did yo" ever know a comely K: 80 His name was King Arthur?” & then befpake him noble K: Arthur, These were the words said hee ; “T doe not know that comly K : But once my felfe I did him fee.” 85 Then befpake Cornwall K: againe, Thefe were the words faid he. Sayes, “7 yeere I was clad & fed, In Litle Brittaine, in a bower; 1 his, MS. [p. 27.] ARTHUR AND THE KING OF CORNWALL. I had a daughter by K: Arthurs wife, It now 38 called my flower ; For K: Arthur, that kindly cockward, Hath none fuch in his bower. For I durft fweare, and fave my othe, Y* fame lady foe bright, That a man yt were laid on his death-bed, Wold open his eyes on her to have fight.” « Now, by my faith,” fayes noble K: Arthur, “& thats a full faire wight !” & then befpake Cornewall [King] againe, & these were the words he said?, “ Come hither, 5 or 3 of my knights, & feitch me downe my steed ; King Arthur, that foule cockeward, Hath none such, if he had need. For I can ryde him as far on a day, As King Arthur can doe any of his on 3. & is it not a pleasure for a K: When he shall ryde forth on his journey ? For the eyes that beene in his head, They? glister as doth the gleed ;?— « Now, by my faith,” says noble King Arthur, [Half a page is wanting.] No body aa an if rer ens But one yt learned to speake. 1 faid he, MS. ? the, MS, FRAGMENT OF THE BALLAD OF KING Then K: Arthur to his bed was brought, A greeived man was hee ; & foe were all his fellowes wth him, From him they! thought never to flee. Then take they did that lodly boome?, & under thrubchandler® closed was hee ; & he was set by K: Arthurs bed-side, To heere theire talke, & theire com’nye. Yt he might come forth, & make proclamation, Long before it was day ; It was more for K: Cornwalls pleafure, Then it was for K: Arthurs pay. & when K: Arthur on his bed was laid, Thefe were the words faid hee ; « Ve make mine avow to God, & alfoe to the Trinity, That Te be the bane of Cornwall kinge Litle Brittaine or ever I fee!” , “Tt is an unadvifed vow,” faies Gawaine the gay, « As ever K: hard make I; But wee yt beene 5 christian men, Of the chriften faith are wee ; & we shall fight against anoynted K: & all his armorie.” & then he spake him noble Arthur, & these were the words said he; * Why, if thou be afraid, S* Gawaine the gay, Goe home, & drinke wine in thine owne country.” ! the, MS. 2 goome ? 3 thrubchadler, MS. [p. 28.] ARTHUR AND THE KING OF CORNWALL. THE 3d. PARTE. And then befpake St Gawaine the gay, And thefe were the words faid hee ; « Nay, seeing yo" have made such a hearty vow, Heere another vow make will I. Tle make mine avow to God, & alfoe to the Trinity ; Yt I will have yonder faire lady, To Litle Brittaine wth mee. Ile hose her hourly to my hurt’, & wth her Ile worke my will ; [Half a page is wanting. | Thefe were the words fayd hee ; « Befor I wold wrestle wt" yonder feend, It is better be drowned in the fea.” And then befpake St Bredbeddle, & thefe were the words faid he; « Why, I will wrestle wth yon lodly feend, God! my governor thou shalt bee.” ! hart? 282 FRAGMENT OF THE BALLAD OF KING Then bespake him noble Arthur, 160 & these were the! words faid he; « What weapons wilt thou have, thou gentle knight, I pray thee tell to me?” He fayes, “Collen brand Ie have in my hand, & a Millaine knife faft be my knee ; 165 & a Danish axe faft in my hands, Y* a sure weapon I thinke wilbe.” Then wth his Collen brand, yt he had in his hand, The bunge of the trubchandler he burft in 3. W: that start out a lodly feend, 170 Wib 7 heads, & one body. The fyer towards the element flew, Out of his mouth, where was great plentie ; The knight ftoode in the middle, & fought, Yt it was great joy to fee. 175 Till his Collaine brand brake in his hand, & his Millaine knife burst on his knee ; & then the Danifh axe burft in his hand firft, Yt a sure? weapon he thought shold be. But now is the knight left without any weapone, 180 & alacke! it was the more pitty ; But a furer weapon then had he one, Had never L: in Chriftentye. & all was but one litle booke, He found it by the fide of the fea. 185 He found it at the fea-fide, Wrucked upp in a floode ; | they, MS. 2 fur, MS. [p- 29.] ARTHUR AND THE KING OF CORNWALL. Our L: had written it wth his hands, & sealed it wth his bloode. [Half a page is wanting.] “That thou doe............ But ly still in that wall of stone; Till I have beene wth noble K: Arthur, & told him what I have done.” And when he came to the Ks chamber, He cold of his curtesie ; Sayes!, © sleep yo", wake yo", noble K: Arthur ? & ever Jesus watch yee!” « Nay, I am not sleeping, I am waking,” These were the words said hee ; “ For thee I have card, how hast thou fared, O! gentle knight, let me see.” The knight wrought the K: his booke, Bad him behold, reede, & fee ; & ever he found it on the backfide of the leafe, As noble Arthur wold wish it to be. & then bespake him K: Arthur, « Alas! thou gentle knight, how may this be, That I might see him in the fame lickneffe, Yt he stood unto thee ?” 1 Saye, MS. [p-30.] FRAGMENT OF THE BALLAD OF KING & then befpake him the Greene Knight, These were the words said hee ; “ If youle stand stifly in the battell stronge, For I have won all the victory.” Then befpake him the K: againe, & these were the words said hee ; <« If we stand not stifly in this battell strong, Wee are worthy to be hanged all on a tree.” Then befpake him the Greene Knight, These were the words said he; Saies, “I doe coniure thee, thou fowle feend, In the fame lickneffe thou ftood unto me.” W* that start out a lodly feend, W* 7 heads, & one body; The fier towarde the element flaugh, Out of his mouth, where was great plenty. The knight stood in the middle....... [Half a page is wanting. | ee ere the fpace of an houre, I know not what they did. And then befpake him the Greene Knight, & thefe were the words faid he ; Saith, “I coniure thee, thou fowle feend, Y* thou feitch downe the fteed yt we fee.” ARTHUR AND THE KING OF CORNWALL. 285 & then forth is gone Burlow-beanie, As fast as he cold hie; & feitch he did that faire steed, 235 & came againe by & by, Then befpake him S™ Marramile, & these were the words said hee; “ Riding of this steed, brother Bredbeddle, The maftery belongs to me.” 240 Marramiles tooke the fteed to his hand, To ryd him he was full bold; He cold noe more make him goe, Then a child of 3 yeere old. He said! uppon him wth heele & hand, 245 W* yard that was foe fell ; “ Helpe! brother Bredbeddle,” says Marramile, “ For I thinke he be the devill of hell.” “ Helpe! brother Bredbeddle,” says Marramile, « Helpe ! for Christs pittye ; 250 For without thy help, brother Bredbeddle, He will never be rydden for? me.” Then befpake him S” Bredbeddle, Thefe were the words faid he; «IT coniure thee, thou Burlow-beane?, 265 Thou tell me how this steed was riddin in his country.” He faith, “ there is a gold wand, Stands in K: Cornwalls ftudy windowe. 1 fayed, 5. e. efsayed ? 2 p’, i. e. pro or per, MS. 5 leane, MS. sp. 31.] FRAGMENT OF THE BALLAD OF KING Let him take that wand in yt window, & strike 3 strokes on that fteed ; & then he will spring forth of his hand, As sparke doth out of gleede.” Then befpake him the Greene Knight, [Half a page is wanting.] A lowd blaft............. & then befpake S* Bredbeddle, To the feend these words said hee ; Says, “I coniure thee, thou Burlow-beanie, The powder-box thou feitch me.” Then forth is gone Burlow-beanie, As fast as he cold hie; & feich he did the powder-box, & came againe by & by. Then S” Tristeram tooke powder forth of yt box, & blent it with warme sweet milke ; & there put it unto the horne, & fwilled it about in that ilke. Then he tooke the horne in his hand, & a lowd blaft he blew ; He rent the horne up to the midft, All his fellowes this they! knew. 1 the, MS. ARTHUR AND THE KING OF CORNWALL. Then befpake him the Greene Knight, These were the words said he; Saies, “I coniure thee, thou Burlow-beanie, Y* thou feitch me the sword that I fee.” Then forth is gone Burlow-beanie, As faft as he cold hie; & feitch he did that faire fword, & came againe by & by. Then befpake him S' Bredbeddle, To the K: thefe words faid he ; * Take this sword in thy hand, thou noble K : For the vowes sake yt thou made Ile give it thee ; And goe ftrike off K: Cornewalls head, In bed where! he doth lye.” Then forth is gone noble K: Arthur, As faft as he cold hye ; & ftrucken he hath K: Cornwalls head, & came againe by & by. He put the head upon a fwords point, [The poem terminates here abruptly.] were, MS. No. VII. Fragment of the Marriage of Str Gawaine. (MS. Per- INGE Arthur lives in merry Carleile, To ia And seemely is to see ; And there he hath wth him Queene Geney,, Y¢* bride fo bright of blee. And there he hath wth him Queene Genever, Yt bride foe bright in bower ; & all his barons about him ftoode, Yt were both ftiffe & ftowre. The K. kept a royall Chriftmaffe, Of mirth & great honor ; oe WHEN ce eee eee [About nine stanzas wanting. ] [p 47.) And bring me word what thing it is, Yt women! moft defire ; This fhalbe thy ranfome, Arthur,” he fayes, « For Ile haue noe other hier.” 15 1 Y* a woman, MS. FRAGMENT OF THE MARRIAGE OF SIR GAWAINE. 289 K. Arthur then held vp his hands, According thene as was the law ; He tooke his leaue of baron there, And homword can he draw. And when he came to merry Carlile, 20 To his chamber he is gone ; And ther came to him his cozen, S" Gawaine, As he did make his mone. And there came to him his cozen S* Gawaine!, Yt was a curteous knight ; 26 « Why sigh yo" foe sore, vnckle Arthur >” he said, * Or who hath done thee vnright ?” « 0 peace! o peace! thou gentle Gawaine, Yt faire may thee be-fall ; For if thou knew my fighing foe deepe, 9 30 Thou wold not meruaile att all. For when I came to Tearne-wadling, A bold barron there I fand ; Wt a great club vpon his backe, Standing ftiffe & ftrong. 35 And he afked me wether I wold fight, Or from him T fhold be gone ; Or? elfe I muft him a ranfome pay, & foe dept him from. To fight wt him I saw noe cause, 40 Me thought it was not meet ; For he was ftiffe & strong wth all, His ftrokes were nothing fweete. 1 Cawaine, MS. 20, MS. 2P 290 FRAGMENT OF THE MARRIAGE OF SIR GAWAINE. Therfor this is my ranfome, Gawaine, I ought to him to pay; 45 I must come againe, as I am sworne, Vpon the Newyeers day. And I must bring him word what thing it is [About nine stanzas wanting. | {p.48.] Then King Arthur dreft him for to ryde, In one foe riche array ; 50 Toward the forefaid Tearne-wadling, Yt he might keepe his day. And as he rode over a more, Hee fee a lady, where fhee fate ; Betwixt an oke and a greene hollen, 55 She was cladd in red scarlett. Then there as fhold have ftood her mouth, Then there was fett her eye; The other was in her forhead faft, The way that fhe might fee. 60 Her nofe was crooked, and turnd outward, Her mouth ftood foule a-wry ; A worfe formed lady then fhee was, Neuer man saw wth his eye. To halch vpon him, K. Arthur, 65 This lady was full faine ; But K. Arthur had forgott his leffon, What he fhold fay againe. (p- 49.] FRAGMENT OF THE MARRIAGE OF SIR GAWAINE. « What knight art thou >” the lady fayd, “That wilt not fpeake to me? Of me [be] thou nothing difmayd, Tho I be vgly to fee. For I haue halched yo" curteouflye, & yo" will not me againe ; Yett I may happen, S' Knight,” fhee said, “To ease thee of thy paine.” « Giue thou ease me, lady,” he said, * Or helpe me any thing, Thou fhalt haue gentle Gawaine, my cozen, & marry him wth a ring.” « Why if I helpe thee not, thou noble K. Arthur, Of thy owne hearts desiringe, Of gentle Gawaine.......... [About nine stanzas wanting. And when he came to the Tearne-wadling, The baron there cold he finde! ; Wrih a great weapon on his backe, Standing ftiffe & ftronge. And then he tooke K. Arthurs letters in his hands, & away he cold them fling ; & then he puld out a good browne fword, & cryd himselfe a K. | frinde, MS. 2p2 292 FRAGMENT OF THE MARRIAGE OF SIR GAWAINE. And he fayd, “I haue thee, & thy land, Arthur, To doe as it pleafeth me ; For this is not thy ransome. sure, © Therfore yeeld thee to me.” 95 And then bespoke him noble Arthur, & bad him hold his hands; “ & give me leave to fpeake my mind, In defence of all my land.” He! said, © as I came over a more, 100 I fee a lady where fhee fate ; Betweene an oke & a green hollen, She was clad in red scarlette. And fhe fays a woman will haue her will, & this is all her cheef defire ; 105 Doe me right, as thou art a baron of sckill, This is thy ransome, & all thy hyer.” He fayes, © an early vengeance light on her! She walkes on yonder more ; It was my sister, that told thee this, 110 She is a miffhappen hore. But heer Ile make mine avow to god, To do her an euill turne; For an euer I may thate fowle theefe get, In a fyer I will her burne.” 215 [About nine stanzas wanting.] \ The, MS. [p. 50.) FRAGMENT OF THE MARRIAGE OF SIR GAWAINE. THE 2d. PART. Sir Lancelott, & S* Steven, bold, They rode wth them that day ; And the formoft of the company, There rode the fteward Kay. Soe did St Banier, & S* Bore, St Garrett wth them, foe gay ; Soe did SF Trifteram, yt gentle kt, To the forrest, fresh & gay. And when he came to the greene forrest, Vnderneath a greene holly tree ; Their fate that lady in red searlet, Yt vnseemly was to fee. St Kay beheld this ladys face, & looked vppon her fuire ;— « Whofoeuer kiffes this lady,” he fayes, « Of his kiffe he stands in feare !” St Kay beheld the lady againe, & looked vpon her fnout ; « Whofoeuer kisses this lady,” he faies, « Of his kiffe he stands in doubt !” « Peace, coz. Kay,” then faid St Gawaine, « Amend thee of thy life ; For there is a knight amongft us all, Yt must marry her to his wife.” 294 FRAGMENT OF THE MARRIAGE OF SIR GAWAINE. « What! wedd her to wiffe,” then s! S" Kay, 140 “Tn the diuells name anon ; Gett me a wiffe where ere I may, For I had rather be flaine !” Then fome! tooke vp their hawkes in hast, & fome tooke vp their hounds ; 145 & fome fware they wold not marry her, For citty nor for towne. And then be-fpake him noble K. Arthur, & fware there, “by this day, For a litle foule fight & mifliking, 150 [About nine stanzas wanting.] [p.51.] Then fhee said, © choose thee, gentle Gawaine, Truth as I doe fay; Wether thou wilt haue me in this likneffe, In the night, or elfe in the day.” And then befpake him gentle Gawaine, 155 Wt» one foe mild of moode; Sayes, “ well I know what I wold fay, God grant it may be good ! To haue thee fowle in the night, When I wth thee shold play ; 160 Yet I had rather if I might, Haue thee fowle in the day.” ' soome, MS. FRAGMENT OF THE MARRIAGE OF SIR GAWAINE. 295 “ What, when Lords goe wth ther feires!,” shee said, « Both to the ale & wine ; Alas! then I must hyde my felfe, 165 I must not goe withinne.” And then befpake him gentle Gawaine, Said, © lady, thats but a skill ; And because thou art my owne lady, Thou shalt haue all thy will.” 170 Then shee said, © blessed? be thou, gentle Gawaine, This day yt I thee see; For as thou see me att this time, From henceforth? I wilbe. My father was an old knight, 175 & yett it chanced foe ; That he marryed a younge lady, Yt brought me to this woe. She witched me, being a faire young lady, To the greene forreft to dwell ; 180 & there I muft walke in womans likneffe, Most like a feeind of hell. She witched my brother to a Carlift B.... [About nine stanzas wanting.] [p- 52.] That looked foe foule, & that was wont, On the wild more to goe. 185 1 feires, MS. 2 blesed, MS. 3 hencsorth, MS. FRAGMENT OF THE MARRIAGE OF SIR GAWAINE. “ Come kiffe her, brother Kay,” then said S* Gawaine, «* & amend thee! of thy liffe ; I fweare this is the fame lady Y* I marryed to my wiffe.” St Kay kiffed that lady bright, Standing vpon his feete ; He fayes, as he was trew knight, The spice was neuer foe sweete. “ Well, coz. Gawaine,” faies St Kay, “Thy chance is fallen arright ; For thou haft gotten one of the faireft maids, I ever saw wit my fight.” “It is my fortune,” said St Gawaine, « For my vnckle Arthurs sake; 1 am glad as graffe wold be of rain, Great joy that I may take.” St Gawaine tooke the lady by the one arme, S Kay tooke her by the tother ; They led her ftraight to K. Arthur, As they were brother & brother. K. Arthur welcomed them there all, & foe did lady Geneuer, his queene; W all the knights of the Round Table, Moft feemly to be feene. K. Arthur beheld that lady faire, That was foe faire & bright ; He thanked Chrift in Trinity, For St Gawaine, that gentle knight. ! the, MS, FRAGMENT OF THE MARRIAGE OF SIR GAWAINE. 297 Soe did the knights, both more and leffe, + | Reioyced all that day; 215 For the good chance yt hapened was, To St Gawaine & his lady gay. T FINIS, =» 2a a No. VIII. The weddynge of S* Gawen € Dame Ragnell. ome YTHE! and? liftenyth the lif? of a lord? riche, fol. 128°] ‘ The while that he ly¥id’ was none hy licke, te Nether in bowre ne in halle ;— In the tyme of Arthour? thys adventure betyd’— And’ of the greatt adventure that he hym felf dyd’, 5 That kyng curteys & royatt. & Of alle kynge Arture beryth the flowyr, And of alle knygtitod’ he bare away the honor, Where soell he wentt; In hys contrey was no thyng butt chyvalry, 10 And’ knygtite were belovid’ [by] that doughty, . For cowarde were eumore sh#ht. Nowe wytt ye lyst a whyle to my talkyng, I fhait you tett of Arthowre the kyng, Howe ones hy befett ; 15 Ofi huntyng he was in Inglefwod’, With alle his bold’ knyghte good’,— Nowe herkefi to my spelt. The kyng was sett att his treftyit-tree, : With his bowe to fle the wylde ven’e, 20 And?’ hys lord¢ were fett hym befyde ; & As the kyng stode, then was he ware, Where a greatt hartt was and” a fayre, 1 Klythe, MS. © * WEDDYNGE OF SYR GAWENE. ‘298% An@ forth fast dyd’ he glyde, The hartt was in a brakefi ferne, 25 And’ hard’ the hounde, and” stode fuit derne, Alle that sawe the kyng ;— “ Hold? you styft, ely mafi, And’ I wott goo my self, yf I cafi, # With craft of stalkyng.” 30 {fol. 129.} The kyng in hys hand toke a bowe, And’ wodmanly he stowpy@ lowe, To ftalk’ vnto that dere; Whefi that he ca the dere fuit nere, The dere lept forth into a brere, 35 And ell the kyng went nere & nere. So kyng Arthure went a whyle, After the dere, I trdwe, half a myle, And’ no mafi with hym went ; And’ att the last to the dere he lett flye, 40 And’ smote hym fore and’ fewerly, | Suche grace God’ hym fent. Doufi the dere tumblyd’ fo derofi, And’ felt into a greatt brake of ferofi, _ The kyng folowy@ fuit fast ; Ps 45 | Anofi the.kyng both ferce & felt Was with the dere, and’ dyd’ hym fvelt!, And’ after the graffe he tafte. As the kyng was with the dere alone, Streygtit ther ci to hym a quaynt grome, 50 Armyd’ weit and’ sure; A eel futt strong, and’ of greatt mygtit, d’ grymly worde to the kyng he ya, — & ae i-mett, kyng Arthor ! 7 Thou hast me done wrong many a yere, 55 And’ wofully I shaft quytte the here, I hold thy lyfe-days nygti done; 1 serve welt ? 298 Þ > a -WEDDYNGE OF SYR * GAWENE. Thou hast gevyfi my lande, in certayfi, With greatt wrong vato £ Gawefi, Whate fayest thou, kyng alone ?” « Syr knyghit, whate is thy name, with honot ?” « Syr kyng,” he fayd’, © Grom®som?. Jour’, I tett the nowe with rygtit.”— “ALF Grow®som?, bethynk’ the welt, To fle me here hono” getyst thou no deft, (fol. 129°.) Be-thynk’ the thou artt a knygiit. > Yf thou fle me nowe in thys cafe, Alle knygtite wott refuse the in ey place, That shame shaft neil the froo; Lett be thy wytt, and folowe wytt, And’ that is amys I shaft amend’ itt, And thou wolt, or that I goo.” « Nay,” fayd’ £ Grom?som?, © by heuyfi kyng! So shalt thou nott skape, withoute lefyng, I haue the nowe att avayit ; Yf I fhold’ lett the thus goo with mokery, Anoder tyme thou wolt me defye, Of that I fhatt nott faytt.” Now fayd’ the kyng, “ fo God’ me faue, Save my lyfe, and’ whate thou wolt crave I shaft now graunt itt the ; Shame thou shalt haue to. fle me in ven’e, Thou armyd’, and I clothyd’ butt in grene, pde.” “ Alle thys fhait nott help the, fekyrly, For I wott nother lond’ ne gold’ truly, Butt yf thou graunt me att a certayh day, Suche as I-fhait sett, and’ in thys same araye.” « Yes,” fayd’ the kyng, “lo! here my hand.” « Ye, butt a-byde, kyng, and’ here me a ftound’. Fyrft thow shalt swere, vpoh my sword” brouf, To shewe me att thy comyng whate wemefi love best in fel and’ And@ thou shalt mete me here, with outefi fend’, Evyfi att this day xij. monethes end’ ; [town ; WEDDYNGE .OF .SYR. GAWENE, 298 © And’ thou shalt fwere vpofi my swerd?. good? That of thy knygtite shaft none com wt ws by the rood’, 95 Nowther frende! ne freynd’. = And’ yf thou bryng nott anfwere, with oute fe fayit, Thyne hed’ thou shalt lose for thy travaytt,— {fol. *129.] Thys fhatt nowe be thyne oth. . » 2-1} Whate sayst thou, kyng, lett fe, haue done.” — 100 « Syr, I graunt to thys, now lett me gone, Thdbgh itt be to me futt loth. I ensure the, as I a true kyng, To com agayf att thys xij. monethes end’, And’ bryng the thyne anfwere.”— 105 « Now go thy way, kyng Arthure, Thy lyfe is in my hand’ I am fuit fure, Of thy forowe thow artt nott ware. Abyde, kyng Arthure, a lyteit whyle, Loke nott to day thou me begyle, 110 And’ kepe alle thyng in close ; For and’ I wyft, by Mary mylde, Thou woldyst betray me in the feld’, Thy lyf’ fyrft sholdyst thou lose.” « Nay,” fayd’ kyng Arthure, “that may nott be, 115 Vutrewe knyght shalt thou neu fynde me, To dye yett were me lever ; Farwett, f knygtit, and’ evyit mett, I woft com, and’ I be of lyve, att the day fett, Though I fhold’ scape neu.” 120 The kyng his bugle gai blowe, That hard’ ely knyght, and’ itt gafi knowezÞ Vnto hym cafi they rake; - Ther they fond’ the kyng and’ the dere, With fembland’ fad’ an ad? hevy chere, 125 That had’ no lust to lay”. 7 Go we home nowe to Carlytt, 1 fremde? % 298 4 WEDDYNGE OF SYR GAWENE. x Thys huntyng lykys me nott welt,” — ‘So fayd’ kyng Arthure ; Alle the lord. knewe by his counter? nce, [fol.*129>,]That the kyng had’ mett with sime dyfturbaunce. Vato Carlytt then the kyng cam, Butt of his hevyneffe I no mafi, His hartt was wonder hevy ; If this hevyneffe he dyd’ or Thatgmany of his knygtite m *vely@ that tyde. ® Tytt att the last f Gaweh To the kyng he fayd’ than, « Syr, me marvaylyth rygtit fore, Whate thyng that thou sorowyst fore.” 7 Then anfweryd’ the kyng as tyghit, LY « T shaft the tell, gentyft Gawen knyght. In the foreft as I was this daye, Ther I mett with a knygtit in his araye, And’ fteyfi worde to me he gafi sayh, And chargyd’ me I fhold’ hym nott bewrayne ; His councett must I kepe therfore, # Or els I am forfwore.” “ Nay, drede you nott, lord’, by Mary flower”, I ai nott that mafi that‘wold?’ you difhono’, Nother by euyfi ne by morof,”— “ Forsoth I was of huntyng in Inglefwod’, Thowe knowest weit I flewe ah St by the rode, Alle my fylf alofi; Ther mett I with a knyght amy@? ee His nameafie told? me was £ Grom? som? Joure, Therfor I make my mone. = Ther that knygtit fast dyd’ me threte, And’ wold’ haue flay me with greatt heatt, But I fpak’ fayre agayh ; Wepyns with me ther had’ I none, em Alas! my worfhypp’ therfor is nowe gone.” — ¥ - “ What therof?” fayd’ Gawei. fol. 130.) WEDDYNGE OF SYR GAWENE. 298° “ What nedys more, I shaft nott lye, 165 He wold’ haue flayfi me ther with oute m? oY And’ that me was fult loth ; wt He made me to fwere that att the xij. rinse end’, That I fhold’ mete hym ther in the fame kynde, To that I plygtt my trowith. . - 170 And’ alfo I fhold’ teit hym att the fame day, Whate wemefi desyrefi mofte, in good faye, My lyf? els fhold’ I lese?; This oth I made vnto that knyghit, An@ that I fhold’ new telt itt to no wight, 175 Of thys I myght nott chefe. And? alfo I fhold’ com in none oder araye, But euyfi as I was the fame daye ; And’ yf I faylyd’ of myne anfwere, I wott I fhal be flayh rygtit there. 180 Blame me nott though I be a wofutt maf, Alle thys is my drede and’ fere.” “Ye, f, make good’ chere,— * Lett make yo" hors redy, To ryde into straunge contrey ; 185 And? etl wher as ye mete owther mafi or womaii, in faye, Ask’ of theym whate thay therto faye. And’ I shaft also ryde a noder waye, And’ enquere of ely mafi and’ womaH, and’ gett whatt I may, Of evy maf and’ womans anfwere, 190 And’ in a boke I shaft theym wryte.” « ] graunt,” fayd’ the kyng, as tyte, “ Ytt is welt advyfed, Gawefi the good’, Evyfi by the holy rood’ !”— Sone were they® both redy, 195 Gawefi and’ the lkyng, wytterly. The kyng rode of way, and’ Gawefi anoder, Angel enquyred of mafi, womafi, and’ other, tes 1 leve, MS. 2 the, MS. 298 f WEDDYNGE OF SYR GAWENE. Whate wemefi defyred’ moste dere. Somme fayd’ they lovyd’ to be weit arayd’, Somme fayd’ they lovyd’ to be fayre prayed’; [fo]. 1306.) Somme fayd’ they lovyd’ a lufty maf, That in theyr armys caf clypp’ them and’ kyffe them thai ; Somme fayd’ one, somme fayd’ other, - And’ fo had’ Gawefi getyfi many afi answer?,. By that Gawefi had’ getefi whate he maye, And’ come agayfi by a certeyf daye ; Syr Gawefi had’ gotefi anfwerys fo many, That had’ made a boke greatt, wytterly, To the courte he cai agayh; By that was the kyng comyf with hys boke, And’ eyther ofi others pamplett dyd’ loke,— « Thys may nott fayd’},” sayd? Gawefi. «© By God,” fayd’ the kyng, “I drede me fore, I cast me to feke a lyteft more, In Ynglefwod’ Foreft ; I haue butt a moneth to my day fett, I may hapefi of fomme good’ tydynge to hytt, Thys thynkyth me nowe best.” - « Do as ye lyst,” then Gawefi say, <« What fo etl ye do I hold’ me payd’, Hytt is good” to be spyrryng ; Doute you nott, lord’, ye shaft weit spede, Sime of yo" sawes shaft help att nede, Els itt were yt lykyng.” Kyng Arthoure rode forth of the other day, In to Yngleswo” as hys gate laye, An@ ther he mett with a lady; She was as vngoodly a creature, As eu mafi sawe, withoute mesure, Kyng Arthure m?vaylyd’ fecurly. = Her face was red’, her nose fnotyd’ withait, i» 1 faylle? 220. WEDDYNGE OF SYR GAWENE. 298 & Her mowith wyde, her teth yalowe ou aft, With bleryd’ eyef gretter thei a bait, Her mowith was nott to lak’ ; 235 (fol. 131.]; Her teth hyng ol her! lyppe, Her chekys fyde as wemens hyppt, A lute she bare vpofi her bak’. Her nek’ long and” therto greatt, Her here cloteryd ofi afi hepe, 240 In the sholders she was a yard’ brode, Hangyng pappys to be afi hors-lode, And? lyke a bareit she was made ; And’ to reherfe the fowlneffe of that lady, Ther is no tung may teft, securly, 245 Of lothlyneffe inowgh fhe had’. She fatt of a palfray was gay begoh, Witt gold befett, and many a precious ftone, Ther was af vnfemely fyghit ; So fowtt a creature, with oute mesure, 250 To ryde fo gayly, I you ensure, Ytt was no reafon ne ryght. She rode to Arthoure, and thus fhe fayd’, « God’ fpede, kyng, I am welt payd’, That I haue with the mett ; 255 Speke with me, I rede, or thou goo, For thy lyfe is in my hand’, I warf the foo, That fhalt thou fynde, and’ I itt nott lett.” « Why, what wold’ ye, lady, nowe with me?” « Syr, I wold’ fayfi nowe speke with the, 260 And tett the tydynge good’ ; For alle the anfwerys that thou canft yelpe, None of theym alle fhait the helpe, That shalt thou knowe, by the rood” ! Thou wenyst I knowe nott thy councett, 265 But I warfi the I knowe itt etly deait, 1 he, MS, 2 q* 298 tr WEDDYNGE OF SYR GAWENE. Yf? I help the nott thou art butt dead” ; Graunt me, f kyng, butt one thyng, (fol. 131,] And’ for thy lyfe I make warrauntyng, Or elle thou shalt lose thy hed’.” 270 « Whate meaf you, lady, teit me tygtit, For of thy word¢ I haue great difpyte, To you I haue no nede. Whate is yor defyre, fayre lady, - Lett me wete fhortly, 275 Whate is yo" meanyng ; And’ why my lyfe is in yo" hand’, Teltt me, and’ I shatt you warraunt, Alle yo" oui afkyng >?” “ For foth,” fayd’ the lady, “I aii no qued’, 280 Thou must graunt me a knyght to wed’, His name is f Gawei; And? suche couen'nt I wott make the, Butt thorowe myne anfwere thy lyf? fauyd’ be, Elle lett my defyre be in vayne. 285 And’ yf myne anfwere faue thy lyf’, Graunt me to be Gawens wyf?, Advyfe the nowe, f kyng; For itt muft be fo, or thou artt butt dead’, Chose nowe, for thou mayfte fone lose thyne hed’. 290 Teft me nowe in hying.” « Mary,” fayd’ the kyng, “I maye nott graunt the, To make warrant f Gawefi to wed’ the, Alle lyeth in hym alof ; Butt and’ itt be fo, I wott do my labor, 295 In favyng of my lyfe to make itt seco, To Gawefi wott I make my mone.” “Welt,” fayd’ she, © nowe go home agayh, And’ fayre word¢ fpeke to f Gawefi, For thy lyf? I may faue ; 300 1 In the MS. part of the previous line is carelessly repeated. (fol. 132.] WEDDYNGE OF SYR GAWENE. Though I be foutt, yett am I gaye, Thourgh me thy lyfe saue he maye, Or sewer thy deth to haue.” « Alas !” he fayd’, © now woo is me, That I shold? cause Gawefi to wed’ the, For he wol be lott to faye naye ; So foutt a lady as ye ar nowe one Sawe I net in my lyfe ofi ground’ gone, I nott whate I do may.” “No force, f kyng, though I be foutt, Choyfe for a make hath af owtt, Thou getest of me no more ; Wheii thou comyst agayfi to thyne answer?, Rygtit in this place I shatt mete the here, Or elle I wott thou artt lore!.” “ Now fareweit,” fayd’ the kyng, © lady, “Ye, £,” fhe fayd’, © ther is a byrd’ mefi catt afi owtt?, And’ yett a lady I am ;”— «© Whate is yo" name, I pray you teft me?” | | « Syr kyng, I hight dame Ragnett, truly, | That net yett begylyd’ maii.” “Dame Ragnelt, nowe haue good’ daye,” — “ Syr kyng, God’ fpede the of thy way, Rygit here I fhatt the mete.” Thus they departyd’ fayre and’ weit, The kyng futt fone com to Carlytt, And his hartt hevy and’ greatt. The fyrfte mafi he mett was f Gawei, That vnto the kyng thus gail fayh, « Syr, howe haue ye fped’?” « Forfoth,” fayd’ the kyng, © new fo yi, Alas! I ami in poynt my self to spytt, For nedely I most be ded’.” « Nay,” fayd’ Gawefi, © that may nott be, 1 Jore fowtt, MS. 2 Sic MS. 29q*2 298i 298 k WEDDYNGE OF SYR GAWENE. I had lever my self be dead’, fo mott I the, 335 Thys is itt tydand’.” « Gaweh, I mett to day with the fowlyst lady That en I fawe, ftenly ; She fayd’ to me my lyfe fhe wold’ faue, Butt fyrst fhe wold’ the to husbond’ haue ; 340 Wherfor I am wo begoii, Thus in my hartt I make my mone.” [fol. 132.] © Ys this ait?” thefi fayd’ Gawefi, «I fhatt wed’ her and’ wed’ her agayfi, Thowgti she were a fend’ ; 345 Thowgh she were as fouit as Belfabub, Her fhait I wed’, by the rood’, Or elle were not I yor frende. For ye ar my kyng with hono’, And’ haue worfhypt me in many a ftowre, 350 Therfor fhait I nott lett; To faue yor lyfe, lord’, itt were my parte, Or I were! falfe and’ a greatt coward’, And’ my worfhypp’ is the bett.” « I-wys, Gawefi, I mett her in Inglyfwod’, 355 She told? me her name, by the rode, That itt was dame Ragnett ; She told’ me butt I had’ of her answere, Elle alle my laboure is neu the nere, Thus fhe gafi me tett. 360 And butt yf her answer? help me weit, Elle lett her haue her defyre no dele, This was her covernt ; And’ yf her anfwere help me, and’ none other, Thefi wold’ she haue you, here is alle to-geder, 365 That made fhe warraunt.” “ As for this,” fayd’ Gaweh, © [it] shaft nott lett, I woit wed’ her at whate time ye wot fett, 1 were I, MS. WEDDYNGE OF SYR GAWENE. I pray you make no care; For and’ she were the mofte fowlyst wygtit, That ell mefi mygtit fe with sygtit, For yo" loue I woit nott spare.” « Garam*cy, Gawefi,” thefi fayd’ kyng Arthor, “ Of alle knygtite thou bereft the flowre, That ed yett I fond’; | My worfhypp’ and? my lyf? thou favyft for eu, [fol. 133.] Therfore my loue shaft nott frome the dyffevyr, As I am kyng in lond’.” Thefi within v. or vj. days, The kyng muft nedys goo his ways, To bere his anfwere ; The kyng and’ f Gawefi rode oute of toufi, No mafi with them, butt they alone, Neder ferre ne nere. Whef the kyng was with in the Forest, — “ Syr Gawef,, farewelt, I must go west, Thou shalt no furder goo; ? « My lord’, God’ spede you ofi yo" jorney, I wold’ I fhold’ nowe ryde yo" way, For to departe I ai rygtit wo.” The kyng had’ ryddefi butt a while, Lytett more thefi the space of a myle, Or he mett dame Ragnett ;— « A, f kyng, ye arre nowe welci here, I wott ye ryde to bere yo" anfwere, That wott avaytt you no dele.” Nowe fayd’ the kyng, © sith itt wott none other be, Tell me yo" anfwere nowe, and’ my lyfe faue me, Gawefi fhait you wed’ ; So he hath pmyfed’ me my lyf’ to faue, And’ yor defyre nowe fhait ye haue, Botk in bowre and’ in bed’. Therfore tett me nowe alle in hast, Whate wott help now att last, 298 ! 298 = WEDDYNGE OF SYR GAWENE. Haue done, I may nott tary ;”— 405 « Syr,” quod’ dame Ragneft, © nowe shalt thou knowe, Whate wemefi defyrefi moste, of high and’ lowe, From this I wott not varaye. Summe mefi fayfi, we defyre to be fayre, Alfo we defyre to haue repayre, 410 Of ditfe straunge mei ; Alfo we loue to haue luft in bed’, [fol. 133.] And? oftefi we defyre to wed’, Thus ye mefi nott kefi!. Yett we defyre a noder man? thyng, 415 To be holdefi nott old’, but freffhe and’ yong ; With flatryng, and’ glosyng, and’ quaynt gyi, So ye mefi may vs wemef ell wyh, Of whate ye wott crave. Ye goo fuit nyse, I wot nott lye, 420 Butt there is one thyng is alle oure fantafye, And’ that nowe shalt ye knowe ; We defyrefi of mefi, aboue alle man? thyng, | To haue the folleynte, wioute lefyng, Of alle, both hygt and’ lowe. 425 For where we haue foveynte alle is ourys, Though a knygtit be newt fo ferys, And’ etl the mastry wynne ; Of the mofte manlyeft is oure defyre, To haue the solleynte of suche a syre, 430 Suche is oure crafte and’ gynne. Therfore wend’, f kyng, on thy way, And teft that knyghit, as I the faye, That itt is as we desyrefi mofte ; He wol be wroth and’ vnfought, And’ curfe her faft, that itt the taught, For his laboure is loft. Go forth, f kyng, and’ hold’ pmyfe, 1 Sic MS, WEDDYNGE OF SYR GAWENE. For thy lyfe is sure nowe in alle wyfe, That dare I welt vndertake.” The kyng rode forth a greatt shake, As fast as he myghit gate; Thorowe myre, more, and’ fenne, Where as the place was fygnyd’ and’ fett thefi, Evyii there with £ Grom? he mett. And? sterfi worde to the king he fpak’ with that,— “ Com of, £ kyng, nowe lett fe, Of thyne anfwere whate itt fhal be, For I am redy grathyd’.” The kyng pullyd’ oute boke twayne,— “ Syr, ther is myne answer”, I dare fayfi, For somme wott help at nede.” Syr Grom? lokyd’ ofi they etychofi,— « Nay, nay, £ kyng, thou artt but a dead’ mafi, Therfor nowe shalt thou blede.” “ Abyde, £ Grom?,” fayd’ kyng Arthoure, « T haue one anfwere shaft make ait! sure,” — “ Lett fe,” thefi fayd’ £ Grom’ ; “ Or els, fo God’ me help as I the fay, Thy deth thou shalt haue wt large paye, I teft the nowe ensure,” Now fayd’ the kyng, © I fe, as I geffe, In the is butt a lyteft gentilneffe, By God’, that ay is helpand’! Here is oure anfwere, and’ that is alle, That wemefi defyrefi mofte {peciatt, Both of fre and’ bond’. I faye no more, butt aboue al thyng Wemeii defyre folleynte, for that is theyr lykyng, And’ that is ther moft defyre ; To have the rewit of the manlyeft meh, And’ then ar they weit, thus they me dyd’ ken, 1 ale, MS. 298" 298 ° WEDDYNGE OF SYR GAWENE. To rule the, Grom? fyre.” “ And’ she that told’ the nowe, f Arthoure, I pray to God’, I maye fe her bref of a fyre, For that was my fufter dame Ragnett ; [fol. 134>.] That old’ scott, God’ geve her! shame! Elle had’ I made the futt tame, Nowe haue I loft moche travayit. Go where thou wolt, kyng Arthoure, For of me thou maifte be etl fure, Alas! that I eli fe this day; Nowe, weit I wott, myne enime thou wolt be, And’ att fuche a pryk’ shatt I nel gett the, My song may be weit-awaye!” “No,” fayd’ the kyng, © that make I warraunt, Some harnys I wott have to make me defendaunt, That make I God’ avowe! In fuche a plygtit fhallt thou new me fynde, And’ yf thou do, lett me bete and’ bynde, As is for thy best prouf?.” « Nowe haue good’ day,” fayd’ f Grom?, “ Farewell,” fayd’ £ Arthoure, “fo mott I the, I am glad’ I haue fo fped’.”— King Arthoure turnyd’ hys hors into the play, And’ fone he mett with dame Ragnelt agayf, In the fame place and’ ftede. « Syr kyng, I am glad’ ye haue sped” weit, I told’ howe itt wold’ be, ely deft, Nowe hold” that ye haue hygit ; Syf I haue fauyd’ yor lyf’, and’ none other, Gaweh must me wed’, f Arthoure, That is a fult gentitt knyght.” “No, lady, that I you hight I shalt not faytt, So ye wol be rulyd’ by my cowncett, Yor witt thefi fhatt ye haue ;?— 1 he, MS, 2 prow? (fol. 135.] WEDDYNGE OF SYR GAWENE. “ Nay, f kyng, nowe wolt I nott soo, Openly I wol be weddy@ or I parte the froo, Elle shame wott ye haue. Ryde before, and’ I wott cof after, Vnto thy courte, f kynge Arthoure, Of no mafi I wott shame; Be-thynk’ you howe I haue fauyd’ yor lyf’, Therfor with me nowe shalt ye nott ftryfe, For and’ ye do, ye be to blame.” The kyng of her had’ greatt fhame, But forth fhe rood’, though he were grevy@’ ; Tytt they cat to Karlyle forth they mevyd’. In to the courte she rode hym by, For no mafi wold’ she spare, fecurly, Itt likyd’ the kyng futt yit. Alle the contraye had’ wonder greatt, Fro whens fhe com, that foule vnswete, They fawe new of fo fowtt a thyng ; In to the hatt she went, in certef,— “ Arthoure kyng, lett fetche me f Gaweyh, Before the knygtite, alle in hying. That I may nowe be made sekyr, In welle and’ wo trowith plygtit vs togeder, Before alle thy chyvalry ; This is yo" graunt, lett se, haue done, Sett forth £ Gawefi, my love, anofi, For lenger tarying kepe nott I.” Theh cam forth £ Gawefi the knygtit,— “ Syr, I am redy of that I you hygit, Alle forwarde to fulfyit ;” « Godhauem’ cy,” fayd’ dame Ragnett thefi, “ For thy fake I wold’ I were a fayre womaf, [fo]. 135%.] For thou art of fo good’ wytt.” Ther f Gawefi to her his trowth plygiit, In weit and’ in woo, as he was a true knyght, Thefi was dame Ragnett fayfi ; 2Q? 298 P 298 4 [fol. 136.] WEDDYNGE OF SYR GAWENE. “ Alas!” thei fayd’ dame Gayno’, So fayd’ alle the ladyes in her bower, And wept for £ Gawefi. « Alas!” then fayd’ both kyng and’ knygit, That ett he shold wed’ suck a wyght, She was so fowlt and’ horyble ; She had’ two teth on etly fyde, As borys tuske, I woit nott hyde, Of length a large handfuit. The one tufk’ went up, and the other doufi, A mowth futt wyde, and’ fowtt igrowh, With grey herys many of ; Her lyppe¢ lay lumpryd’ on her chy, Nek’ forsoth on her was none ifeefi, She was a lothly of! She wold’ nott ‘be weddy@ in no man’, Butt there were made a krye in alle the fhyre, Both in towh and’ in borowe; Alle the ladyes nowe of the lond’, She lett kry to com to hand’, To kepe that brydalle thorowe. So itt befytt after of a daye, That maryed’ fhold’ be that fowft [lady] Vnto f Gaweyf ; The daye was cémyfi the daye fhold’ be, Therof the ladyes had’ greatt pitey, « Alas!” thefi gaf they say. The queef prayd’ dame Ragnett, sekerly, To be maryed’ in the mornyng erly, As pryvaly as we may ; « Nay,” fhe fayd’, © by hevyh kyng ! That woit I neu’, for no thyng, For ought that ye caf faye. I wol be weddyd’ alle openly, For with the kyng fuche cover nt made I, I putt you oute of dowte ; WEDDYNGE OF SYR GAWENE: 298° I wolt nott to church tyit high masse tyme, And? in the opefi halle I woft dyne, 580 In myddys of alle the rowte.” “T am greed’,” fayd’ dame Gaynor, © Butt me wold’ thynk’ more honor, And yo" worfhypp’ mofte ;?— “Ye, as for that, lady, God’ you faue, 585 This daye my worfhypp’ wott I haue, I teft you withoute boste.” She made her redy to church to fare, And’ alle the State that there ware, Syrs, withoute lefyng ; 590 She was aray@ in the richest man’, More fressher than dame Gaynor. Her arayment was worth ij MY mark’, Of good’ red’ nobles ftyff and’ ftark’, So rychely she was begof ; 595 For alle her rayment fhe bare the bett Of fowlneffe, that etl I hard tet, So fowtt a fowe fawe new mafi, For to make a shortt conclufiof, [fol. 136>,] Wheft fhe was weddyd’, they hyed’ theym home, 600 To mete alle they went; This fowtt lady bygafi the high defe, - She was fuit fouff, and’ nott curteys, So fayd’ they alle, verament. Wheii the fuyce cam her before, 605 She ete as moche as vj. that ther wore, That m’vaylyd’ many a maf; Her naylys were long ynchys iij®, Therwith fhe breke her mete vngoodly, Therfore fhe ete alone. 610 She ette iij®. capons, and” also curlues iij¢, And’ greatt bake met¢ fhe ete vp, pde, Al mefi therof had’ m*vaytt ; Ther was no mete ci her before, 2a"? 298 § [fol. 187.] WEDDYNGE OF SYR GAWENE, Butt she ete itt vp, leffe and’ more, That praty fowtt damesett. Ait mefi thefi that ed her fawe, Bad? the deviit her bonys gnawe, Both knygtit and fquyre ; So fhe ete tyit mete was done, Tyit they drewe clothes, and’ had’ waffheh, As is the gyfe and’ man’. Meny mefi wold’ speke of didfe fuice, I trowe ye may wete inowgh ther was, Both of tame and? wylde ; In king Arthours courte ther was no wontt, That mygiit be gottefi with mannys hond’, Noder in forest ne in fel. Ther were mynstralle of ditfe contrey * * * * * * [A leaf here is wanting. | * * * * * * « A, f Gawef, sy I haue you wed’, Shewe me yo” cortesy in bed’, With ryght itt may nott be denyed’. I-wyse, £ Gawefi,” that lady fayd’, « And’ I were fayre, ye wold’ do a noder brayd’, Butt of wedlok’ ye take no hed’; Yett for Arthours sake, kysse me att the leste, I pray you do this att my request, Lett fe, howe ye caii spede.” f Gawefi fayd’, © I wott do more Thefi for to kyffe, and’ God’ before !” He turnyd’ hym her vatitt ; He fawe her the fayreft creature, That etl he sawe, withoute mesure, — (fol. 137°.] WEDDYNGE OF SYR GAWENE. She fayd’, © whatt is yo" wytt 2 ” “ A, Iu!” he! fayd’, © whate ar ye?” “, I am yor wyf’, fecurly, Why ar ye fo unkynde ?” “ A, lady, I am to blame, I cry you m’cy, my fayre madame, Itt was nott in my mynde. A lady ye ar fayre in my fygtit, And’ to day ye were the foulyst wygiit, That et I fawe with myne ie?; Wele is me, my lady, I haue you thus,”— And’ brafyd@’ her in his armys, and’ gafi her kyffe, And’ made greatt joye, fycurly. “ Syr,” she fayd’, © thus fhait ye me haue, Chefe of the one, fo God’ me faue, My beawty woit nott hold”; Wheder ye wot haue me fayre ofi nygtite®. And’ as foutt of days to alle mefi sighte ; Or els to haue me fayre of days, And’ oft nygtite on the fowlyst wyfe, The one ye must ned¢ haue; Chefe the one or the oder, Chefe ofi, f knyght, which you is let, Yor worfhypp’ for to faue.” « Alas!” fayd’ Gawefi, © the choyfe is hard’, To chefe the beft itt is froward’, Wheder choyfe that I chefe ; To haue you fayre on nyghite and’ no more, That wold’ greve my hartt rygftit fore, And’ my worfhypp’ shol@ I lese?. And’ yf I defyre ofi days to haue you fayre, Thef of nygtite I fhold’ haue a symple repayre, Now fayh wold’ I chose the best; I ne wott in thys world’ whate I shaft faye, 1 she, MS. 2 Jen, MS. 3 nyght, MS. 298 * + lose, MS. 298" [fol. 138.] WEDDYNGE OF SYR GAWENE. Butt do as ye lyft nowe, my lady gaye, The choyfe I putt in yor fyst. Euyfi as ye wott I putt itt in yor hand’, Lose me whefi ye lyst, for I am bond’, I putt the choyfe in you; Both body and’ goode, hartt, and’ ely dele, Ys alle yo" ou, for to by and’ felt, That make I God’ avowe!” « Garam’ cy, corteys knygtit,” fayd’ the lady, « Of alle erthly knygtite blyffyd’ mott thou be, For now am I worshyppy@ ; Thou shaft haue me fayre both day and’ nygit, And’ ed whyle I lyve as fayre and’ brygit, Therfore be nott greuyd’. For I was fhapef by nygramancy, With my ftepdame, God’ haue ofi her m’cy! And’ by enchauntement ; And’ fhold’ haue bene oderwyse vnderftond’, Euyf tytt the best of Englond’ Had’ wedyd’ me, verament. And’ alfo he fhold’ geve me the soveynte, Of alle his body and” goode, sycurly, Thus was I difformy@ ; And’ thou, f knygtit, curteys Gawefi, Has gevyfi me the sotleynte, éteyn, That wott not wrott the erly ne late. Kysse me, f knygtit, euyf now here, I pray the, be glad’, and’ make good’ chere, For weit is me begoft” ;— Ther they made joye, oute of mynde, So was itt reasofh and’ co's of kynde, They two theym felf alone. She thankyd’ God’ and’ Mary mylde, She was recoud? of that that fhe was defoylyd’, So dy £ Gawei; He made myrth alle in her boure, WEDDYNGE OF SYR GAWENE. 298” And’ thankyd? of alle oure Sauyoure, I teft you, in certeyf. 715 With joye & myrth they wakyd’ tyit daye, And’ thafi wold’ ryfe that fayre maye', © Ye shaft nott,” £ Gawefi fayd’ ; “We wott lye, & slepe tyit pryme, And’ thefi lett the kyng catt vs to dyne,”— 720 “ 1 am greed’,” thefi fayd’ the mayd’. Thus itt paffyd’ forth tyit mid-daye,— « Syrs?,” quod’ the kyng, © lett vs go and’ afaye, Yf £ Gawefi be off lyve; I am futt ferd’ of f Gaweh, 725 Nowe left the fende haue hym slayfi, Nowe wold’ I fayfi preve. Go we nowe,” fayd’ Arthoure the kyng, “ We wolt go fe theyr vpryfyng, [fol. 138*.] Howe welt that he hath sped ;”— 730 They cam to the chambre, alle in certeyf, “ Aryse,” fayd’ the kyng to f Gaweh, « Why slepyst thou fo long in bed??? « Mary,” quod’ Gawef,, © £ kyng, ficurly, I wold? be glad’ and’ ye wold’ lett me be, 735 For I am fuit weit att eas; Abyde, ye shaft fe the dore vndone, I trowe that ye wolt fay I am welt goon, I am fuit loth to ryfe.” Syr Gawefi rofe, and’ in his hand’ he toke 740 His fayr lady, and’ to the dore he fhoke, And? opyny@ the dore fut fayre ; She ftod’ in her fmok’ alle by that fyre, Her her? was to her knees as red’ as gold’ wyre,— «© Lo! this is my repayre. 745 Lo!” fayd' Gawefi Arthoure vntitt, <« Syr, this is my wyfe, dame Ragnett, That fauyd’ onys yor lyfe ;?— 1 mayd, MS. 2 Syr, MS. 3 hed, MS. 298 * (fol. 139.] WEDDYNGE OF SYR GAWENE. He told’ the kyng and’ the queefi hem beforh, Howe fodenly from her fhap she dyd’ torne, “ My lord’, nowe be yor leve.” And’ whate was the cause fhe forfhapen was, Syr Gawei told’ the kyng, bot more and’ leffe, «I thank’ God’,” fayd’ the queef; “ I wenyd’, f Gawefi, fhe wold’ the haue myfcaryed’, Therfore in my hartt I was fore agrevyd’, Butt the contrary is here feef.” Ther was game, revelt, and’ playe, And’ ely mai to other gafi faye, “ She is a fayre wygiit ;” Thaf the kyng theym alle gafi tett, How did’ held’ hym att nede dame Ragneft, “ Or my dett had’ bene dyght.” Ther the kyng told’ the queefi, by the rood’, Howe he was beftad’ in Inglefwod’, With £ Grom? fom? Joure ; And’ whate othe the kngytit made hym fwere, “ Or elle he had’ slayfi me ryght there, Wtoute m’cy or mesure. This fame lady, dame Ragnett, From my deth fhe dyd’ help me ryght wett, Alle for the love of Gawen ;”— Theh Gawefi told’ the king alle to-geder, Howe forfhapef fhe was with her ftepmoder Tytt a knygitt had’ holpefi her agayfi. Ther fhe told’ the kyng fayre and’ weit, How Gawef gave her the fouleynte euy deft, And’ whate choyfe she gave to hym ;— *« God’ thank’ hym of his curtesye, He favid’ me from chaunce and? vilony, That was futt fouit and? grym. Therfore, curteys knygtit and’ hend’ Gawefi, Shaft I neti wrath the, ftey, That pmyse nowe here I make; Whille that I lyve I shal be obaysaunt, WEDDYNGE OF SYR GAWENE. 298 * To God? aboue I fhait itt warraunt, An@ neti with you to debate.” ee Garam’ cy, lady,” thefi fayd’ Gaweh, “Wt you I hold’ me fuit weit content, And?’ that I trust to fynde ;?— 790 He fayd’, “ my loue shaft she haue, Therafter nede she neti more craue, For fhe hath bene to me fo kynde.” The queefi fayd’, and’ the ladyes alle, “ She is the fayreft nowe in this halle, 795 I fwere by Seynt Johfi !— My loue, lady, ye shaft haue eu, For that ye favid’ my lord’ Arthoure, As I am a gentilwomaf.” Syr Gawef gatt of her Gyngolyn, 800 (fol. 1399.] That was a good’ knygiit of strength and’ kynn, And’ of the Table Round? ; Att etly greatt fest that lady fhold’ be, Of fayrneffe fhe bare away the bewtye, Wher fhe yed’ of the ground’. 805 Gaweh louy@ that lady, dame Ragnett, In alle his lyfe he louyd’ none fo weit, I teit you, withoute lefyng ; As a coward’ he lay by her both day and’ nygit, Neu wold’ he haunt justyng arygiit, 810 Ther att m?vaylyd’ Arthoure the kyng}. She prayd’ the kyng, for his gentilnes, To be good’ lord’ to £ Grom” i-wyffe, Of that to you he hath offendyd’ ;— “ Yes, lady, that shatt I nowe, for yo" fake, 815 For I wott weit he may nott amende make, He dyd’ to me fuit vnhend’.” Nowe for to make you a fhort conclufyon, I cast me for to make af end’ fuit fone, Of this gentyit lady ; 820 1 kyng Arthoure, MS. 2 Q° [fol. 140.] Here endyth the weddyng of Syr Gawen and Dame Ragnett, for WEDDYNGE OF SYR GAWENE. She lyvyd’ with £ Gawefi butt yerys v. That grevyd’ Gawefi alle his lyfe, I tett you, securly. — In her lyfe she grevy@ hy ae Therfor was neu. womafi to hym lever, Thus leves my talkyng ; She was the fayreft lady of att! Englond’, Wheii she was of Iyve, I vnderstond’, So fayd’ Arthoure the kyng. Thus endyth the aduenture of kyng Arthoure, That oft in his days was grevyd’ sore,” And’ of the weddyng of Gaweh; © Gawefi was weddyd’ oft in his days, Butt fo weft he nel lovyd? woman always, As I have hard’ mefi sayh. This aduenture befett in Inglefwod’, As good’ kynge Arthoure of huntyng yod’, Thus haue I hard’ mefi teit’; Nowe, God’, as thou were in Bethleme borfi, Suffer new her soules be forlorne, In the brynnyng fyre of heft! And’, Iu, as thou were borne of a virgyfi, Help hym oute of forowe, that this tale are devyne, And’ that nowe in alle hast; © For he is be-fett with gaylours many, That kepefi hym futt sewerly, With wyles wrong & wraste, ' Nowe, God’, as thou art veray kyng ryoatt, Help hy#. oute of daunger that made this tale, For therin he hath bene long; : And’ of greatt pety help thy funt, For body & fouit I yeld’ into ne hand’, For paynes he hath strong. * helpyng of Kyng Arthoure. 1 ale, MS, NOTES. Spr Gawayn and the Grene Knyzt. HIS curious poem is printed for the first time from a manuscript, believed to be unique, preserved in the Cottonian Collection, and marked Nero, A. x The volume had undoubtedly been seen by Warton, since he quotes some other pieces contained in it', and it is singular he should not have noticed the poem in question, which he seems to have confounded with a preceding one, on a totally different subject. The same error, indeed, pervades the Cottonian Catalogues compiled by Smith in 1696, and by Planta in 1802; and to this cause, in all probability, may be ascribed the oblivion in which for so long a period such a remarkable composition should have remained. Accident, however, threw it in the way of Mr. Price, the able editor of Warton, who extracted a passage in illustration of his argument against the Scotish authorship of Sir Tristrem, and announced his intention of publishing the entire Romance, under the designation of “ Aunter of Sir Gawaine,” in an octavo volume, to be intitled “ /llustrations of Warton's History of English Poetry ;” but which he relinquished some time previous to his decease?. Price, however, omitted all reference to the MS. containing the poem, and the same chance which had brought it under his notice subsequently made it known to myself and to Mr. Stevenson, the latter of whom frequently quotes it in his additions to 1 History of English Poetry, vol. iii. pp. 107, 108, ed. 4to, 1781; and vol. iii. p. 393, ed. 8vo, 1824. 2 See H. E. P. Preface, p. 17, vol. i. p. 187; and Advertisement annexed at the end of vol. iv. 2Q2 300 NOTES. Boucher's Glossary'. A transcript was made by me shortly after the discovery, and the subject of the romance communicated in October, 1829, to Sir Walter Scott, who with his well-known courtesy, and zeal in the cause of ancient Scotish literature, at once proposed to have it edited, together with the similar poems of The Awntyrs of Arthure, and Golagros and Gawane, by subscription. I subsequently received from Sir Walter, during his visit to London, in October, 1831, permission to dedicate the work to himself; and a prospectus was circulated? containing proposals of publication, which circumstances afterwards prevented being carried into effect. To those noblemen and gentlemen who on that occasion sent me their names, I have never hitherto had an opportunity of expressing my thanks, and although tardy they are not the less sincere. Having said thus much to account for the non-appearance of the poem in print, previous to its being so liberally taken under the patronage of the Bannatyne Club, I shall proceed to discuss briefly the questions which arise respecting the age of this composition, its author, and the sources whence it was derived. Warton, in quoting two poems in the same volume, written by the same hand as the present, assigns them to the age of Minot, 2. e. to the middle of the fourteenth century, and adds, that the writing cannot be later than the reign of Edward III. But the historian of English poetry is too poor a critic in matters of this kind to cause any weight to be attached to his opinion, unless supported by other evidence. His editor, Price, was evidently inclined to give the poem a much greater antiquity, and the whole scope of his argument would refer it to the thirteenth century, previous to the time of Robert de Brunne. “It abounds,” says this ingenious writer, in those *selcouth names which in the fourteenth century were rapidly growing into disuse, and which were only retained by the writers in alliterative metre.” To refute this notion, which has been adopted too hastily by the Rev. W. Conybeare® and Mr. Laing‘, there is abundant evidence in the poem itself, independent of the proofs afforded by the language and metrical structure. Stevenson merely notices that the poem was © probably written about the end of the fourteenth century ?,” and Guest, who is the latest writer on the subject, says, that the MS. “ certainly belongs to the latter half of the fourteenth century,” which he modifies in another 1 This new edition of Boucher, under the superintendence of the Rev. Joseph Hunter, and Joseph Stevenson, Esq., came out in 1832. Only two parts, extending to the middle of letter B, have hitherto appeared. 2 The work had previously been proposed to Messrs. Longman and Co., and Mr. Murray. The former party civilly declined it, but the latter never even took the trouble to answer the letter ! 3 Illustrations of A. S. Poetry, p. Ixix, 8vo, 1826. 4 Poems of Dunbar, vol. i. p. 38, 8vo, 1834. 5 Add. to Boucher, voce Bale. NOTES. 301 passage to © about the year 1400'.” It will not be difficult from a careful inspection of the manuscript itself, both in regard to the writing and illuminations, to assign it to the reign of Richard the Second; and the internal evidence, arising from the peculiarities of costume, armour, and architecture, would lead us to assign the romance to the same period, or a little earlier. There are three other metrical pieces in the volume?, all most unquestionably composed by the author of the romance, and these I have carefully read over with the hope of detecting some more direct indication of the age, but without success. Jean de Meung is indeed referred to, in fol. 71>, under his surname of Clopinel, in the following lines : Toi Clopyngnel in the compas of his clene Rose, Ther he expounez a speche to hym that spede wolde, Of a lady to be loued, loke to hir sone, Of wich beryng that ho be, & wych ho best louyes. etc. But as this writer completed, before the year 1300, the oman de la Rose, commenced by Guillaume de Lorris, it will only prove the popularity of the work in Scotland as well as in England, during the course of the fourteenth century. In another passage the author alludes to a proverbial phrase, Thay blwe a boffet in blande, that banned peple, That thay blustered as blynde as Bayard wat; euer.—fol. 69. Yet since this proverb is also found in Chaucer's Canterbury Tales, nothing can be inferred from the contemporaneous use of a saying, of which the origin is too obscure to assist our inquiry. In regard to the author of these poems much uncertainty also exists. There is sufficient internal evidence of their being Northern, although the manuscript containing them appears to have been written by a scribe of the midland counties, which will account for the introduction of forms differing from those used by writers beyond the Tweed. It is, I think, certain, that the writer of the romance must have been a man of birth and education, for none but a person intimately versed in the gentle science of wode-craft could so minutely describe the various sports of the chase, nor could any but an educated individual have been so well acquainted with the early French 1 See History of English Rhythms, vol. ii. pp. 159, 171, note, 8vo, 1838. 2 These all possess great merit, and deserve to be printed as the remains of one of the earliest existing Scotish poets. 302 NOTES, literature. Of his poetical talent the pieces contained in the manuscript afford unquestionable proofs, and thedescriptions of the change of theseasons ', the bitter aspect of winter?, the tempest which preceded the destruction of Sodom and Gomorra? and the sea-storm occasioned by the wickedness of Jonas‘, are equal to any similar passages in Douglas or Spenser. The individual who has the best claim to be recognised as the author, is © Huchowne of the Awle Ryale,” mentioned by Wyntown 5, who writes of him thus : - - + - « Men of gud dyscretyowne Suld excuse and loue Huchowne, That cunnand wes in literature ; « He made the Gret Gest of Arthure, And the AwNTYRE or GAWANE, The Pystyl als of swete Swsane. He wes curyws in hys style, Fayre of facund, and subtile, And ay to plesans and delyte Made in metyre mete his dyte°. Mr. Chalmers was of opinion, that this Huchowne and the Sir Hugh of Eglintoun, mentioned by Dunbar in his “ Lament for the Makkaris,” who flourished in the middle of the fourteenth century, and died it is supposed about the year 1381, were one and the same person; but there are so many difficulties in this supposition, as justly to prevent our yielding assent to it without some additional evidence’. Admitting, however, Huchowne to be the author of the romance’, we are sin- 1p. 21. 2 pp. 28, 74. 3 MS. Cott. Nero A. x. f. 70. 4 Ibid. f. 85. 5 Wyntown was elected Prior of St. Serf's, in Loch Leven, in 1395, so that he must have been contemporary with Huchowne. His Chronicle was not finished till the year 1420-1424. © Cronykil of Scotland, vol. i. p. 122. ed. Macpherson, 1795. 7 See the notices of this Sir Hugh collected in the admirable edition of Dunbar’s poems by my friend Mr. Laing, vol. ii. 355 ; and his remarks, vol. i. p. 38. Consult also the Select Remains of the Popular Poetry of Scotland, pref. to Pystyl of Susan, 4to, 1822; Lyndsay’s Works, by Chalmers, vol. i. p. 132, note, 8vo, 1806 ; and Tytler’s History of Scotland, vol. ii. p. 367, 8yo, 1829. 3 Mr. Guest regards as the most decisive proof of what is here assumed, the fact, that in the void space at the head of the poem in the MS., a hand of the fifteenth century (Mr. G. says, “ not much later than the year 1500,”) has scribbled the name Hugo de, as shown in the fac-simile annexed to the description of this MS., but, I confess, to this I do not attach much weight. Mr. Guest’s wish to regard any signature as the name of the author, has led him into some awkward mistakes, particularly in the case of the English lives of Saints, composed probably in the early part of the thirteenth century, and contained in a MS. written not long after, MS. Reg. 17 A. xxvii., which Mr. Guest NOTES. 303 gularly fortunate in possessing probably all the pieces written by him noticed by Wyntoun, together with three others on allegorical or scriptural subjects, hitherto not pointed out. It is very evident on the chronicler's authority, that the G'ret Gest of Arthure, the Gest Hystoryale, and the Gest of Broyttys auld story, are one and the same poem, and relate to the exploits of Arthur and his knights against the Romans. In this work Huchowne makes Lucius Hiberius emperor, in the time of Arthur, whereas Wyntown, following other authorities, names Leo as emperor. He first defends himself, and then good-naturedly excuses his predecessor, by saying that in the Brwte, (by which he here means Geoffrey of Monmouth,) Lucius is called Procurator, which was more correct, but that had Huchowne done so, That had mare greuyd the cadens, Than had releuyed the sentens. Had Sir Walter Scott ever read through the Arthour and Merlin of the Auchinleck MS., he would have known that it could not be the Gest referred to in the above passage by Wyntown; and Mr. Turnbull, the editor of this romance, is less excusable on this account in repeating the error without correction'. But of what in all probability is the veritable Gest of Arthure composed by Huchowne, and written in alliterative metre, I possess a transcript, from a MS. in Lincoln Cathedral Library, which may, probably, at some future period be given to the press. It is, perhaps, too much to assume positively with Mr. Guest, that Huchowne “is certainly the oldest English poet, born north of the Tweed, whose works have reached us,” since Barbour, who wrote between 1370-1380, possesses equal claims to be so considered ; but we have this remarkable fact before us, that the oldest manuscripts containing genuine Scotish poetry, are the Cotton MS., Nero, A. x., the Vernon MS. in the Bodleian library, and a MS. formerly in the possession of Dr. Whitaker, and afterwards of Mr. Heber, all of which are of the reign of Richard the Second, all apparently written in England, and all contain poems of Huchowne?. Now if it be supposed that some time must necessarily elapse to account for the transmission of poems composed on the other side of the Tweed to attributes to © one John Thayer” [Theyer], whose name occurs at the commencement, and who was the possessor in the reign of Charles the Second! The whole of Theyer’s MSS. were subsequently purchased for the Royal Library. See History of Rhythms, ii. 139, note. In the same page for « Latin original,” read © Latin version,” as may be proved, perhaps, on some future occasion. 1 Preface to Romance of Arthour and Merlin, 4to, 1838 ; printed for the Maitland Club. I have no doubt that the author is the same who wrote the English romance of Alexander, printed in Weber. 2 The MS. of Barbour’s Bruce, followed by Jamieson, is dated in 1489; and is in the Advocate Library. Another copy, dated one year earlier, is at Cambridge. 304 NOTES. the southern counties, we must then with Mr. Guest give Huchowne the priority over Barbour, and he will stand first in the list of Scotish © makkaris.” Of course by this I shall be understood to range myself on the side of those who consider Thomas of Erceldoune’s claim to Sir Tristrem as apocryphal. To discuss this subject at length here would take me too much out of my way, therefore I shall only observe in passing, from a passage in the inedited portion of Robert de Brunne's Chronicle, that Kendal’s christian name was also Thomas, and that he wrote a © tale” about Flayn, the brother of the giant Shardyng, the lord of Scarborough castle ; a piece of information which I believe to be new to all the writers on the subject. In regard to the peculiarity of Huchowne’s stanza and style, it cannot fail to excite observation how well it corresponds with the character given by the chronicler. It has also been ingeniously remarked by Mr. Guest, that the form of the stave, with its abrupt bob-line preceding the wheel, distinguishes the romance of Syr Gawayn and the Pystyl of Sussan from other somewhat similar productions of the fifteenth century, and fairly intitles them to be considered of earlier date’. The question of the introduction of alliteration into Scotland is a difficult one, as well as the period of its being first used ; but I should be glad to have pointed out to me any poem in that metre, previous to the year 1350, composed unquestionably by a native of North Britain. As far as we can at present judge, it must have been borrowed from their southern neighbours, and retained subsequently to the middle of the sixteenth century. Mr. Guest is inclined to place among the earliest specimens the portion of the romance of Alexander, inserted in the splendid copy of the French romance in the Bodleian Library’, which he places about the middle of the fourteenth century’. But the writing of this portion is of the reign of Henry the Sixth, nor is there any reason to believe the poem itself very much earlier than the year 1400. A larger portion of the same romance is in a MS, in the Ashmolean Library‘, and I possess a transcript of a fragment of an English alliterative romance on the same subject, which would appear from internal evidence to have been composed by the author of William and the Werwolf. Of the sources whence the author has availed himself in composing Syr Gawayn and the Grene Knyzt, it now remains to say something. It is professedly not of his own invention, nor founded upon popular tradition, for he expressly refers at 1 Vol. ii. p. 172. 2 MS. Bodl. 264. 3 The Rev. W. Conybeare assigns it to so early a period as the end of the thirteenth. lustr. p- xx. This and many other similar statements by eminent writers, prove that a critical history of English poetry is still a desideratum. 4 No. 44 paper, fifteenth century, It contains 27 passus, the 18, 19, 20 and 21 of which are in MS, Bodl, 264. NOTES. 305 the commencement to written authority, “in stori stif and strong with lel letteres loken',” and again at the end, Thus in Arthurus day this aunter bitidde, The Brutus bokes ther of beres wyttenesse. To my knowledge no English romance of an earlier period than the one before us exists, in which the writer might have found the story he has so ingeniously converted to his own purpose; but on turning to the early Anglo-Norman literature,— an extensive knowledge of which was undoubtedly at this period diffused over Scotland,—I have been more successful. The immediate original of the Grene KKny3t appears to exist in the Roman de Perceval, one of the most celebrated of Arthur's knights, whose adventures were written in verse by Chrestien de Troyes, at the close of the twelfth century, and continued after his death by Gautier de Denet and Manessier, at the beginning of the thirteenth?. This romance was translated into prose in the sixteenth century, and printed in 1530. In this it is related, that king Carados of Vaigue came to Arthur's court to ask for a wife, and receives from the suzerain a lady named Ysenne de Carahais. During the ceremonial of the nuptials an enchanter named Eliaures falls in love with the bride, and by magical delusion contrives to take the husband’s place. The issue of this intercourse is a son, also named Carados, who is subsequently sent to the court of Arthur by his supposed father, to acquire a knowledge of chivalrous exercises. After a time the monarch resolves to hold a court pleniére in the city of Carlisle ( Cardeuil), for the purpose of conferring the order of knighthood on his young nephew, and communicates his intention to Gawayne, who highly approves of it. The feast is kept at Pentecost with extraordinary splendor, the ceremony of knighthood takes place, and Arthur, according to his usual practice, is only awaiting some adventure before he proceeds to the banquet, when at this moment a knight hastily rides up, singing an air © bien doulcement,” whose appearance is thus described :—* et avoit dessus le bonnet ung cercle, ou pendoit ung chapeau de fleurs, et estoit vestu de satin verd, fourré de erminnes ; et avoit une espée saincte, dont puis eust la teste couppée, et en estoient ses renges ou saincture de fine soie, batue en or, et force perles semées par 1 p. 4,1. 34. See also p. 27, 1. 690. 2 Copies of the metrical romance are rare in Great Britain. I have only been able to discover one, in the College of Arms, MS. Arund. 14; but this is imperfect, and does not proceed beyond f. xlvii. of the edition. There is said to exist a second perfect copy in the Advocates Library. In a copy of this romance among the MSS. of the Bibliotheque du Roi at Paris, Suppl. Frangais, No. 430 ; the Episode of Carados and Elaures occurs at fol. 89>. 2K 306 NOTES. dessus.” The knight comes to the king, and begs to have a request granted, —to exchange blow for blow. “ How is that?” said Arthur. “ Sire, I will tell you,” replied the stranger, “I will deliver my sword to a knight, before your majesty and all the assembly, and if he is able to cut off my head with it at a blow, in case I should afterwards recover, I will then return him the stroke.” Keux, the seneschal, declares he would not accept the proffer for all the world, and brands with the name of fool any one hardy enough to attempt it. The knight, however, persists, and drawing his sword presents it first on one side and then on the other, much to the displeasure of the king, who sees his bravest champions draw back. At last young Carados starts forward, and seizes the weapon. The knight then lays down his head on a block, and Carados, persisting in the enterprise against the wishes of the whole court, raises the sword, and at a blow sends the stranger's head rolling off the length of a lance. The headless trunk immediately rises and takes up the head, which unites as well as ever, and the knight now claims the fulfilment of the conditions, but defers it for one twelvemonth, and on leaving the court reminds Carados strictly to observe the agreement. The court is much troubled at so strange an adventure, and many tears are shed for Carados, who, however, does not seem to regard the peril, but passes the time in feats of arms. At length the prescribed term arrives, and he returns to Carlisle at Pentecost day, when Arthur and his Round Table are assembled as before. The stranger knight again makes his appearance, and demands the accomplishment of the covenant. Carados lays his head on the block, and tells the knight to do his worst. Arthur and his queen both make an effort to save Carados from what appears certain death, but in vain; and the stranger having sufficiently kept them all in suspense, raises his sword, and strikes the neck of Carados, but with the flat side only of the weapon. He then tells him to rise, and reveals to him that he is Eliaures, the enchanter, his real father, and how it was brought about. He afterwards mounts his horse and departs, leaving Arthur and his knights to celebrate their feast in gladness’. From a comparison of this narrative with the Scotish romance, we may be better able to judge fairly of the merit of the author of the latter, and how far he has drawn on his own inventive powers for the changes and embellishments of the story. We meet with an incident of the same kind in the fabliau of La Mule sans Frein, probably of the thirteenth century. In this Gawayne is the hero, and on behalf of a damsel undertakes a perilous adventure. He arrives at the castle of a giant, sur- 1 Edit. 1530, ff. 76+—79*, Southey in his notes to the preface to the Morte d’ Arthur, gives an analysis of this story, p. xxxv., and refers it to a Welsh or Breton original. It is most surprising he should have been ignorant of the existence of the metrical French text. See idéd., p. xxvi. NOTES. 307 rounded by a paling, on which are fixed four hundred human heads. The giant receives him civilly, but when he is about to retire to rest, he is ordered to strike off the giant's head, who warns him at the same time, that on the following morning he will have to suffer a similar blow. Gawayne is nothing daunted, and smites the giant’s head off, but is infinitely astonished to see the body rise, take it up, and replace it. He goes to bed, and, strange to say, sleeps tranquilly. The next morning the giant comes with his axe, and awaking Gawayne, reminds him of the disagreeable conditions made the previous evening. The knight holds forth his neck, but it proves to be only a trial of his courage, and the giant praises and embraces him. This is evidently the same story as the preceding one, but diversified according to the fancy or memory of the minstrel. A third adventure of a similar description occurs in the second part of the Roman du Saint Graal, ascribed to Helie de Borron, and manifestly composed subsequent to the romance of Perceval. It is there related of Lancelot du Lac, that in one of his rambles he entered the Gaste Cité, from which issues a knight richly clad, holding a huge axe in his hands. Lancelot cuts his head off with the weapon, on the same conditions as Carados. At the appointed time he returns, and a strong and tall knight, brother of the one beheaded, approaches him, habited “de court, comme celluy qui veult faire office,” and holding the fatal glayve, which he had just whetted to make it cut sharper. Lancelot prepares to fulfil the conditions, makes a cross on the earth, and kneels down onit. The sole thought that troubles him is of his mistress, queen Guenever, He regrets he had not seen her once more to bid her adieu, and fears death only because it will separate him from her. His tears flow for the first time in his life. He extends his neck, and the tall knight steps back, andaimsa blow. Lancelot sees the shadow of the weapon, and eludes it. “Ha!” cried the knight, © my brother, whom you killed, did not act thus, but held his head firm, and so must you do.” At this crisis Lancelot is saved by the interference of two ladies from the castle, and the two enemies become friends?. Some points of resemblance will here also be remarked with the Scotish Romance, and it is highly probable that the author may have mingled together several narratives for the purpose of rendering his own more attractive. The series of temptations to which Gawayne is exposed, undoubtedly connects it with another traditionary story of his exploits, which I shall have occasion to speak of when I come to the romance of the Carle of Carelyle. To one of the preceding sources, in all probability, was Ariosto indebted for his 1 In Meon’s Nouv. Rec. des Fabliauz, t. i. p. 1. 8v0, 1823; and Le Grand d’Aussy, Fabliaua ou Contes, vol. i. p. 79, ed. 1829. 2 Roman du St. Graal, ff. 149», 181, 4to, 1516. 2r2 308 NOTES. episode of the necromancer Orrilo, whose powers in replacing his limbs when cut off exceed those of Eliaures :— Se gli spiccano il capo, Orrilo scende, Né cessa brancolar fin che lo truovi ; Et or pel crine et or pel naso il prende, Lo salda al collo, e non so con che chiovi : Piglial talor Grifone, e'l bracchio stende, Nel fiume il getta, e non par ch’ anco giovi ; Ché nuota Orrilo al fondo come un pesce, E col capo salvo alla ripa esce’. In the Appendix to the present volume will be found a modern rifacimento of this romance of Syr Gawayn and the Grene Kny3t, printed from the well-known Percy manuscript. Respecting the claim of the Britons and other nations to a Trojan descent, see the remarks of Thompson, in the preface to his translation of Geoffrey of Monmouth, 8vo, 1748; Warton’s Hist. Engl. Poetr., vol. i. p. 131, note, and Diss. on Rom. Fict., p. xi. ed. 1824; Ritson’s Life of Arthur, p.6, 8vo, 1825; and Panizzi’s Essay, prefixed to his edition of Boiardo and Ariosto, p. 49, 12mo, 1830. It is adopted by all the romancers, French and English, and introduced into Spenser’s Faerie Queen, b. iii, c. 9, st. 38, 41. Thus also the author of the alliterative Morte Arthur, in the Lincoln MS. A. 1. 17. Thus endis kyng Arthure, as auctors alegges, That was of Ectores blude, the kynge sone of Troye, And of sir Pryamous, the prynce, praysede in erthe ; Fro thethene broghte the Bretons all his bolde eldyrs In to Bretayne the brode, as the Bruytte tellys. Thid. 1. 5. Hit wat; Ennias the athel, & his highe kynde. The authority for this assertion was doubtless the Latin history ascribed to Dares 1 Orlando Furioso, canto xv. st. 71. NOTES. 309 Phrygius, cap. 39, 174, ed. Delph. 1702, although it is corroborated by the more classical names of Dionysius of Halicarnassus and Strabo. Joseph of Exeter in his poem De bello Trojano, composed in the twelfth century, thus versifies Dares : Interea questique diu, bellumque perosi, In foedus coiere Phryges ; juratur in usum Perfidiz perjura fides, Antenore dirum Parturiente nefas ; hujus consulta secuti Ucalegon atque Amphidamas, nec justior ipso Polydamante Dolon, patrieque in dumna ruentis Impius et tantis Aineas consonus ausis.—lib. vi. v. 705. The immediate source, however, made use of by the Scotish poet, may have been the popular Latin romance of Guido de Colonna, compiled in the thirteenth century, which subsequently was translated by Lydgate into English verse. Tbid. 1. 11. Ticius to Tuskan (turnes,] & teldes bigynnes. Unless Ticius is here a mistake altogether for Antenor, the name may possibly have been derived from Titus Tativs, king of the Sabines, and afterwards the colleague of Romulus at Rome. The word supplied is obvious, and rendered certain by several other passages, but I shall only quote one, In to Tuskane he towrne3, whenne thus well tymede, Takes townnes fulle tyte, withe towrres fulle heghe, etc. Morte Arthur, f. 80°. Tbid. 1. 13. Felix Brutus. This surname seems to be an invention of the writer for the sake of alliteration. I have not met with it elsewhere. A phrase by no means unusual. Compare ll. 614, 1049. We may hence reject the emendation of Chalmers, in reading rown for toun in the first stanza of Sir Tristrem. See Works of Sir David Lyndsay, vol. i. p. 128, 8vo, 1806. Tbid. 1. 37. This kyng lay at Camylot, etc. In Malory's Morte d' Arthur, compiled in 1469, Camalot is expressly declared to be the same as Winchester, b. 12, ch. x. vol. ii. p. 193; but this is contradicted oy 310 NOTES. by the Roman de Lancelot, vol. iii, f. exliv?, 4to, 1513, where the two cities are clearly distinguished from each other. Ritson supposes it may have been CaerWent in Monmouthshire, and afterwards confounded with Caer- Wynt or Winchester ; Life of Arthur, p. 82. But popular tradition here seems the best guide, which assigned the site of Camalot to the ruins of a castle on a hill, near the church of South Cadbury, in Somersetshire. See Leland's Jéin. ii. 75, and Collectan. v. 28. In the Roman de Tristan we read, “ Le roy Artus y sejournoit souvent, pour ce que la cité estoit aisée de toutes choses qu’il conuenoit a corps de homme aysier.” vol. 1, f. xxxvii. fol. 1520. So also the author of the Roman du St. Graal, 2nd part, in speaking of another Camylot, the residence of the mother of Perceval, says, “ Seigneurs, ne cuydez pas que ce soit de celluy Kamelot dont ces jougleurs vont chantant la chanson, ou le roy Artus tenoit si souvent sa court. Cestuy Kamelot, que fut a la vefue dame, est assyz au plus beau chef, et en la plus belle isle, et en la plus sauvaige de Galles, prez de la mer vers occident. Et Þ autre Kamelot est a I entrée du royaulme de Logres, qui est peuplé de gens, et est assiz au chef de la terre au roy Artus, pour ce que il tient & toutes les terres qui de celle part marchissoyent a la Stenne.” f. clxxxvii, 4to, 1516. See a passage likewise in the Roman de Lancelot, vol. i, f. Ixxxvi, and Southey’s note on Morte d’ Arthur, ii. 487. Tbid. 1.40. The revels at Christmas are more than once described with a zest, which would induce us to believe that the feasting and jollities of that season were kept up in the fourteenth century in Scotland in a manner not to be excelled by English pageantry. Besides the tourney, or amicable joust, we have carols, dancing, shouts of Noel, gifts decided by lot, interludes, songs, and other amusements. See ll. 472, 983, 1007, 1026, 1654. With regard to carols and Noel, Sandys's work on the subject may be consulted, 8vo, London, 1833. In the Roman de Lancelot, vol. i. f. xxxvi, it is stated, that Arthur was accustomed to hold a court and wear his crown five times in the year; namely, at Easter, Ascension-day, Pentecost, All Saints, and Noel. Of these the feast at Easter was more honoured, but that of Pentecost the most joyous. See some lines describing a court pleniére at Christmas, in the Lai du Conseil, p. 85, of Lais Inedits, by Fr. Michel, 8vo, Paris, 1836. On the popular Christmas play, as at present preserved in various parts of Scotland and England, see Davies Gilbert’s Christmas Carols, 8vo, 1823, pref. p. iv; Mactaggart's Scotish Gallovidian Encyclopedia, (a work but little known, and very curious), 8v0, London, 1824, in v. Yule-boys; Gentleman's Magazine, 1830, parti. p. 505; Hone's Every-day Book, vol. ii. p. 18, 8vo, 1831; and Sandys's Carols, pp. 110, 174. This play has been separately printed, but made up, without judgement, from various sources, 8vo, Portsmouth, 1836, NOTES. 311 Ther glent with yzen gray. The beauty of Queen Guenever is a constant theme with the old romancers, and appears to rest on historical tradition. In the Welsh version of the romance of Ywaine and Gawaine, (recently edited with so much taste by Lady Charlotte Guest as Part I. of the Mabinogion,) the expression © more lovely than Gwenhwyvar” occurs, p. 42, (see 1. 945 of the present poem), and the editor remarks, that this was the highest compliment it was possible to pay, since Gwenhwyvar is celebrated in the Triads as one of the three fair ladies of Arthur's court, p. 102. So also in the Latin Chronicle of Geoffrey, lib. ix. cap. 9, the queen is equally praised for her beauty and courteous manners, and this is repeated by Wace and his translators or imitators. But the most naive and elaborate personal description of her appearance, whilst yet at the court of Leodagan her father, is given in the very rare Roman de Merlin, vol. i. f. exxxvii, in these words:—“ Ny oncques en Bretaigne n' en nasquit point de plus belle pour lors. Son visaige estoit cler et luysant, et bien coulouré blanc et vermeil; si belle estoit que Nature avoit mis en elle toute son estudié, qu'il ne luy en failloit ne plus ne moins. Elle estoit haulte et droicte, et bien polie, le corps long, et gresle par les flans, les hanches basses, vestue d' abiz qui moult bien luy advenoient ; les bras avoit gros et longs, les piedz plains et voultiz, les mains grassetes, blanches comme neige. Si luy commengoient encores a croistre les mamelles dures, blanches, et rondes comme pommettes ; ne fut trop grasse ne trop maigre.” etc. See also another passage quoted by Southey in his Notes on Morte d' Arthur, vol. ii. p. 462. It need only be remarked in addition, that the “ y3en gray,” des yeux vaires, were considered in the times of romance as the undoubted characteristic of beauty. See examples (out of many) in the Erle of Tolous, ap. Ritson, Metr. Rom. iii. 107. Launfal, ib.i.205. Thomas of Ersyldoune, ap. Laing, Pop. Poetr. 1. 89; and Syre Gawene and the Carle of Carelyle, in the present volume, p. 197, 1. 365. Tbid. 1. 90. And also another maner meued him eke That he thurz nobelay had nomen, he wolde neuer ete. This is borrowed by the author immediately from the Roman de Perceval, fol. lxxviii— Keux, faict le Roy, ne vous hastez, car vous scavez long temps y a que quant court planiere ay tenue, que jamais ne voullus menger ains que nouvelles ou merveilles ne fussent devers moy venues ; et encores ne veuil coustume laisser ne abollir.” So also in the Roman de Lancelot, vol. iii. f. Ixxxii ; and Roman de Merlin, vol. ii. f. 1vi?, which narrates the establishment of this custom of Arthur, and is 312 NOTES. probably the authority whence the other romances borrowed. Cf. Malory's Morte d Arthur, ii. 203, 462. The same usage appears in the earlier German romancewriters, who, in truth, only translate the metrical French authorities. Consult Wigalois, p. 12, 12mo, Berlin, 1819; and the notes of the editor Benecke, p. 436. One of the brothers of Gawayne, by Belisent, half-sister of Arthur. I know not whence the author of the poem derived the epithet of a la dure main, which is never applied to him in the romances. His constant appellation there is 7 Orgueilleuz. His character is drawn in a few words in the Roman de Lancelot, ii. f. Isix.—* 1 fut sans pitié et sans amour, ne il neut oneques bonne grace fors que de chevalerie, et de beaulté, et la langue eut a delivré.” There is an amusing episode of his haughty behaviour in Merlin, ii. f. Ixxxvi, at which his father, old king Lot, is so enraged, that he cries out to Gawayne to slay him. His death, however, was reserved for Sir Launcelot, after the latter had been surprised by him in queen Guenever's chamber. Morte d Arthur, ii. 395. Tbid. 1. 112. Bischop Bawdewyn. This personage, who figures also in Sir Gawene and the Carle of Carelyle, and in The Turke and Gowin, occurs nowhere in the early French metrical and prose romances ; and his name seems to have been substituted by the English or Scotish poets in the fourteenth century, for that of Bishop Brice or Dubricius. There was an Archbishop of Canterbury named Baldwin, who held the See from 1184 to 1191, from whom the name may have been taken. Tbid. 1, 113, Ywan, Yryn son. Is the celebrated Ywain or Owain, sometimes surnamed Le Grand, son of Urien king of Moray, according to Geoffrey, or of Rheged, according to the Welsh authorities. His exploits were celebrated in French verse by Chrestien de Troyes, and thence translated into the German, Icelandic, Welsh, and English languages, for which consult Benecke’s edition of Jwein der Riter mit dem Lewen, 8vo, Berlin, 1827 ; Von der Hagen’s Grundriss zur Geschichte der Deutschen Poesie, 8vo, Berlin, 1812, p-118; Ritson’s Metrical Romances, vol. i. and Notes, vol. iii. 8vo, 1802 ; and Lady C. Guest’s Mabinogion, part i, 8vo, 1838. He must not be confounded (as Ritson has done) with Ywain 7 Avoultre, a base son of Urien by his seneschal’s wife, who was killed by Gawayne without knowing him, Roman de Lancelot, iii. f. exvii. There NOTES. 313 are also others of this name mentioned in the Roman de Merlin, i. f. ecviii®, and in the Roman d'Erec et d'Enide. Cf. Arthour and Merlin, p. 306, 4to, 1838. The name of this hero of the Round Table, somewhat disguised, again occurs in 1. 551 of the present poem; in the Awntyrs of Arthure, st. li. 1. 4; and Golagros and Gawane, |. 662. Sir Doddinaual de [le] Sauage, the duk of Clarence, Launcelot, and Lyonel, and Lucan the gode, Sir Boos, and Sir Byduer, big men bothe, And mony other menskful, with Mador de la Port. Of Aywan or Ywain I have already spoken. The second on the list is Erec, son of king Lac, of whom the romance of Erec et d'Enide, by Chrestien de Troyes, exists in MS. Bibl. du Roi, No. '7498*. The third is Dodinel le Sauvage, son of Belinans, king of Estrangegorre, by a daughter of king Matheu “de Iisle perdu.” “ Cestuy Dodinel,” says the Roman de Merlin, “fut surnommé Sauvaige, pource quil ne bougeoit des forestz et des bois, a chasser bestes sauvaiges,” i. f. cxlviii. He is delivered by Gawayne out of prison in the Roman de Perceval, f. cxcii®. The fourth, here named by his title of Duke of Clarence, was Galachin, son of Neutres, king of Garlot, by a sister of Arthur, and cousin of Dodinal, The duchy was given to him by Arthur, after his marriage with Guenever. The author of Merlin says of him, © Cest enfant Sut le meilleur chevalier de deux cents cinquante chevaliers qui furent de la Table Ronde,” i. f. exiP. His exploits in the Val sans retour are narrated in the Roman de Lancelot, i. f. cxc?. The fifth on the list is the redoubtable son of king Ban of Benoit, whose amours with queen Guenever have made him more conspicuous even than his valor. The readers of his romance, or of Malory’s Morte d Arthur, need not be reminded that he became the destroyer, mediately or immediately, of Gawayne and his brothers. Lyonel de Gauves or Gannes, son of king Boort, was the cousin of Lancelot, and received the kingdom of Gaul from his hand. In the Roman de Lancelot, i. f. Ixxxvi, it is said of him, “ Et le varlet avoit a nom Lyonnel pource que une grande merveille advint a son naistre. Car sy tost comme il yssit du ventre Helayne, sa mere, Pen trouva au meillieu de son pis une tasche vermeille en forme de lyon, et avoit l'enfant embrassé parmy le col, ainsi comme pour Pestrangler.” He is stated to have been killed in a battle against the sons of Mor. dred, and buried at Winchester. Sir Lucan was Arthur’s butler, and died with the king in the fatal engagement with Mordred. Sir Boort or Bors de Gauves or Gannes, was brother of Lyonel, and inherited the territories of king Claudas. Sir 314 NOTES. Beduer, usually styled the Constable, from his filling that office in Arthur's court, is characterized in the romance of Erec and Enide as one “ Qui molt sot deschas et tables.” His attendance on Arthur in his last moments, with the adventure of the sword Escalibor, forms an interesting chapter in the Morte d' Arthur, ii. 440. The last knight in the list, Mador de Ja Port, js introduced into the romance of Lancelot and the Morte d’ Arthur, as the accuser of queen Guenever, on behalf of his cousin Sir Patryse, who had been poisoned by some apples at a banquet instead of Gawayne, for whom the fruit had been treacherously prepared. ‘See Roman de Lancelot, iii. f. clix® ;. Morte d Arthur, ii. $21. This entire stanza and the following one are valuable for the minute description they contain of the mode of completely arming a knight at the close of the fourteenth century. The order was as follows :—A carpet was first brought, on which the various pieces of gilt armour were laid. The knight then was clad in a doublet of expensive Tarsic silk, (which was, doubtless, padded, to protect the body,) and next a skilfully made hood (capados), closed above, and bound within with some soft material (blaunner). The steel shoes were then placed on his feet, and his legs covered to the knee with steel greaves, to which were affixed knee-pieces (poleyns) well-polished, and fastened with knots of gold. After this, fair cuisses were affixed to his brawny thighs, and tied beneath with thongs, and afterwards the byrny or haubergeon of mail, consisting of steel rings sewed on a fair stuff. Well-burnished braces then are placed on his arms, with good elbow-pieces (cowters), and gloves of plate. Above all he wore his coat-armor, or jupon; his gold spurs were fixed ; and his sword attached about him by a silken girdle. Thus accoutred he hears mass, and afterwards, before mounting his horse, puts on his helmet, or bacinet, which was strongly stapled, and lined within ; it sat high on his head, and was hasped behind ; with a light urisoun over the aventaile, or part protecting the face, embroidered with gems on broad silken borders, with birds and truelove-knots interspersed so thick, as if it had been the labor of many ladies for seven years. Around the helmet was a circle of diamonds. The shield and spear complete the knight's equipment. Compare with this the passage in p. 75, and plate 14 of Skelton’s {lustrations of Antient Armour, 4to, 1830. Tbid. 1. 572. A crafty capados, closed aloft. I have met with no other instance of this term except in the present poem, but NOTES. 315 its derivation is clear, from the French cap-d-dos, and, doubtless, means a hood or close cap, descending low in the neck. Compare ll. 186 and 1930. Ibid. 1. 57%. Thenne set thay the sabatoun3, etc. These were steel shoes or clogs to protect the feet, from the French sabot, Spanish sapato, and were at an earlier period termed sollerets. They are mentioned in a poem quoted in Sir Walter Scott's Notes to Sir Tristrem, p. 374, ed. 1833. And some also dempte most sureste To arme them for battel of areste, And dyd on first, after their desires, Sabatons, greves, cusses with voyders. The poem is cited as “ Clariodes, MS.”, but as these lines do not occur in the romance of Clariodus, published by the Maitland Club, it would be very desirable to know where Sir Walter’s authority is preserved. The term again occurs in a curious MS. in the Lansdowne collection, No. 285, written for Sir John Paston, in the reign of Edward IV, and subsequently the property of Sir Thomas Wriothesley, the elder, Garter. “First ye muste set on sabatynes, and tye them vpon the shoo, wt smalle poyntes that wille [not] breke; and than griffus, and than guysshews, and than the breche of maile, and than towlettes ; than the breste ; than the vambrace ; than the rerebrace, than the gloovis,” etc., fol. 9. See Archeologia, vol. xvii. p. 295, where the whole passage is copied, but not very accurately ; and vol. xx. p. 496. Tbid. 1. 576. With polayne3 piched ther to. This term for genouillieres or knee-pieces of plate, is as old as the reign of Edward the First, in whose household-book it is found. See Du Cange, v. Polena, and Dissert. on Joinville, p. 184, fol. 1668. The word is preserved in the Wallace, viii. 1203, and Rauf Coilzear, ap. Laing, sign. B. iv.; and Jamieson is clearly mistaken in his explanation of pullaine greis, which mean greaves furnished with kneepieces. See also MS. Harl. 6149, fol. 46. Ibid. 1. 583. With gode cowters and gay. From the French coudiere, la partie qui couvre la coude. In the inedited romance of Morte Arthure is a curious passage, which as it refers to a combat between Sir Gawayne and Sir Priamus, I may be excused quoting here. 316 NOTES. And gyrdes at Syr Gawayne, as he by glentis, And awkwarde egerly sore he hym smythes ; An alet enamelde he ochis in sondire, Bristes the rerebrace with the bronde ryche, Kerues of at the coutere with the clene egge, Ane[n]tis the avawmbrace, vrayllede w' siluer, ‘Thorowe a double vesture of veluett ryche ; W' the venemous swerde a vayne has he towchede, That voydes so violently, that alle his witte changede ; The vesere, the auentaile, his vestures ryche, With the valyant blode was verrede alle ouer. MS. Linc., A. 1, 17, f. 80%. Ibid. 1. 592. So harnayst as he watz he herknez his masse. Thus in the Roman du Saint Graal, f. clxi>, 4to, 1516, it is said of Gawayne, « Ne jamais Gauvain ne partoit d'ung logis sans ouyr messe, 8 povoit, ny oncques ne trouva damorselle qu'il ne secourust.” See also Ritson’s Metr. Rom., iii. 241. The name of this celebrated horse furnishes an additional proof of the acquaintance possessed by the author of the early French romances. In the Roman de Merlin, pt. ii. f. lxxiib—lxxiv, is the account of his acquisition by Gawayne from the Saxon king Clarion, who rode “de Gringalet, ung cheval qui ainsi avoyt a non, pour la grant bonté de quoy il estoit plain ; car le compte dit, que pour dix lieues courir il n'en faisoit que le cerf, a tout ung chevalier armé de toutes pieces, ne si ne le failloit point picquer ne petit ne grant, ne jamais poil ne luy sua.” We meet with the same steed in the Conte of Le Chevalier a l Espee, Les armes recut un vaslet, Uns autres prist lou Gringalet. Meon's Fadliauzx, i, 134. Again, in the metrical Roman de Perceval, Trestoz fors le Gringalet ; Plorant s’en revont li valet. MS. Coll. Arm. f. 199. which in the prose text (4to, 1530, f. xxxiii®) is thus rendered, “ et remenassent ses chevaulx, fors ung bien petit palefroy,” evidently shewing that the later writer did NOTES. 317 not understand his original. In the old German version of Wolfram von Eschenbach, who appears to have followed Guiot, a Provencal author, rather than Chrestien de Troyes, we find the lines, D6 was ouch Gringuljetan gegurt, daz in mangen angestlichen furt gein strite was zer tjoste braht, des wart och da hin zim gedaht. Parzival, ed. Lachmann, 8vo, 1833, p. 167. In The Awntyrs of Arthure, Gawayne's steed is simply named Grisselle, st. xlii. 1. 18. Tbid. 1. 607. Hit wat; hyze on his hede, hasped bihynde, Wyth a ly3th vrisoun over the aventayle, Enbrawden and bounden, etc. Much time has been spent, but without success, in endeavouring to find other instances of the term urisoun, which would seem to have been the same as the cointisse, or © kerchef of plesaunce,” such as it appears on the effigy of Aymer de Valence, who died in 1323. See Stothard’s Monum. Effigies, fol. 1817, and Sir S. Meyrick’s Critical Inquiry, ii. 57. But in the former work, p. 12, in describing the bacinet, Stothard writes, © The camail, and what was called by the French a hourson, to which may be added a strap, was to attach the whole by means of a buckle, to the haubergeon or plates.” Whence did Stothard derive this term ? I answer, in all probability from MS. Harl. 6149, in which at fol. 46, are regulations “ How a knyt suld be armyt in tournay ;” and among them occurs, © Item, bacynet & tout le hourson, and ane escussone of balayne apone the nek, couerit wt ledder, etc. And apone ye bacynet a coife of mail, and a faire offroy befor on ye front, quha will.” These regulations are printed at length in the Archeologia, vol. xx. p- 510, and in the Critical Inquiry, vol. i. p. 155, but, I regret to add, very incorrectly ; and the explanation of the terms used is very wide of the truth, as may appear by comparing the original French text, printed in Du Cange’s seventh Dissertation on Joinville, p. 184. It is a, curious circumstance, which must have escaped the notice of the author of the Jngwiry, that the same regulations were previously printed more accurately by Leyden in his rambling preface to the Complaynte of Scotland, 4to, Edinb., 1802, p. 57, and there given as an extract from an heraldic MS., written and therefore conjectured to have been composed by Sir David Lyndsay, in 1586; and on such doubtful grounds large excerpts were made, and an argument drawn to prove the author of the Complaynte and the writer of the heraldic MS. 318 NOTES. to have been one and the same! But the fact is, that the contents of this Heraldic MS. (now in the Advocates Library, marked W. 4. 13.) were literally transcribed by Lyndsay from the Harleian MS. 6149, which latter volume, as appears by several entries in it, was translated out of French into Scotish at the command “of anne wirschipfulle man, Welzim Cumyn of. Inverellochquy, alias Marchemond Herald, be his obedient sone in the Office of Armes, Kintyre purseuant,” in the year 1494. In Lyndsay's time the Harleian MS. was no doubt preserved in the Scotish Office of Arms, which easily accounts for its transcription, and at once destroys all the superstructure raised by Leyden on its contents. In the French text, the word which occasioned this note is written houson; in Leyden it is printed howsone, and in Meyrick housson, and interpreted housing. I am, however, inclined to believe that hourson, the reading of the Harleian MS., is correct, as established by the line in the romance cited above. Ibid. |. 615. The cercle watz more o prys. This is not the padded wreath worn from the time of Richard IT. to Henry IV. on the bacinet, but the more splendid band of goldsmiths’ work, enriched with jewels. It is called “ bourdoure” in the Awntyrs of Arthure, st. xxx. 1. 4, and said to be “alle of brynte golde.” See numerous examples in Stothard’s excellent work ; and also consult Du Cange, v. Bacinetum ; Roquefort's Glossaire, Suppl. v. Helme ; Meyrick’s Inquiry, Gloss., v. Helmus ; and Planché’s Hist. of Costume, p. 160. Ibid. 1. 620. Wyth the pentangel de-paynt,— Hit is a syngne that Salomon set sum quyle, etc. Those who may wish to know the efficacy of this figure, as devised by Solomon, are referred to “ Lemegeton, Clavicula Salomonis, or The Little Key of Solomon the King, which containeth all the names, orders and offices of all Spirits, with the seales belonging to each,” &c., MS. Sloane, 3825. At f.221?, is the Pentagonal Figure of Solomon, comprising a pentangle within a circle; in the outer triangles is inscribed the name TETRAGRAMMATON, and names of Spirits in the inner divisions. It is directed to be made in © or ), and worn upon the breast, with the seal of the Spirit on one side of it, ete. He ber in schelde and cote. This appropriation of arms to Sir Gawayne is purely imaginary on the part of NOTES. 319 the author, and borne out by no romance authority. In the Devise des Armes des Chevaliers de la Table Ronde, prefixed to the Roman de Gyron la Courtois, fol., his arms are thus blasoned, “ Gauvain d’ Orcanie portoit de purpre & ung aygle d'or a deux testes, membrées d'azur ;” and this is copied by all the writers on the (pretended) armorial bearings of the Round Table, down to Richard Robinson, who in that very scarce book, © The Auncient Order, etc., of Prince Arthure,” 4to, Lond., 1583, tells us in his doggerel lines, In purple shield an Aegle spled All golde Sir Gawayne gaue ; One of the knights most conquerous, Hee merits fame to haue. Amongst them which the Table Rounde Enobled with Renowne By deeds of Arms in Contreyes cause, To bring her foes a-downe. It is certain, however, that the earlier romancers do not uniformly countenance these arms. In the Roman du St. Graal, indeed, pt. ii. ff. exxxvi>, clxii, Gawayne's shield is said to be de sinople, a ung aigle d'or, which device was probably bestowed on him from winning the shield of Judas Maccabeus (ibid. f. cxxx.), bearing the same insignia ; but in the Roman de Merlin, vol. i. f. elxiv, Gawayne's banner is described © de cendal d Inde, a ung lyon d'argent,” and vol. ii. f. Ixxxiii®, his shield, © au lion de sinople, rampant.” So also in the Roman de Lancelot, i, f. xev?, his shield is blasoned, © le champ de Tescu estoit d'or, et ung lyon de gueules.” Again in the German romance of Wigalois, 1. 5618, his arms are represented to be “ein wizzer hirz uf einem berge guldin,” and on an ivory carving of the thirteenth century, representing Sir Gawayne reposing on the enchanted bed, (see Roman de Perceval, f. xl.) we find on his shield a lion’s jamb. Consult Ferrario, Storia ed Analisi degli antichi romanzi di Cavalleria, vol. ii. p. 101, 8vo, 1828. By way of adding to this variety, the author of the Awntyrs of Arthure, st. xl. tells us his arms were © griffones of golde, engrelede fulle gaye,” with whom agrees the author of the metrical Morte Arthure in the Lincoln MS., fol. 93°. Tbid. 1. 648. At this cause the kny3t comlyche hade In the more half of his schelde hir ymage depaynted. The author has introduced the Virgin on Gawayne’s shield in imitation of Pridwen, the famous shield of Arthur, on which her image was similarly depicted. The 320 NOTES. passage in Geoffrey of Monmouth, lib. ix. c. 3, appears thus in the early English version of Lazamon. He heng an his sweore zenne sceld deore ; his nome wes on Bruttisc Pridwen ihaten ; ther wes innen igrauen, mid rede gold stauen, an on-licnes deore of Drihtenes Moder. See my edition of this valuable old poet, now in the press, vol. ii. p. 464, and Notes on the passage. A curious tradition or legend on the subject, evidently composed by the Monks at Glastonbury, and intitled © Quedam narracio de nobili rege Arthuro, in sacramento altaris non plene credente, qualiter confirmatus fuit in fide, factus vere credens, et quare mutavit arma sua,” is preserved in the Bodleian Library, and together with several other Latin legends relating to the heroes of the Round Table, may hereafter be published by me, accompanied by translations and notes. In the Roman de Merlin, ff. xevii, exvii?, Logres is merely the name of London, «a maitresse cite” of Arthur's kingdom, but in the present instance it means England in general. Supposing Gawayne to set out on his expedition from Camelot in Somersetshire, he must have proceeded (in case he did not cross the Severn) through Gloucestershire and adjoining counties into Montgomeryshire, and thence by a very circuitous route to Holyhead, adjoining the isle of Anglesea, from which he passes into the long narrow peninsula of Wirral in Cheshire, the uninhabited and waste state of which in the sixteenth century is borne out by historical facts. (See Ormerod’s Cheshire, vol. ii. p. 187.) The knight thence pursues his way over hill and moor, until he arrives at an immense forest, the locality of which would lead us to presume it to be Inglewood forest in Cumberland, which is elsewhere celebrated in romance. The object of his search, “the grene chapel,” is stated to be but two miles distant from a castle in this forest, in which Gawayne takes up his abode. Although in cases of this sort the imagination of the romance-writer generally is the sole guide of his pen, yet I cannot help thinking some allusion may be made to the “ Chapel of the Grune,” which in the older maps of Cumberland is marked as existing on NOTES, 32] the point of land on the western coast running into the estuary of the Wampool, not far from Skinburness, which forms part of Allerdale ward, below Derwent, but its history I have in vain searched for in various topographical works. Close to this was Woltsty or Vulstey castle, said to have been built by the Abbots of Holm Cultram, to secure their treasures; and here also are said to have been preserved the magic books of the wizard Michael Scott. Hutchinson's Cumberland, i. 329, li. 327, 340, 4to, 1794. The latter is Saint Julian, who in his character of “the gode herberjour,” was noted for supplying way-worn travellers with lodgings in a time of need. See Tyrwhitt’s Note on Chaucer, C. T. v. 342. The gorger or wimple is stated first to have appeared in Edward the First’s reign, and an example is found on the monument of Aveline, countess of Lancaster, who died in 1269. The fashion continued partially during the fourteenth century, for Chaucer’s Wife of Bath is so dressed, and the usage may have lasted longer in Scotland than in England. It makes its appearance again in the reign of Henry the Sixth, as appears by the monument of Elizabeth, wife of John de la Pole, duke of Suffolk. It may be observed, however, that from the poem the usage of the gorger would seem to have been confined to the elderly ladies. This is the 27th of December, and the last of the feast. Sometimes the Christmas festivities were prolonged to New Year's Day. in his “ History of English Rhythms,” vol. ii. p. 166, accompanied by a translation» which is often faulty, as will be occasionally pointed out in the Glossary. The minute particulars given here and elsewhere of © wode-crafte,” may seem to have been suggested by the similar passage in the romance of Sir Tristrem ; but whether this be so or not, the present poem has greatly the superiority, both in the extent of the details and the more graphic character given to them. The plan of hunting the deer here described may be explained as follows. On assembling at the kennel, the hounds were called out and coupled, and the hunters blew on their bugles three short moots or notes, which was responded to by the 2T 322 NOTES. baying of the dogs. The vewters, or men who judged of the game by the fewte or scent, then proceeded to the stations (érysteres) marked out, and the dogs were cast off. The deer, roused from the dale by the cry, seek refuge in the heights (the hy3e), but are there driven back by the parties (stablye) appointed, who allow the male deer and bucks to pass, but drive back the hinds and does with shouts; and as they fly, followed by the dogs, they are pierced with arrows, or should they escape the bowmen, are pulled down and killed by the greyhounds at the stations below. Compare the passages in the Awntyrs of Arthure, st. iv. v.; Romance of Clariodus, p. 246; and Wyntoun, vi. 16, 15, vii. 1, 46. The process here described may be compared with that in Str Tristrem, p. 158, and in Dame Juliana Berner’s Book of St. Albans, sign. e. i. edit. 1496. See also La Venerie de Jaques de Fouilloux, 4to, Paris, 1585, cap. 44; and A Jewell for Gentrie, [by T. S.] 4to, Lond., 1614, sign. F. 2. The description runs thus, as far as the obscurity of the technical terms used enables me to interpret it. After taking the assay, or depth of the fat, they slit the slot (the hollow above the breastbone, or, according to others, the pit of the stomach), and take out the erber (the conduit leading to the stomach), cut it with a sharp knife, and tie up the severed parts ; then rip the four limbs, and rend off the hide. They next open the belly, and take out the bowels, cutting away lustily, and bear away the knot; then grasping the gargulun, they quickly divide the weasand or gullet from the wind-hole, and throw out the small guts. Afterwards they proceed to carve out the shoulders, by a small aperture, so as to keep the sides whole, and divide the breast in halves. Then beginning again at the gargulun, the deer is slit up to the fork; the avancers are voided out, and the fillets cut away by the ribs, and so by the ridge-bone even to the haunch, all of which form the noumbles, and are taken away together. By the fork of the thighs they lance the flaps behind, and hew it in two parts by the backbone. After this the head and neck are cut off, and next the sides severed from the chine ; the raven’s bone or fee is cast on a bush, and the sides pierced through and hung upon the houghs of the haunches(?), as the fee of those who were entitled to them. Lastly, they feed their hounds on the hide, with the liver, lights, and skin of the paunch, mingled with-bread dipt in blood, and blow prys, consisting of © two longe notes and the rechate.” The latter part of this ceremony, then considered so important, is amply described.in the Mayster of the Game, a treatise compiled for king Henry the Fifth, when prince ; but the details are passed over as belonging “moor to wodemannys craft than to hunters.” See MS. Cott. NOTES. 323 Vesp. B. xii. f. 94. The modern practice of breaking a deer may be found in « L’école de la Chasse,” par M. le Verrier de la Conterie, 8vo, Rouen, 1763, part ii. p. 182. The meaning of this line is obscure, but it seems to be, that the boar from its age had long since quitted the sounder or herd; according to the Book of St. Alban’s, Now to speke of the boore, the fyrste year he is A pygge of the sounder callyd, as haue I blys ; The seconde yere an hogge, and soo shall he be, And an hoggestere, whan he is of yeres thre ; And when he is foure yere, a boore shall he be, From the sounder of the swyne thenne departyth he ; A synguler is he soo, for alone he woll go. Edit. 1496, Sign. d. i. See also the treatise on hunting, by Twety, MS. Cott. Vesp. A. xii. f. 3°, and the chapter in the Mayster of the Game, on the wild boar, f. 33. This process of unlacing or undoing the boor is told more at length in the Book of St. Alban’s, sign. e, i, and the reward given to the hounds is especially noticed in another passage. Thrugh your houndys by strengthe yf that he be dede, They shall haue the bowelles boyllyd wyth the brede. Sign. d. iP. And so also in the treatise ascribed to Twety, written originally in French, in the time of Edward the Second. © And whanne the boor is itake, he be deffetyd al velue, and he shal haue xxxii hasteletys; and ye shal 3if your houndys the bowellis boyled wt breed, and it is callyd reward, for cause that it is etyn on the erthe, and not on the skynne.” —f. 6°. That the hunting of the fox was an accustomed sport as early as the beginning of the thirteenth century we have the authority of Lazamon, who in his translation of the Brué inserts a passage not in his original, in which king Arthur compares the position of Cheldric, in the forest of Caledon, to that of bold Reynard after a chace, 324 NOTES. when he is fain to take to his hole, and is unearthed by his pursuers. See vol. ii. p- 451. A drawing on this subject executed soon after the year 1300, is copied by Strutt in his Sports and Pastimes, from MS. Reg. 2 B. vii. In the Mayster of the Game it is said, © The huntynge for the foxe is faire for the good crie of the houndis that folowene hym so nye, and with so good a wille; alway thei senten of hym, for he fleth by thik spoies, and also for he stinketh evermore, and with gret payne he wil leeue a couert whan he is therinne,” etc., f. 42%, Yet notwithstanding this commendation, fox-hunting seems to have been but in little repute in the fifteenth century, and is almost wholly passed over in the Book of St. Alban's. The description of the fox-chase given in stanzas xxiii, xxiv, and xxxi, forms one of the most spirited parts of the poem, and are certainly the earliest extant on the subject among Scotish writers. Trased aboute hir tressour, etc. The fret in which the hair was confined forms a remarkable feature of the female coiffure in the reigns of Richard the Second and Henry the Fourth, and was composed of gold wire studded with precious stones. See Chaucer's Floure and the Leafe, 1. 152; Kempe’s Introd. to Stothard’s Monumental Effigies, p. 15; and Planché’s Hist. of Costume, p. 166. Compare also the tracing of the rude illumination in the original MS. of the poem, representing the lady’s visit to Sir Gawayne. The process of arming is not so minutely described here as in p. 23, but consists merely in putting on the ordinary apparel, and then the armour, namely, a hauberk (paunce), a pair of plates for the back and breast, and a byrny or haburgeon of steel rings, which would almost seem superfluous. Over all these was cast the surcoat of velvet, embroidered with the knight’s conisance in precious stones, and furred. In Chalmers's Caledonia, vol. iii. p. 211, a local proverb is quoted, which bears the same phraseology, When cloudy Cairnmuir hath a hat, Pilnour and Skairs laugh at that. Fuller in his Worthies, preserves a similar saying in Cumberland, vol. i. p. 234, 4to, 1811. NOTES. 325 By Barsabe the writer means Bath-sheba, the wife of Uriah the Hittite. See 2 Sam. cap. xi. In hoyntyse of clergye bi craftes wel lerned ; The maystres of Merlyn, etc. The fame of this lady is known to all readers of romance, and more particularly of the Romance of Merlin, in which a minute description of her personal appearance and accomplishments is given. See Southey's Notes on Morte d'Arthure, ii. 468. It is acknowledged on all sides that she received her instruction in the art of magic from the © conable klerk” Merlin, and from her proficiency was called © Morgain la fee,” which our author has rendered © Morgne the goddess.” Yet he seems by calling her © the maystres of Merlyn,” and speaking of her amours with that sage personage, to have unwittingly confounded her with her rival in the science of necromancy, Vivienne, the Lady of the Lake. Merlin's love for the latter, and her deception of him by means of the art he had taught her, are related in various places ; but there is no authority, as far as my reading extends, for the assertion in the poem, beyond that of the writer himself. The cause of Morgain's hate to queen Guenever, alluded to in the text, 1. 2460, was occasioned by an intrigue between the former and a knight named Guyomars, which was discovered and revealed by the queen. Roman de Merlin, i. f. clxxx” ; Roman de Lancelot, i. f. cxevi; Le Grand's Fabliaux, i. 152, ed. 1829. In the romance of “ Ywaine and Gawin,” printed in Ritson, a lady says she has a precious ointment, given to her by © Morgan the Wise.” This undoubtedly refers to the enchantress, and Ritson in his Notes, vol. iii. p. 239, interprets it erroneously. The Prophecies of Merlin attribute to the Lady of the Lake a deeper knowledge of magic than Morgain, and a curious story is related of a trial of skill between Morgain, the Lady of Avalon, Sibille, the enchantress, and the queen of North Wales. If, says the compiler, the Lady of the Lake had been there, “ toute la subtilité du monde y seroit.” Morgain conjures up a legion of devils to carry away the Lady of Avalon, but they are repulsed, and Morgain herself comes in person, reading her magical book as she advances. Her opponent, however, is prepared for her, and having on a ring, the power of which is such as to obtain instantly whatever the possessor demands, she comes forward to Morgain, and asks for all her clothes, which of course immediately leave the wearer, and Merlin’s pupil, to her extreme surprise, finds herself “al so naked as she was borne” in the midst of her attendants! The Lady of Avalon laughs 326 NOTES. at her confusion, but in pity takes off her surcoat, and gives it to the vanquished and angry enchantress.—“ ‘Ha!’ dame, ‘fait Morgain, vous m' avez honnye, car Ton cuidoit que je fusse de Jeune aage, et ilz ont veu ma chair nue et ridée, et mes mamelles pendans, et aussi la peau de mon ventre, dont la nouvelle sera comptée en maint lieu. © Morgain, fait la Dame d’Avallon, ‘je scay certainement que par maintes fois avez esté en vostre lict toute nue avec maint beau chevalier.” ‘En nom Dieu, fait Morgain, ‘se je y ay esté, aussi me suysje baignée, et oings tous mes membres, dont les chevaliers les troverent toutes fresches et dures,” fol. cxxxi®. The author of the poem had therefore good authority for his description of the © auncian” lady. See 1. 961. The Awntyrs of Arthure at the Cerne Gathelpne. WO Manuscripts of this romance exist. Of these one is at present in the Bodleian Library, which previously belonged to Baynes, Ritson and Douce, and from a transcript of this MS. the poem was first printed (“surreptitiously,” says Ritson,) by Pinkerton, in his © Scotish Poems,” vol. iii. p. 197, 12mo, 1792, under the title of © Six Gawan anp SIR GALARON OF GALLOWAY.” He divided it into two parts, and prefixed an argument to each, but his text is extremely incorrect, and, as he was confessedly ignorant of the language, his Glossary exhibits many errors. From this edition, bad as it is, the first twenty-six stanzas were transferred to Sibbald’s “ Chronicle of Scotish Poetry,” 8vo, 1802, vol. i. p. xvii. Another transcript of this MS., made about the middle of the last century, was in the library of Heber (Sale Cat. No. 1121, where it is stated to have been copied “ from a MS. penes Nickols,”) and was purchased subsequently by Sir Thomas Phillipps, Bart. The second NOTES. 327 copy of the poem is preserved in the library of Lincoln Cathedral, marked A. 1. 17, but is, unfortunately, not quite perfect. From this MS. the romance was again printed by Laing, in his © Select Remains of the Ancient Popular Poetry of Scotland,” 4to, 1822, and the deficiencies supplied from Mr. Douce’s manuscript. The age of the latter MS. is assigned by Pinkerton and Laing to the reign of Henry the Sixth, but I do not think it can claim a higher antiquity than the period of his successor, or about the years 1460-1480. The Lincoln copy is undoubtedly earlier, being written, with many other pieces in the same volume, between the years 1430— 1440.' It has therefore been judged advisable, in printing this curious poem for the third time, to take the Lincoln MS. for the ground-work of the text, and where defective, inserting the lines from the later copy, the variations of which throughout are very carefully noted. There are many clerical errors in both manuscripts, which were no doubt written in England, and therefore do not present a genuine Scotish text, yet enough remains to prove the romance to be of Northern original. The readings of the Douce MS. are sometimes preferable, but as it is a dangerous practice to attempt to unite copies written at different periods and in different parts of the kingdom, the variations of the later copy have been kept quite distinct. Both the MSS. having been placed by the liberality of the owners, the Dean and Chapter of Lincoln and the late Francis Douce, Esq., for a considerable period in the hands of the editor, an opportunity was thereby afforded of transcribing and collating them more minutely than had previously been possible, and it is believed that the present edition may on that account lay claim to greater accuracy than its predecessors. The authorship of this poem has been generally ascribed to Clerk of Tranent, who is believed, with every appearance of probability, to have lived in the early part of the fifteenth century. The authority on which this supposition rests is a passage in the poem of Dunbar, intitled “Lament for the deth of the Makkaris,” written about the year 1507, in which he says, Clerk of Tranent eik he hes tane, That maid the awnteris of Gawane.? The Maitland MS. reads The clerk, which has occasioned Macpherson, and, after him, Sibbald and Heber, to conjecture, that Hucheon or Hugh may have been his christian name, and consequently that the Huchowne of Wyntoun and the Clerk of Dunbar were the same individual. But this conjecture has no probability in it, and is satisfactorily refuted by the internal evidence of the poem itself. From the simi- 1 See the description of this MS. annexed to the Introduction of the present volume. 2 Edit. Laing, vol. i. p. 214. 3 Notes on Wyntoun, ii. 364. 328 NOTES. larity of style, the peculiar construction of the stanza, and the subject, it is almost certain, that the writer of the Awntyrs of Arthure must also have been the author! of Golagros and Gawane, and it will hence appear how inconsiderately the composition of these poems has been assigned by Sir Walter Scott?, Ellis3, Sibbald*, and Tytler to the thirteenth century! The language alone, had it been studied, would prove the error of such an hypothesis, which is more completely demonstrated by the costume of these pieces, and by the structure of the wheel attached to each stanza. Another feature of these poems consists in the repetition of a leading thought or expression, which served to knit the lines together and assist the memory, but this is not confined to poems of the fifteenth century, nor indeed to Scotish poetry ; for the usage occurs in Minot’s poems, composed in the middle of the fourteenth century, and was borrowed from the middle-age Latin writers, among whom such verses were called serpentine. The sources from which the Scotish writers derived their romance poems has been too hastily referred by Sir Walter Scott to the floating British traditions of Arthur's cycle®; an opinion repeated by Leyden’, Laing®, and Tytler’. This assertion I hold to be true to a very limited extent. Allowing even Sir Tristrem to be the work of a native of Scotland, (which I do not,) nothing is more certain than its derivation from an Anglo-Norman text; and the same fact is indisputable in the instances of the romances of Sir Gawayne and the G'rene Kny3t, and Golagros and Gawane. In regard to the poem which these remarks more particularly apply to, the author refers to “the buke,” but whether this is, as often, a mere form of words, I have met with no evidence to prove. It is, however, not to be doubted, that the groundwork of the first portion of the poem is taken from a very popular religious legend among the Latin writers of the middle-age, which is found in various forms, but with the same general outline,—the appearance of a female in torments, who has been punished for her want of chastity, pride, and vanity, and whose salvation is procured by a certain number of masses said for her soul. In my edition of the old English versions of the Gesta Romanorum, printed for the Roxburghe Club, 4to, 1838, will be found several notices on the subject, Notes, p.528. There is an inedited English poem of the fifteenth century, called © The Trental of St. Gregory,” MS. Cott. 1 Ellis commits a grievous error in ascribing the English romance of Ywain and Gawin to Clerk. See Metr. Rom. i. 345. 2 Preface to Sir Tristrem, p. 57, ed. 1833. 3 Ellis, Metr, Rom., i. 129. 4 Chron. of Sc. Poetr., i. p. xvi.; but he also assigns the years 1341—1371 as its era. 5 Hist. of Scotland, ii. 359, 8vo, 1829. 6 Pref. Sir Tristr. p. 57. 7 Compl. Scotl. p. 208. 3 Pop. Poetr. Scotl., pref. to The Awntyrs. 9 Hist. Seotl. ii, 359. NOTES. 329 Calig. A. II. f. 84%, founded on the same story, in which Pope Gregory plays the part that queen Guenever does in the Scotish romance. It may be worth while to quote a few lines to shew the similarity of the tales. The pope as he at hys masse stode Vpon hys modur he hadde throw3t goode, Prayng to god wt conciens clere, The sothe to knowe as hit were; And sodenly yn myddes hys masse Ther throw3 to hym suche a derkenesse Tht he lakkede ner the dayes ly3t, For hit was derke as mydny3t. In tht derkenes was myste among, Alle astonyed he stode, so hit stongke ! Be syde he loked vnthur hys lere ; In tht derknes a thyng threw hym nere, A wonthurfulle grysely creature, Aftur a fend fyred, w* alle here feture ; Alle ragged & rente, both elenge & euelle, As orrybulle to beholde as any deuelle ; Mowthe, face, eres, and yes Brennede alle fulle of brennyng lyes. He was so agast of th‘ grysyly goste That yn a sownyng he was almoste. He accosts the spirit, who answers him thus: I am thy modur tht the beere, Tht for vnschryuen dedes so derne In byttyr paynes thus Y brenne. He inquires the cause, and is told it is the consequence of her living in lusts and refusing to confess. The pope lette teres adown renne, And to hys modyr he sayde then, Telle me now, modur, for loue of Mary, flour, If any thyng may the help or sokour, Bedes or masse thy penaunce to bye, Or ony fastyng thy sorowe to aleye? She requires a ¢rental of masses, and then departs. It need scarcely be remarked how immeasurably the Scotish poet has the advantage over the English writer. 2u 330 NOTES; Of the second part of the romance I have not been so fortunate as to find the prototype, but in the Morte d'Arthur of Malory, professedly compiled from the French, Syr Galleron of Galway is introduced as a knight of the Table Round, “the whiche was a noble knyghte, and had done many dedes of armes, and he was a large knyght of flesshe and boone,” vol. ii. p. 197. Of his © many dedes of armes” scarcely any information is given, but we find him again included among the knights who watch together for the purpose of surprising Lancelot du Lac in queen Guenever's chamber. “ And these were their names: Syr Colgreuaunce, Syr Mador de la Porte, Syre Gyngalyne, Syr Melyot de Logrys, Syre Petypase of Wynchelse, Syr Galleron of Galway, Syr Melyon of the Montayne, Sir Astamore, Syre Gromore Somor joure [read Grummors sone], Syr Curselayne, Syr Florence, Syr Louel. So these twelue knyghtes were with Sir Mordred and Sir Agrauayne, and al they were of Scotland, outher of Syr Gawayn's kynne, outher well willers to his bretheren.” —Morte d'Arthur, vol. ii. p. 392. This is still the name of a small zr or lake, which covers about an hundred acres of land in the forest of Inglewood, near Hesketh in Cumberland. Towards the north-east end were the remains, in 1794, of an ancient castle, called popularly Castle Hewin. Hutchinson's Cumberland, i. 491. The spot is again alluded to in the romance-tale or ballad on the Marriage of Sir Gawayne, printed by Percy, Reliques, iii. 351, ed. 1794, and reprinted in the Appendix to the present volume. Consult Ritson’s King Arthur, p. 93. Ibid. st. i. 1. 3. Carelele. Carlisle in Cumberland is here evidently intended, but in the French romances we always find Cardueil, which is represented to be © en la marche de Galles” in the Rom. de Perceval, f. \xxvi*, where we may conclude that Caerleon on Usk, in Monmouthshire, may be meant. See Lady C. Guest’s Note on the Mabinogion, pt. i. p. 87. | This must refer to the birth-place of Gawayne’s steed, since neither himself nor the Queen were born in Burgundy. Perhaps, however, it is a poetical license, for the sake of the alliteration. NOTES. 331 Cador was earl of Cornwall, and acts a conspicuous part in the Brut. He was slain with the flower of the knights of the Round Table in the battle against Mordred, and his son Constantine succeeded Arthur inthe kingdom. Mr. Douce’s MS. reads Sir Cleges, whose name occurs several times in the Morte d Arthur, and of whom exists a romance printed by Weber, vol. i. p. 331. Sir Caduke is doubtless Sir Cradock (the Carados of French romance,) who is the hero of the amusing tale of The Boy and the Manile, in Percy, vol. iii. p. 3. Sir Costarde is probably a false reading for Constantyne, Cador’s son; and Sir Kaye is the well-known Seneschal of Arthur. Brangwayne is sufficiently well known as the accommodating attendant of La belle Iseult, (see Scott's Notes on Sir Tristrem, pp. 418, 450, and Michel’s Tristan, ii. 163, 12mo, 1835); but of the other lady, Beryke, or Berelle (as Douce’s MS. reads, ), no mention has been found, either in French or English romancers. Compare some corresponding lines in Golagros and Gawane, 1. 1230. The name of queen Gayenour's or Guenever's mother is not here expressed, nor have I met with it elsewhere. According to romance authority she must have been the wife of Leodegan, king of Carmelide. The vices she accuses herself of are imaginary, and introduced from the old religious legend, invented for the purpose of shewing the efficacy of confession and mass. Arthur's combat with, and victory over Frolo, the tribune or governor of Gaul under the Romans, is related by Geoffrey, lib. ix. cap. 11, and amplified afterwards by Wace and Lazamon. The same personage is introduced into the Roman de Merlin, p. ii. f. ix, and Roman de Lancelot, ii. f. lxiv’. Who is meant by the Farnaghe, I am at a loss to discover, and from the reading of Douce’s MS. one would suspect some error here. In the inedited Morte Arthure, Fortune says to the British monarch, 2u2 332 NOTES. Fownde abbayes in Fraunce, the froyte3 are thyne awene, Fore Frolle, and for Ferawn?, and for thir ferse knyghttis, That thowe fremydly in Fraunce has faye be-leuede. MS. Line. f. 89. This Sir Feraunt was slain by Sir Florent, in a battle between Sir Gawayne and the Lorainers and Lombards, ib. f. 82P. Compare Malory’s Morte d’ Arthur, book v. cap. 11. It may be remarked that the reading of the Douce MS. in the latter part of the line is fully confirmed by the passage quoted above. Few readers of romance will have to be reminded that the traitor Mordred, generally termed Arthur’s nephew, but in reality his bastard son by the wife of king Loth, is here intended. According to Malory, book xxi. cap. 1, he was crowned at Canterbury. For a personal description of Mordred, see Roman de Lancelot, ii. f. lxix. His treason was first communicated to Arthur, after the final defeat of the Romans, in Tuscany. Ibid. st. xxiii. 1. 8. Be-syde Ramessaye, fulle ryghte at a rydynge ; And at Dorsett salle dy doghetyeste of alle. The scene of the fatal battle with Mordred is placed by Geoffrey of Monmouth and his followers near the river Camel in Cornwall, which by French writers and many of our modern historians is called Camlan. Lazamon, the translator of Wace in the reign of King John, adds from himself, that the precise spot was at Camelford. See my edition of that writer, vol. iii. p. 141. The author of a short metrical Brut, in the MS. Red Book of Bath, calls it Camelerton. It is therefore difficult to explain the statement in the passage above cited, which is manifestly erroneous, and opposed to the stanza immediately following, in which the writer says “upponne Cornewayle coste.” Sir Thomas Malory, apparently without any authority, removes the action to “a doune besyde Salysbury,” vol. ii P- 436. . Ibid. st. xxiv... 7. «oo that beris of sabille A sawtire engrelede, of siluer fulle schene. This is also an invention of the poet, and not in accordance with the romance auh orities, which state Mordred's arms to have been similar to his half-brothers, © de NOTES. 333 pourpre da un aigle a deux testes d'or, membrées de mesmes, @ un chef d'argent.” See La Devise, etc., des Chevaliers de la Table Ronde. To mene me w* messes grete mede to the it were; Bot for hym p* raghte was one rode, Gyffe faste of thi gude Whilles pt pou arte here. To pam’ pat fayles the fude, Of Randulphs, or Randals Hall, I have been unable to fix the locality. It may be, as in other instances, an imaginary spot. Stode als ane unycorne, etc. Cheuarone is here used for the chanfron or chanfrain, 5. e. the piece of armour which protected the horse’s head. Sir S. Meyrick states, Critical Inquiry, vol. ii. p- 143, that the invention of a spike in front of the chanfron is to be assigned to the end of Henry the Sixth’s reign ; and Planche, in his Hist. of Costume, p. 205, says © chanfrons, with spikes projecting from them, were adopted about 1467.” Were this true, the date of the poem before us would be brought lower than the period we are from other circumstances justified in considering it to belong to. In an inventory dated 1316,, I find mention made of two © chanfrains dore3, et un de cuir,” and in the Assise Hierosolymitane, which Sir S. Meyrick considers to belong to the reign of Edward the Third, we have in cap. 95, the following passage, © Et le cheval doit estre couvert de couverture de fer (as in the present poem, st. xxx. 1. 6,) et avoir une testiere de fer, et enmi la testiere une broche de fer, telle come celle de Vescu.” See Crit. Ing. i. 124. Of Lomonde, of Lenay, of Lowthyane hillis. For Konynge the Douce MS. reads Connok, which is right, as confirmed by st. liii, 1. 3, The parishes of Old Cumnock and New Cumnock, in Ayrshire, were formerly comprehended in one, and constituted a barony, which in the fourteenth cen- 334 NOTES. tury belonged to the earls of March. See Chalmers's Caledonia, iii. 521. The same writer says it is difficult to decide when the Celtic districts of Carrick, Cuningham, and Kyle were formed into the present county of Ayrshire, and that in the time of Henry the Third Carrick was described as being in Galloway, a name applied loosely to the whole peninsula between the Solway and the Clyde, including Annandale and Ayrshire. By the ancient division of this county Carrick occupied the southern side of the Doon; Kyle, the space between the rivers Doon and Irvine ; and Cuningham the whole territory on the north of the last-mentioned river. bid. iii. 249, 446. Lomonde is in Dumbartonshire, and for Lenay, or, as MS. Douce reads, Zosex, we should probably read Zenaux, Lennox, an ancient district now partitioned between the counties of Stirling and Dumbarton. Perhaps Plumpton Park or Land is alluded to, situate in the parish of Lazenby, Leath ward, Cumberland, about six miles from Penrith. I can find no such person among the knights of Arthur's court. See Note on the previous poem, I. 686. The absence of this and of numerous other terms which occur in the present and following poems from Jamieson's Dictionary, induces me unwillingly to believe, that his work was executed but carelessly. The Doctor, had he pleased, might have found the word repeated in another piece he professes to have consulted. Hir peytrelle was of irale fyne, Hir cropoure was of orpharé, And als clere golde hir brydille it schone ; One aythir syde hange bellys three. Thomas off Ersyldoune, MS. Linc., A. 1. 17, f. 149°. The meaning of the term, I confess, I am ignorant of. This practice of wearing precious stones on the armour became very general during the fourteenth NOTES. 335 and fifteenth centuries, and the allusions to it in this and the succeeding poem are extremely frequent. So in a curious passage in the inedited Morte Arthure : Thane ryse3 the riche kynge, and rawghte one his wedys ; A reedde actone of Rosse, the richeste of floures, A pesane, and a paunsone, and a pris girdelle, And one he henttes a hode of scharlette fulle riche ; A Pauys pillione hatt, that pighte was fulle faire We perry of the oryent, and precyous stones ; His gloues gayliche gilte, and grauene by the hemmys, W* graynes of rubyes, fulle gracious to schewe. MS. Linc. A. 1, 17, f. 89%. Marrake, and Menegalle, that maste were of myghte. The reading of the Douce MS. Arrak fi; Lake, is the more preferable. See with regard to this hero and Sir Owayne, the notes on the previous poem, Il. 113, 551. The third on the list is called Syre Mewreke in the romance of Syre Gawene and the Carle of Carelyle, 1. 34, and appears to be the same as © Sir Marrok, the good knyghte, that was bitrayed with his wyf, for she made him seuen yere a werwolf,” in Malory’s Morte d' Arthur, ii. 385, and on a similar story is founded the Lai de Bisclaveret of Marie, ed. Roquefort, tome i. p. 1/79, For Menegalle ( Moylard, MS. Douce,) we should perhaps read Menadeuke, a knight of Arthur's table frequently Joined to the former, as in the following passage : Sir Ewayne and Sir Errake, and othire gret lordes ; Demenys the medilwarde menskefully thare aftyre, With Merrake and Menyduke, myghtly of strenghes. MS. Line., 95». Both of these heroes were slain in the battle against Mordred. bid. f. 97°. I must leave the illustration of this and the two following lines to those who may be more able to give it than myself. The readings of the Douce MS. make the localities still more perplexing than in the text. 336 NOTES. The Lebynge, the Lowpynge, the Leveastre Ile. To elucidate the names of places probably disfigured by the English scribes of the MSS. requires more local knowledge than I possess, and no assistance has been derived from Macpherson's Geographical Illustrations, 4to, 1796, who ought to have had the passage before him. I heartily recommend the task to some Scotish antiquary. Inglewood forest in Cumberland was of great extent, being sixteen miles long and ten broad, lying between the rivers Shawk and Eden, and reaching from Carlisle to Penrith. It formerly abounded with deer, wild swine, and other beasts of the chace. In the Chronicle of Lanercost, under the year 1280, it is said that king Edward the First hunted there, and killed two hundred harts and hinds. The writer of the poem therefore in making this the scene of Arthur’s adventure, renders his romance authority of greater credit, by its being supported by historical probability. Golagros and Gawane, HE present poem is 80 intimately connected with the preceding one in subject and style, that the authorship of both has been almost by general consent ascribed to one and the same writer, and consequently to the same period. Unfortunately no manuscript of the work is now known to exist, either in Scotland or England, and the only copy that can be traced is the one formerly contained in the Asloan MS. in the Auchinleck library, written about 1515, but sub- NOTES. 337 sequently, together with many other pieces of interest, severed from the volume. In the index of contents still remaining it is entered as © Sir Golagrus and Sir Gawane.” For its preservation from total oblivion we are indebted to the earliest efforts of the Scotish press, established at Edinburgh, in 1508, by Chepman and Myllar, and it is, perhaps, owing to the popularity of their edition, that we find Gauen and Gollagras mentioned among the tales enumerated in the Complaynte of Scotland, 1549. In Lyndsay’s Historie of Squyer Meldrum, composed about the same period, we also read, Rolland with Brandwell, his bricht brand, Faucht never better, hand for hand, Nor Gawin aganis Gologras, Nor Olyver with Pharambras. Pol. ii. p. 296, ed. 1806. From the unique copy of. the black-letter 4to edition of 1508, preserved in the Advocates’ Library, it was negligently reprinted by Pinkerton in his Scotish Poems, vol. iii. pp. 67-123, who divided it into four parts, and added an argument to each ; and it appeared again, together with other pieces of Chepman and Myllar, in a limited fac-simile impression at Edinburgh in 1827. From this volume (which is now become extremely scarce, owing to a fire having destroyed most of the copies, ) it is here reproduced in ordinary type, with no other changes than a substitution of the Saxon Þ for its inadequate representative y, the rejection of obvious errors of the press (which are, however, retained at the foot of the page), and the use of regular punctuation, which is wholly omitted in the original. I have already had occasion to advert to the error of Scott and others, in assigning these poems to the thirteenth century ; an opinion chiefly founded “on the comparative absence of French words and phraseology, so fashionable in Scotland after the time of Robert Bruce.” [1306-1329.] Now we learn from a curious passage in the inedited Latin chronicle attributed to Walter of Coventry, that as early as the reign of William the Lion the Scotish court had adopted the manners, dress, and even language of France', and this taste continued to prevail more or less to a comparatively recent period, and must have had considerable influence on Scotish literature in general. That such was the case at the close of the fourteenth century we have abundant proof in the various poems presumed to have been com- 1 “ Moderniores enim Scottorum reges magis se Francos fatentur, sicut genere, ita moribus, lingua, cultu, Scotisque ad extremam servitutem redactis, solos Francos in familiaritatem et obsequium adhibent.”—Memor. Histor. ad ann. 1212, MS, C.C.C.C. 2x 338 NOTES. posed by Huchowne, which exhibit not only a familiar acquaintance with Freneh compositions, but abound with words and phrases borrowed from that language. Yet, as it is nearly certain on other grounds that the present poem was composed in the first half of the fifteenth century, the argument of Scott necessarily falls to pieces. But the author of the prefatory remarks to the fac-simile reprint, in 4to, 1827, writes thus, © Had this romance, like so many of the English metrical romances, been a translation, it is unlikely that the author would have encumbered himself with such an intricate mode of versification ; and therefore, it may be entitled to claim the praise of an original composition.” —p. 8. To this it may be replied, that there is no reason why a Scotish writer, even when translating or imitating a foreign original, should not use whatever form of verse was popular in his own country (as in the case of Rauf Coilzear), and that this peculiar alliterative stanza was the most cultivated is evident from the numerous poems still remaining in it, even so late as the sixteenth century. But without further © fending and proving,” the plain fact is this; that the author of Gologras and Gawane has borrowed the entire outline of his romance from the French Roman de Perceval. An abridgement of the original, as it appears in the prose version, printed in 1530, will best serve to shew the close imitation of the Scotish writer, and the fallacy of believing in “floating Celtic traditions.” King Arthur sets out with fifteen knights, amongst whom was Sir Gawayne, to undertake the delivery of Girflet, son of Do, from the Chateau Orgueilleux, where he had lain-prisoner for three years. They issue from a forest into a plain of great extent, where the king is so fatigued with his journey and fasting, that he requires both meat and repose. They stop under a tree, by the side of a fountain, and Gawayne points out to Kay (Keux), the Seneschal, a mansion in a valley, to which the latter at once proceeds, in the hope of procuring some provisions. He finds only an old woman in the house, and no eatables of any sort; but the old woman tells him, that at no great distance was a castle, built by the Seigneur de Meliolant, where he generally amused himself with his hawks. She points it out to him, and Kay perceives that it is well environed with fish-ponds, woods, meadows, windmills, and orchards, in the midst of which stood a fair tower, Kay spurs his horse, rides up, and passes the drawbridge, but encountering nobody, he enters a spacious hall, and perceives a chimney with a large fire burning in it, at which a dwarf is diligently roasting a fat peacock on a spit made of apple-tree wood. The Seneschal inquires if any other person is within, but the dwarf does not deign to answer him, at which Kay is so angry, that he is near killing the dwarf on the'spot. He restrains himself however, and merely says, he will take the peacock for his dinner, and for the king’s repast. The dwarf swears he shall not have it, and tells him he will fare ill, if he does not depart quickly. After some more mutual ill language Kay strikes the dwarf such a blow, that he falls against the pillar of the chimney. He cries out lustily, and at the noise a door opens, and a tall fair knight enters the hall, not NOTES. 339 yet thirty years of age. He wore a robe of white sami, furred with ermine, and fastened by a girdle of gold, of great value. He led a greyhound by a green silk lace, and when he saw his dwarf bleeding, he asks of Kay why he had thus mal-treated his servant? The Seneschal replies rudely, on which the knight inquires his name. On being told, he says,’ that he would easily have been known by his manner of speaking, (a direct allusion to Kay the crabbed) and adds, that as it is not the custom of his house to refuse any viands asked for, Kay shall certainly have his share of the peacock. He then takes the bird, and strikes the Seneschal with it on the neck so violently, that he falls flat on the floor. The peacock is broken by the force of the blow, and the hot gravy mms in between the rings of Kay’s hauberk, and scalds him cruelly, so that he bore the mark about his neck the remainder of his life. The knight then throws the remains to his greyhounds, and tells the Seneschal to leave the place; two attendants turn him out, and he returns much mortified to Arthur, to whom he relates what had taken place. Arthur does not credit Kay’s representation, but sends Gawayne. He is received courteously by the knight, who invites the king and his companions to the mansion. They are entertained sumptuously, and Kay is ridiculed by all, the dwarf not excepted. The knight then discloses his name, which is Ydier le Bel, and offers to accompany Arthur to the Chateau Orgueilleux, but this is declined, and on the following day they take their leave.—fol. 103>—105. The above analysis comprehends the first eighteen stanzas of the poem before us. Let us now proceed to another portion of the same romance. Arthur and his knights, accompanied by Brandelis (who will figure also in the Jeaste of Syr Gawayne), proceeds to the siege of the Chateau Orgueilleux (which is clearly identical with the castle of Gologrus). Soon after their arrival a horn is sounded from the castle, and on Arthur’s inquiring the cause of Brandelis (who here takes the part of Spynagros), he is told, it isto warn the country of the approach of their forces. Knights approach on all sides to succour the lord of the castle, and three thousand shields and gonfanons are displayed from the walls. Lucan, the royal butler, asks to have the honour of jousting on the first day, which is granted. The place of combat is marked out by four olive trees, and the conditions are such, that whoever passed the bounds, was to be accounted recreant, and detained. Lucan forces his adversary from his horse, but contents himself with bringing back the steed as a proof of his victory, leaving the knight in the field. He is blamed by Brandelis for so doing, and on returning to the field, is encountered by another knight, wounded severely, and taken prisoner. Brandelis goes out the following day, and brings back his opponent prisoner to Arthur’s camp. On the third day Kay undertakes the joust, and conquers his opponent, but violates the rules by going beyond the boundaries. The bells of the churches in the castle now sound, and Arthur is informed that the besieged are about to celebrate a festival in honour of the Virgin. Arthur therefore spends the day in hunting, and Gawayne rides out by himself, and meets the Riche Souldoyer, who is lord of the castle, and who had an appointment with a lady. The night is passed in great joy by the besieged— grand bruit feirent menestriers, de cors, tabours, fleuttes et trompes & jouer,” —until midnight. The 2x2 340 NOTES. succeeding day Ywain has the joust, and takes his adversary prisoner, the son of Count Blandigant of Ireland. Gawayne inquires of him who will joust on the next day, on the part of the besieged. He is assured that the Riche Souldoyer himself means to come forth. Gawayne asks of Arthur to be allowed the combat. It is granted, and Arthur lends him his famous sword Escalibor. On Gawayne’s coming into the field, a horn is heard to sound four times, and is explained by Brandelis to signify by the first blast, that the Riche Souldoyer was about to arm himself; by the second and third, that his jambes, cuisses, hauberk, and helm were adjusted ; and by the fourth, that he was mounted. The combat between this redoubtable knight and Gawayne is conducted with great strength and valour on both sides, and lasts till midday had passed. Gawayne sees his adversary’s strength is failing, and deals him such a blow, that both combatants fall prostrate on the earth. Gawayne, however, recovers himself first, and commands the knight to yield, who refuses, and only utters some lamentations touching his mistress. Gawayne takes off the knight’s helmet, who inquires his conqueror’s name, and on learning it, he prays him for the sake of preserving the life of his amie, to accompany him to the castle, promising that he would afterwards be at the king’s pleasure. Gawayne consents, and they return together. Arthur is utterly disconsolate, thinking his nephew is made prisoner,—* tel courroux ena le Roy pris, que plus ne le peult regarder, ains s’en va sur ung lict gesir, ou de son manteau le chief se couvrit.’ On the approach of the knight and Gawayne, the lady is summoned, and Gawayne pushes his complaisance so far, as to give up his sword into her hands, and declares himself vanquished. She is then sent away, under the pretence of furnishing the chambers above, and as soon as she has left them, the knight causes Girflet, son of Do, and Lucan to be freed from their imprisonment, and the four, having arrayed themselves in rich robes, ride to Arthur’s camp, to the great astonishment of the king and his barons. The Riche Souldoyer then states the circumstances of his defeat, and concludes by doing homage to Arthur for his lands, which is repeated by the knights his retainers. They feast and revel for a fortnight, and Arthur then takes his departure for Britain.—fol. 113—118Þ, It will readily be seen that this adventure occupies the remainder of the Scotish poem, from the nineteenth stanza to the end. This is the constant character of Kay, both in the French and English romances of the Round Table, and crabbed seems to have been the epithet peculiarly appropriated to him. See The Grene Knight, 1. 160; The Turke and Gowin, 1.19; and Carle of Carlile, 1. 147. This character of him is also alluded to in the interlude of Thersites, (written in 1537,) in the passage, i Where art thou, Gawayne the curtesse, and Cay the erabbed? Brit, Bibl. i, 172. NOTES. 341 For further information respecting this worthy, see the Mabinogion, part i. p. 97 ; and Southey's Notes to Morte d' Arthur, ii. 459, 486. This name is not an invention, for among the knights of Arthur's court is mentioned “ Syr Epynogrys that was the kynges sone of Northumberland,” Morte d'Arthur, vol. ii. p. 385. He is mentioned in the Roman de Tristan, ii. f. xc., under the name of © Espinogres ne de Sorolois,” and in the Roman de Perceval, f. clxviii. A knight of the same name occurs in the Conte de U Atre Perilleux, one of Sir Gawayne's adventures. Bibl. des Romans, Juillet, 1777. I do not recollect any other authority for this expedition of Arthur to Jerusalem, which seems to have been intended by the author as an imitation of Charlemagne’s equally imaginary but better known travels to the same city ; on which subject may be consulted M. Michel’s Preface to “ Charlemagne, an Anglo-Norman poem of the twelfth century,” etc., 12mo, Lond., 1836. Ibid. 1. 310. To Rome tuke the reddy way. So reads the edition, but falsely. It should be Fone, as is evident by comparing ll. 585, 1345. See a previous note, p. 312. Whence this name? Can it be recognised in the Sir Galagars of Malory? vol. i. p- 95. If we may believe Barbour, (who died in 1396,) the Scots first became acquainted with the use of artillery in the year 1328, but this requires confirmation. Twa noweltyis that day thai saw, That forouth in Scotland had been nane; Tymmeris for helmys war the tane That thaim thoucht thane off gret bewte ; 342 NOTES. And al sua wondyr for to se; The tothyr, crakys war off wer, That thai befor herd neuir er. The Bruce, xiv. 168, ed. Jamieson. PLES _ 6545254 Gaudifeir ; Quhilum in Britane that berne had baronyis braid. Intended, apparently, for the personage who occurs in the romance of Perceforest, as the hero's brother, and who was himself made king of Scotland by the conqueror Alexander. See cap. xxviii. ed. fol. Par. 1531. I do not find his name among Arthur's knights. This name as well as the remainder of those given to the knights on the side of Golagros seem to have been invented by the writer. He is mentioned in Malory's Morte d'Arthur, vol. i. p. 175; ii. 384. For the first three of these knights, see a previous note, p. 313. The fourth, Gyromalance (printed erroneously Siromelans in the prose edition of 1530), occurs frequently in the Roman de Perceval. He fights with Sir Gawayne, and afterwards marries Clarissant, the sister of his opponent, fol. liii>. Consult note, ante p. 331. Although all termed “renkis of the Round Tabill,” I have looked unsuccessfully for Schir Owales, or Oviles, Schir Iwell, or Schir Myreot, unless the latter be Syr Melyot de Logres, in Malory’s work, vol. ii. p. 383. Airly sporne, late speid. If by romanis we are here to understand the French language, we have a proverb equivalent to © Mauvaise haste nest preus,” in Renart le Nouvel, v. 1034, written by Jacquemars Gielée at the end of the thirteenth century. But there is NOTES. 343 a homely Scotish and English saying to the same effect, —* Mair haste the waur speed, quoth the tailor to the lang threed.” See Ramsay's Poems, vol. ii. p. 60, 12mo, Glasg., 1797. Quhilk oft in battale had bene his bute and his belde. It is stated in the Roman de Merlin, f. ccix?, that on occasion of the ceremony of knighthood conferred on Sir Gawayne, Arthur girded his nephew with his famous sword Escalibor, vol. i. f. ceix?, and we find the weapon remaining for a period in Gawayne's hands, for one of his exploits with it is to cut down his father Loth, whom he does not recognise till he ‘alights to cut off his head. bid. vol. ii. f. liti. So also in the Roman de Lancelot, i. f. cxxxi>, Gawayne is represented as fighting with ZEscalibor against Hector des Mares. At what period this sword was returned to Arthur we are not informed, but we find it borrowed again at the time Sir Gawayne is about to encounter the Riche Souldoyer. See Roman de Perceval, f. cxvii. Instances of the fanciful epithets given by heroes to their swords abound in old romauces, and Warton tells us in a note on Spenser's Fairy Queen, B. v. c. 3, st. 4, that Sir Gawayne’s sword was named Galantine. What authority he had for this I am not aware, but I find something like it in the inedited Morte Arthure. Then Syr Gawayne was glade, agayne byme he rydez, Wythe Galuthe, his gude swerde, graythely hyme hyttez ; The knyghte one the coursere he cleuede in soudyre, Clenlyche fro the croune his corse he dyuydyde, And thus he killez the knyghte w* his kydd wapene. MS. Linc., A. 1, 17, f. 68. In a MS. which formerly belonged to Dr. Macro, No. 18, and is now in the possession of Hudson Gurney, Esq., written in the reign of Edward the First, I was the first to discover the following curious memorandum at f. 42», relative to the sword of Gawayne :—* Hee est forma gladis Walwyn militis: a puncto usque ad hilte 53 pollices ; hyfte continet, it. pollices et dimidis ; manicle prope, ii. pollices ; pomes continet prope 8 pollices ; latitudo 5 pollices ; longitudo in toto continet 66 pollices et dimidii. Unde scribere in canello gladii : Izo SU FORTH, TRENCHAUNT & DURE, GALAAN ME FYTH PAR MULT GRANT CURE. * CaToRsE ANZ [HESU CRISTH, Quant GALAAM ME TREMPA & FYTH. 344 NOTES. SAGE FELOUN DEYT HOMME DUTYR & FOLH FELOUN ESCHWER ; FoLu DEBONEYRE DEPORTER, & SAGE DEBONER AMER.” In the Roman du St. Graal, vol. ii. f. cxli., may also be found an account of Gawayne's winning the famous sword with which John the Baptist was decollated, which is afterwards presented to king Pescheor, the professor of the holy vessel. And the reader may now decide for himself which sword it is that the author of the poem alludes to. Six out of the eight names here mentioned are taken out of the number of the nine worthies. The remaining three are Charlemagne, Godfrey of Boulogne, and king Arthur. They are separately enumerated in the metrical Morte Arthure, MS. Line., A. 1. 17, f. 89, and © Ane ballet of the Nine Nobles,” printed in Laing’s Popular Poetry of Scotland, 4to, 1822. They made a figure not only in poetry, but in pageantry and tapestry. I presume the allusion here refers to the fatal scene of Charlemagne’s overthrow at Roncevalles. Spre Gawene and the Carle of Carelple. Sener HIS romantic tale is here printed for the first time from an unique copy discovered in one of the MSS. of the Porkington Library, No. 10, belonging to William Ormsby Gore, Esq., M.P., written at the close of the reign of Henry the Sixth. It is more particularly interesting from its being the original from which NOTES. 345 the modernised copy in the Percy MS. was taken. The question, therefore, of the genuineness and antiquity of the romance-poems (as distinguished from the longer and better known romances,) in this celebrated MS. would seem to be decided, for as two of these poems, namely, The Grene Knight and The Carle of Carlile, have been preserved in MSS. of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, it is not too much to suppose, that the rest of the tales in the volume of a similar description, although written at so late a period as the latter half of the seventeenth century, were derived from ancient texts, which may yet be lurking in the unexplored treasures of some cathedral, collegiate, or private library. The original of this story must be sought for in the literature of the continent, and we find it in the beautiful fabliau of Le Chevalier a T Epée, printed in Meon’s Recueil, tome i. p. 127, 8vo, 1823, and previously analysed by Le Grand. Both works are so well known as to render any repetition of it here unnecessary. See previous note, p. 335. Ibid. 1.35. Syre Key Cantocke. I do not understand the meaning of this appellation added to the name of Kay. In Malory, we have “ Kay the Straunger,” vol. ii. p. 403, but this is a corruption of Keux d Estraux, who repeatedly occurs in the French romances, and who was a different personage from the Seneschal. Tbid. 1. 38. Syre Percivalle. The nephew of king Pescheor, guardian of the Sangreal, whose adventures occupy a quarto volume, printed in 1530. In the Thornton MS. at Lincoln is an English metrical abridgement of this romance, but so indifferently executed, as scarcely to be worth printing. Ibid. 1. 39. Lanfalle Is the hero of a lay by Marie de France, printed in Roquefort's Edition, tome i. p- 202, of which an English translation, made in the fifteenth century, is inserted in Way’s Fabliauz, vol. iii. p. 233, 8vo, 1815, and Ritson’s Metrical Romances, vol. i. 2y 346 NOTES. Thid. 1. 40. Syre Eweyne the Vytt yan. There is some blunder here. Perhaps we should read Wytt hand, which would express the epithet given to Ywain as Blanches Mains. See Morte d Arthur, i. 231. Tbid. 1. 41. Syre Lot of Laudyane. The father of Gawayne, and king of Lothian and Orkney. Geoffr. Monm. lib. ix. cap. 9. Tbid. 1. 48. Syre Gaytefere and Syre Galerowne. The first of these is probably the Gaudifeir, previously mentioned, p. 342, and the latter is the Galeron of Galloway, whose exploits are commemorated in the Awntyrs of Arthure. Tbid. 1. 44. Syre Costantyne, and Syre Raynbrowne, The kny3t of armus grene. Sir Constantyne has occurred before, p. 331. Of the latter I know nothing as one of Arthur's knights, but it would appear from 1. 68, that he was the son of Troune-syde by the maiden of Blauncheland. A knight of the same name occurs in the romance of Guy of Warwick. Ibid. 1.49. The kyngus vncull Syre Mordrete. For uncle we should read nephew. In the modern version of this romance, p. 257, and in the Marriage of Sir Gawaine, p. 289, he is called Arthur's cousin, but this is a genera] term of relationship. Tbid. 1. 52. Syre Vngeles. Of this personage, any more than of Syre Grandone, or Syr Ferre-unkowthe, 1. 61, I have found no record. bid. 1. 55. Syre Le Byus Dyshonus was thare. This is no less a person than Giglan, the son of Gawayne, who received the surname of Le Beau Desconu from king Arthur, on his first arrival at that monarch’s court. According to the Roman de Perceval he was the illicit offspring of an amour between Gawayne and Guinalorete, the sister of Brandelys ; and an inter- NOTES. 347 esting scene occurs, in which the mother interposes her child between her brother and lover, whilst struggling in mortal combat, fol. cxi. He is committed to the care of the Pucelle Envoisie, and achieves various adventures, from one of which he obtains the surname of Lyoncel. At length he encounters his father (who is unknown to him,) and after a fierce combat, Gawayne recognises his son, and yields himself. The young hero is then taken to Arthur's court at Caerleon, and receives instructions in all chivalrous exercises from Ywain. Ibid. ff. cxxiv, cxxv. The adventures of Giglan form the subject of a very rare distinct prose French romance, which was printed at Paris without date, and afterwards at Lyons, in 1530, In this he is said to be the son of Gawayne by the fairy Blanchevallée. There is also an English romance, on the same subject, expressly stated to be borrowed from the French, but differing almost entirely from the prose work. It is printed by Ritson in vol. ii. of his Metrical Romances, and many of the incidents seem to have been supplied by the romance of Erec et Enide, composed by Chrestien de Troyes. That there existed, however, a French metrical romance as early as the twelfth century on the exploits of Giglan, is proved by the German romance of Wigolais mit dem Rade, translated from the French by Wirnt von Gravenberch, about the year 1212. In this poem the name of Wigolais is intended to represent Gui le Galois, 1.1574. In the English romance (1. 7) his name is written Geynleyn, and in Malory’s Morte d' Arthur, vol. i. p. 337, ii. pp. 383, 392, Gyngalyn. For further information concerning the versions of this romance, see Benecke’s preface to his edition of Wigolais, 12mo, Berl. 1819. Is mentioned in the Morte d' Arthur, vol. ii. p. 383, and elsewhere, and occurs also in the list of knights given in Robinson’s © Auncient ordre of Prince Arthur,” etc., 4to, 1583, No. 54. Ibid.\. 64. Syr Blancheles and Iron-side. In the modern version, p. 257, Blanch Faire is substituted for Blancheles, but as no knight of that name occurs, in all probability we should read Brandelys, of whom more hereafter. The second knight is mentioned in Malory’s compilation as « Syre Ironsyde, that was called the noble kny3te of the reed laundes, that Syre Gareth [brother of Gawayne] wanne for the loue of dame Lyones,” vol. ii. p. 384. The narrative of the combat may be read in vol. i. p. 211. 2y2 348 NOTES. Thid. 1. 71. Blanche-londe. The Seigneur de la Blaunche londe is noticed as one of Arthur's knights, in the Roman de Perceval, f. \xxi. Cf. f. clxxi>. See in regard to this territory a note of M. Michel on Trestan, ii. 173. No knight of this name occurs in the French romances of the Round Table, nor in the Morte d'Arthure of Malory. A house of Gray or Franciscan friars existed at Carlisle before the year 1390. See Tanner's Notit. Monast. edit. Nasmith, fol. 1787. The Jeaste of Spr Gawapyne. HIS imperfect poem is taken from a s8mall quarto MS. which was purchased at the Fairfax sale at Leeds castle in 1831, and subsequently came to the hands of Mr. Douce, who bequeathed it with the rest of his books to the Bodleian Library. The volume was written in 1564, as appears by a date at the end, and contains several other romances, all unfortunately more or less imperfect, and all, apparently, transcribed from early black-letter editions. Each romance is illustrated with rude drawings, and from their style, as well as the age of the MS. it is evident that the collection was made by the same hand which transcribed the romance of Roberte the Deuyll, printed by J. Herbert in 1798. No copy of the original, from which the present poem was copied, is now known to exist; but it appears from the Stationers books, that in 1557 or 1558 John Kynge had a license to print “A NOTES, 349 Jeaste of Syr Gawayne,” and among Bagford's Collections, MS. Harl. 5927, art. 32, is preserved the last leaf of another edition in black letter, © Imprynted at London in Paule churche yarde, at the sygne of the maydens heed, by Thomas Petyt,” containing fifty-three lines, which have been collated with the text in the MS., and the variations, which are trifling, noted in the margin. It is no doubt this romance which is alluded to, under the title of “ Sir Gawyn,” by Laneham, in his letter describing the entertainment of the Queen at Kenilworth in 1575. Of what antiquity the story may have been in an English dress, it is difficult to form an opinion, but I should be inclined to refer it to the fifteenth century. The original author, however, in this instance, as in so many others, is French, and in the Roman de Perceval, f. Ixxiv?, we meet with the entire story. As the commencement of the adventure is wanting in the MS., a short analysis of the French narrative may not be out of place. Gawayne leaves king Arthur at the siege of the city of Branlant, at which he had himself been severely wounded. He crosses a deep river, and rides along a beautiful plain to a wood, on emerging from which he finds himself in a spacious launde, on which he perceives, by the side of a fountain, a magnificent pavilion raised. The valances were of fine silk of different colours, richly embroidered in gold and silver with flowers, foliage and birds, whilst above the ball on the summit was a golden eagle. He dismounts and enters the pavilion, where he sees a sumptuous bed, on which lay a lovely girl, © qui si formellement belle estoit, que pour ce temps n’eust été trouvé la pareille.” Gawayne is exceedingly surprised at her beauty, and accosts her courteously. In reply she says, © Dieu qui fist soir et matin doint honneur au chevalier Gauvain ; puis & vous qui estes icy!” He inquires why she expresses herself thus, and in explanation learns, that from the fame of Gawayne’s great prowess, courtesy, and other qualities, she has long been accustomed to use suchterms. The knight then discloses himself, and unlaces his helmet, to shew his features, on which the lady retires to an adjoining room, and calls to her a Saracen damsel, who had been fille de chambre to queen Chambres, and who had pourtrayed in embroidery the portrait of Gawayne so exactly, as to be recognised by all who saw it. Whilst she is contemplating his features, Sir Gawayne disarms himself, and puts on a splendid mantle. On the lady’s return she at once acknowledges the original of her picture, and runs to embrace him, kissing his eyes © pur grant amour,” and saying, ‘‘ Sire, la pucelle, comme voyex, du tout se mect & vostre bandon, et de son corps vous faict present, tout par amours et en honneur, si vous plaist & la recepvoir.” Of course the knight is not insensible of the value of such a gift, —© et puis se mirent @ deviser du jeu d'amours, sans villennie, et apres s’entrejouerent, en ensuivant le doulx parler, que le nom de pucelle perdist.” Gawayne at length takes leave of her, and immediately after his departure arrives her father, the king of Lys, and on learning what had occurred, pursues the knight, and accuses him of the death of his brother, and the violation of his daughter. Gawayne overthrows him with a mortal blow, and pursues his way. Shortly after, Brandelys 350 NOTES. the lady's brother, makes his appearance at the pavilion, and on hearing the same story, rides after and overtakes the author of the injury. They encounter each other fiercely, and are both thrown to the ground, but continue the combat with their swords until they are both weary. Gawayne at length proposes a cessation of arms, and to renew the combat whenever they should again meet. This is agreed to, and the combatants separate. Brandelys carries the corpse of his father to an abbey, to be honourably interred ; and Gawayne returns to Arthur’s host at the siege of Branlant, but is so enfeebled by his wounds as to require the attendance of physicians for six months before he was perfectly recovered. At a subsequent part of the romance (f. cv.), the continuation of Gawayne's adventure is thus related. Arthur and his court arrive at a stately castle, which proves to be the residence of Brandelys. They find a sumptuous banquet prepared for some guest, and no less than a hundred wildboars’ heads provided! Whilst at the feast Gawayne discovers the shield of Brandelys hanging up, and recollecting the terms of their agreement, hastens to replace his helmet on his head, which he had laid aside. On being questioned as to the cause, he relates his adventure at the pavilion, which differs so considerably from the preceding narrative, as justly to excite the surprise of Southey, Pref. to Morte d’ Arthur, p. xxvi. In this version of the story Gawayne states, that on arriving at the pavilion he found the lady asleep, and struck by her beauty, he took off his helmet, and kissed her several times so softly, as not to awaken her, except a faint remonstrance of “ Beau sire, laissez moy dormir.” At last she awoke, and inquired who he was. He says, her amy, but she bids him fly, for fear of the vengeance of her father and brothers. He tells his name, and is then courteously welcomed. Gawayne afterwards disarmed himself, and proceeds with his tale thus,—‘‘ Puis m’allay coucher aupres delle,comme pour faire mon delict ; les yeulx luy baise et le visaige, qu’elle plus blans que lys avoit, et depuis feis si grand oultraige, qu’ @ force la despucellay, quelque deffence qu'elle sceust faire.” The lady was in the utmost grief, and fainted in Gawayne’s arms, when Melians de Lys, one of her brothers, arrived, and bursting into the pavilion, loaded Gawayne with reproaches. The knight made every submission, and offered to marry the lady, but Melians reviled them both, and insisted on having recourse to arms. They fought, and the brother was struck dead on the first encounter. The father then came up, and shared the same fate, much to the grief of Gawayne. Lastly arrived Brandelys, and having refused the conciliatory offers of the offender, a combat took place, as previously narrated. It is evident that the author of the English romance has adopted the latter narrative, merely changing the names of the parties, and introducing a few additions of his own. The sequel of the adventure, omitted by the English writer, is thus told in the original text. Brandelys, on hearing that his foe was within his castle, hastens to takes revenge. As it was now late in the evening, candles are sent for, and a furious combat ensues by their light NOTES. 351 between Gawayne and his opponent. At this juncture the lady (whose name we subsequently learn to be Guinalorete,) makes her appearance with her child Giglain, whom she interposes between its father and uncle. Brandelys, so far from being softened by the sight, brutally kicks the child away, which excites the indignation of Arthur. The fight is resumed, and Brandelys is at length struck down. The lady again interposes, and her entreaties being seconded by the interference of the king and his nobles, Brandelys is persuaded to yield, and the adventure terminates by his being made a knight of the Round Table, and granting forgiveness to the penitent Gawayne, who begs it on his knees. The compiler of the Morte d’ Arthur does not insert this episode in his work, but has a distinct allusion to the circumstance, when he says, © Thenne came in Syr Gawayne, with his thre sones, Syr Gyngleyn, Syr Florence, and Sir Louel ; these two were begoten upon Sir Brandyles syster ; and al they fayled.”—Vol. ii. p. 383. Sir Brandelys was subsequently, together with Florence and Louel, slain by Lancelot du Lac and his party, at the rescue of queen Guenever. bd. ii. 401, 403. See Meyrick’s Glossary to his Critical Inquiry, in v. Kercheff of Plesaunce. Tt was sometimes worn on the arm. But a lady’s favour was occasionally in another shape, as we learn from the Roman de Perceval, f. Ixxxiii. “Et pour secretement faire cete chose assgavoir a Alardin par signe, luy donna la manche de sa cotte, que nous appellons mancherons, de quoy il feist ung gonfunon ou banerolle a sa lance.” Cf. Malory, ii. 332. So also in the original text, “Zi me semble, franc chevallier, respond Gauvain, gue vous deussiez plus honestement ou plus prudentement parler, car se je vous ay faict nul dommaige, je suis tout prest de Tamender, au loz de tous noz bons amys, mais que n'y perde mon honneur ; mais quant a la trahison que vous me mettez sus, Je men veulx contre vous deffendre.”—f. Ixxv®. 352 NOTES. The Grene Knight. OPIED in 1831 by permission of the late Mrs. Samuel Isted of Ecton Hall, Northamptonshire, (eldest daughter of the Bishop of Dromore,) from the Percy Manuscript. It is noticed in the list of Romances prefixed to the third volume of the “ Reliques of Ancient Poetry,” p. xxxvii. ed. 1794, and was considered of sufficient interest by the Bishop to be transcribed, for the purpose of insertion in a subsequent edition. The singular volume which contains it may be assigned to the latter half of the seventeenth century, and abounds with inaccuracies of the scribe or compiler. It is here, however, printed literatim from the MS., except in cases where correction is absolutely necessary, and the corrupt readings are then thrown to the bottom of the page. Had Bishop Percy adopted the same plan, when printing his Ballads, even the hypercriticism of Ritson might have been satisfied. It will readily be admitted, I presume, that the Scotish romance at the beginning of the present volume is the original from which the later tale has been borrowed; but that it may have existed in some intermediate shape, is rendered highly probable by an entry in the inventory of English books belonging to John Paston of Norfolk, made in the reign of Edward the Fourth, in which occurs © The Greene Knight.” Orig. Letters, vol. ii. p. 300, 4to, 1787. The changes made in the story, in its recent form, are very remarkable, and serve to shew the extent and character of the license assumed by minstrels and poetasters, in reciting the compositions of their predecessors, or in borrowing from foreign sources. The fairy Morgana of the ancient romance is here changed into Aggteb, a witch, who is endowed with the power of transposing human forms ; and instead of the Grene Knight's visit to Arthur's court being made for the purpose of annoying Guenever, it is here designed by the old witch as a means of alluring Gawayne to her daughter’s arms. The general outline is, however, precisely the same, but the narrative much abridged in the rifacimento. It is somewhat remarkable, that the latter places the scene “in the West Countrye,” instead of the North, as one would have expected to find it. NOTES. 353 Y' none of them shold sitt aboue. The earliest authority for this tradition is Wace, who inserts it in his translation of Geoffrey, and adds, that the Round Table was instituted by Arthur for the purpose of avoiding disputes of precedence among his knights. See the passage in Le Roux de Lincy’s edition, tome ii. p. 74, 8vo, 1836. Robert of Brunne translates this literally in the inedited portion of his Chronicle, f. 62°, MS. Inner Temple Library, No. 511.7. Lazamon goes further, and not only gives the history of the table at much greater length, but adds from some source at present unknown, a narrative of a quarrel which was the more immediate cause of the institution. In an inedited romance on the subject of Arthur, preserved in the Red Book of Bath, of the fifteenth century, I find the following lines on the subject : At Cayrlyoun, wt oute fable He let make the Rounde Table, And why tht he maked hyt thus This was the resoun y-wyss, That no man schulde sytt aboue other, Ne haue indignacioun of hys brother. And alle had oo seruyse, For no pryde scholde aryse, For any degree of syttynge, Other for any seruynge. On what authority the Green Knight is thus named I am ignorant, but in this case it is no mistake of the scribe, for we meet with the same personage again in the ballad of Arthur and the King of Cornwall. He can scarcely be meant for the individual who is surnamed also the Grene Knyght in the Morte d'Arthur, and whose real name was Pertilope, the brother of Sir Persaunt and Sir Perymore, all of whom were defeated by Sir Gareth, younger brother of Sir Gawayne. See vol. i. pp. 196, 223 ; ii. p. 385. In the Forrest of Delamore. The forest of Delamere is an immense tract of wood and waste in Cheshire, and was formerly well stocked with deer. Of the Castle of Flatting I have found no 354 NOTES. mention elsewhere. It is, doubtless, a corruption. See Ormerod's Cheshire, vol. ii. P- 50, fol., 1819. Compare the lines in the original, 1. 2203, p. 81. In the margin of the MS. Dr. Percy has noted after this line, “some great omission here.” I confess I do not perceive it. Perhaps the manor of Hutton in Inglewood forest, Leath ward, Cumberland, is here intended. See Nicolson and Burn's Hist. Cumb., ii. 388, or Hutchinson, i. 506. There is also Hatton Castle, in Allerdale below Derwent, in the same county. The whole of the territory hereabout was romance-ground. Tbid. 1. 515. Why k* of the Bathe weare the lace. Compare the original text, 1. 2516, p. 92, which is very strangely altered here. The dace alluded to was of white silk, and worn on the left shoulder, as early as the reign of Richard the Second. See Anstis's © Observations upon the Knighthood of the Bath,” 4to, 1725, pp. 9, 32, 35, 75. From a curious passage in Lord Herbert of Cherbury's Life, written by himself, 4to, 1764, p. 54, we learn that the practice was still observed in the reign of James the First, and that the Knights were obliged to wear the lace until they had done something famous in arms, or till some lady of honor had taken it off. NOTES. 355 The Turke and Gowtn, ROM the Percy Manuscript, and hitherto unpublished. The commencement of this singular romance-tale is evidently founded on a different version of the adventure related in the G'rene Knyght, who is here transformed into a Turk, or, in other words, a Pagan. The poem, unfortunately, is very imperfect, and the connexion is not always obvious, but the story seems to run thus. After the buffet has been given by Gawayne, the Turk goes away, accompanied by the knight, and they repair to a castle, where the counter-buffet is demanded by the Turk. We next find them, after this proof of Gawayne’s courage, sailing over the sea as friends, and they arrive at a castle inhabited by the King of Man, (who is a heathen Soldan, ) and a rout of giants. A trial of skill takes place at tennis, in which Gawayne is assisted by the Turk, who passes for the knight’s boy. Other trials of strength follow, which end in the discomfiture of the giants. The Soudan and one of his rout lay some plan to kill Gawayne, but are prevented by the Turk, who puts on a coat to make him invisible, and throws the giant into a boiling cauldron of lead, and the Soudan into the fire. After this, to complete the adventure, the Turk desires Gawayne to strike off his head, who at first refuses, but on his compliance, in the place of the Turk rises up a stalworth knight, who immediately sings Te Deum, by way of thankfulness, and to prove his orthodoxy. By this feat the ladies and knights confined in the castle are delivered from thraldom, and the kingdom of Man having first been offered by Arthur to Gawayne, who refuses it, itis bestowed on Sir Gromer, the quondam Turk, as a recompense for his services. From the versification, this poem evidently proceeds from the same hand which composed the preceding one; nor will it, perhaps, be wrong to assign to one hand the greater part, if not the whole, of the romance-stories in the Manuscript. This name is probably borrowed from the Morte d Arthur, in which © Syr Grummore Grummursum, a good knyghte of Scotland,” is mentioned, vol. i. p. 229, and elsewhere. 356 NOTES. Carle off Carlile. ROM the Percy Manuscript, and printed for the first time. It is most certainly a rifacimento of the older romance in the Porkington MS., and retains not only words but entire lines of the original. Some few alterations, however, as a matter of course, are introduced; and at the end of the poem an incident is inserted, altogether omitted in the older copy, namely the striking off the Carle's head, which corresponds nearly with the similar performance in the tale of The Turke and Gowin. The Notes on the earlier text may be referred to for illustration of the present poem. King Arthur and the King of Cornwall. ROM the same Manuscript, and hitherto inedited. It has no title, and the first line has been cut away by the ignorant binder to whom the volume was intrusted, but both are supplied from the notice given of the ballad in the Dissertation prefixed to vol. iii. of the “ Reliques,” p. xxxvii. Dr. Percy has added in the margin of the MS. these words, * To the best of my remembrance, this was the first line, before the binder cut it.” The poem is very imperfect, owing to the leaves having been half torn away to light fires (!) as the Bishop tells us, but I am bound NOTES. 357 to add, previous to its coming into his possession. The story is so singular, that it is to be hoped an earlier and complete copy of it may yet be recovered. On no account perhaps is it more remarkable, than the fact of its close imitation of the famous gabs made by Charlemagne and his companions at the court of king Hugon, which are first met with in a romance of the twelfth century, published by M. Michel from a MS. in the British Museum, 12mo, Lond., 1836, and transferred at a later period to the prose romance of Galien Rethoré, printed by Verard, fol. 1500, and often afterwards. In the absence of other evidence, it is to be presumed that the author of the ballad borrowed from the printed work, substituting Arthur for Charlemagne, Gawayne for Oliver, Tristram for Roland, etc., and embellishing his story by converting king Hugon’s spy into a “lodly feend,” by whose agency the gabs are accomplished. It is further worthy of notice, that the writer seems to regard Arthur as the sovereign of Little Britain, and alludes to an intrigue between the king of Cornwall and queen Guenever, which is nowhere, as far as I recollect, hinted at in the romances of the Round Table. As four knights accompanied the king, a line would seem to be wanting here, containing the names of Sir Gawayne and Sir Bredbeddle. Of the remaining two, Sir Tristeram is sufficiently well known, but of Sir Marramiles I am unable to supply any information. This is a phrase which seems to have been popular at the end of the sixteenth century, and may, perhaps, mark the age of the ballad. See the song of Old Robin of Portingale, in Percy, iii. 49, edit. 1794; Ravenscroft’s Pammelia, 4to, 1609, No. 30; and Scott's Border Minstrelsy, vol. i. p. 151, 8vo, 1803. It is alluded to by Shakspere in King Lear, Act. iii. Sc. 5, where Edgar, repeating some snatches of old ballads, says, Sleepest or wakest thou, jolly shepherd ? This is Sir Bredbeddle, who has subdued the fiend Burlow-beanie by means of the “litle booke,” he carried about him. See a previous Note, p. 358. 358 NOTES. Marriage of Sir Gawatne, HIS fragment is borrowed from the text of the Percy Manuscript, as given in the “ Reliques of Ancient English Poetry,” vol. iii. p. 350, edit. 1794. Dr. Percy supplied the deficiencies in a very ingenious manner, and inserted the ballad thus amended in the first edition of his collection, 8vo, 1764, and repeated it in all subsequent impressions ; but this mode of editing ancient poetry having justly been blamed by Ritson and Pinkerton, the Bishop in the fourth edition annexed the fragment, “with all its defects, inaccuracies and errata,” in order to show the state of the poem in the MS. Ritson reprinted the genuine and the amended texts in parallel columns in the Dissertation prefixed to his Metrical Romances, 8vo, 1802, p- cx, and the ballad in its improved form was introduced also by Lewis into his Tales of Wonder, vol. ii. p. 362, 8vo, 1802. The Bishop was of opinion that this poem was more ancient than the time of Chaucer, and that he borrowed from it his Wife of Bathe's tale (See Cambro-Briton, vol. i. p. 256, 8vo, 1820) ; and Sir Walter Scott in a letter to George Ellis writes, that the tale of Sir Gawayne's Foul Lady is originally Scaldic, as appears in the history of Hrolf Kraka, edited by Torfeus, 12mo, Havn. 1715, cap. vii. (Life, by Lockhart, vol. i. p. 334.) The passage itself is quoted from the Saga by Scott in his Border Minstrelsy, vol. ii. p. 140, in illustration of the old Scotish ballad of King Henrie, which preserves very remarkably the legend of the Scandinavian monarch, Helgius. Warton says in a note to his “ History of English Poetry,” vol. ii. p. 41, ed. 1824, « I must not forget here, that Sir Gawaine, one of Arthur's champions, is celebrated in a separate romance. Among Tanner’s Manuscripts we have The Weddynge of Sir Gawaine, Numb. 455, Bibl. Bodl. It begins, ‘ Be ye blythe, and listeneth to the lyf of a lorde riche.’” It would have given me much pleasure to have included this romance in the present volume, but Warton’s reference is erroneous, and although the Rev. Dr. Bandinel with the greatest courtesy undertook a minute and laborious search for the poem in question, it was without success. Warton's noto- NOTES. 359 rious inaccuracy in matters of this sort forms a sad blot in his otherwise very useful and entertaining work, of which a critical edition is still much desiderated. See previous Note, in p- 330. The name of the second of these champions does not occur in the Round Table romances. Ibid. 1. 120. Soe did Sir Banier and Sir Bore, Sir Garrett with them, soe gay. Banier is probably a mistake for Beduer, the king’s constable. Sir Bore is Bors de Gauves. (See previous Note, p. 313.) Sir Garett is Gareth or Gaheriet, the younger brother of Sir Gawayne ; and his adventures, under the surname of Beaumayns, occupy an entire book,—the seventh,—in the Morte d' Arthur, vol. i. pp. 186 —245. He took the part of Lancelot against his brothers, but was accidentally killed by him on the occasion of the rescue of queen Guenever. bid. vol. ii. p. 403. Revenge for his loss prompted Sir Gawayne to induce king Arthur to cross the sea to attack Lancelot, which ultimately proved the destruction of the whole of the Table Ronde. Sir Walter Scott in a Note on Sir Tristrem, p. 379, ed. 1833, quotes a “romance of Sir Gaheret,” in which the knight plays at chess with a beautiful fairy, [Floribelle, a suivante of the fairy Morgana, ] and is vanquished, but is afterwards liberated from his confinement by his cousin [brother] Gawayne, who wins the game by a move long afterwards called l’échee de Gauvain, and now Véchec du berger, or fool's-mate. In reality there is no such romance, but the adventure here alluded to occurs in an episodical tale of Gawayne and his three brothers, analysed in the Bibliothéque des Romans, Juillet, 1777, pp. 87-122. I may here venture to correct another venial error of Scott, who in the same work, p- 416, quotes from Gower the lines, There was Tristrem, which was beloved With bele Isolde; and Lancelot Stode with Guenor, and Galahote With his lady. Sir Walter argues, that Gower is here incorrect, since Galahaut or Galahad had 360 NOTES. no paramour. But Gower is perfectly accurate, and alludes to Gallehault, king of the loingtaines isles or de oultre les marches, whose mistress was Malchault, lady in attendance on queen Guenever, and by whose instrumentality the intrigue of Lancelot with her mistress was brought about. See the Roman de Lancelot, vol. i. ff. Ixxxiii-v, edit. 1513. Scott confounds this Gallehault with Galaad, the immaculate son of Lancelot, who accomplished the adventure of the Sangreal. Glossary. GLOSSARY. ABBREVIATIONS. AA. Awntyrs of Arthure.—AKC. Arthur and the King of Cornwall. —C. Carle of Carlile.—GC. Syre Gawene and the Carle of Carelyle.—GG. Golagros and Gawane.—GK. Syr - Gawayn and the Grene Kny3t.—Gr.K. The Grene Knight.—J. Jeaste of Syr Gawayne.—MG. Marriage of Sir Gawaine.—TG. The Turke and Gowin.—The numbers refer to the lines of each poem. Words of frequent occurrence have a limited number of references. fixed appear to be irregular forms, or errors. Those to which an odelus is pre- +A, he, 6c. 628. A, in, as A-SWOUNDING, in swooning, GT.K. 269. A-ROWE, in a row, C. 381. ABaD, delay, 66. 55, 311, 548. See Bain. ABANDONIT, p.p. brought under subjection, GG. 275. ABATAYLMENT, battlement, ex. 790. ABLOY, an exclamation used in hunting, aprently borrowed from the French, and equivalent to On! On! ex. 1174. ABoF, above, Gk. 73, 112, 153. ABONE, above, @@. 579, er.K. 513. A-BoNE, excellently, well, 3. 354. In the form of i-bone it occurs in Lazamon and later poets, and is applied to animate or inanimate objects. ABOUEN, ABOWNE, above, GK. 2217. AA. xxxvili. 11. Asy, Asvy, to pay for, buy dear, and, in an oblique sense, atone for, suffer, c. 236, 264. ACHAUFED, p.¢. warmed, Gk. 883. AcHEUvE, to obtain, arrive, x. 1107, 1838. ACHEVED, p. ?. 1081, 1857. See CHEre. AcoLEs, pr. t. embraces, &k. 1936. AcoLEN, embrace, 2472. = ADovun, down, Gk. 254. AFFERE, countenance, demeanour, 66. 707. See Ferr.. AFFRAY, fear, 66. 958. See Fray. .: AFYAUNCE, trust, GK. 642. AFTER, afterwards, 6K. 218. +AGANE, probably a mistake for a.GoME, a man, GG. 525. A-Gayn, towards, Gc. 232, See Azavn. Acuttcu, fearful, dreadful, ex. 136. A-60NNE, to go, Gc. 497. Ay, ever, GK. 26, 73,128,167, 893. 66.1160. Ay-QUERE,AY-WHERE, everywhere, &K. 599, 629, 745, 800. s Arr, previously, before, 66. 157, 606. See Arg, ER. Aire, AYERE, heir, AA. liii. 4. AyTHER, AYTHIRE, either, Gx. 841, 939, 1307. aa. xxxix. 6. +AKER, perhaps an error for ucH a, each, every, GK. 1421. +ALce, also, likewise, Gx. 2492. ALDER-TRUEST, truest of all, cx. 1486. ALDERES, ancestors, GK. 95. ALGATE, every way, GK. 141, always, c. 58. AL-HAL-DAY, All-hallows day, 1 November, GE. 536. ALKIN, ALKYN, of all kind, (ealles cynnes. Sax.) ee. 461, 794. ALLYNS, altogether, ec. 207. ALMOUS-DEDIS, almsdeeds, AA. xx. 5. AL ONE, alone, GK.735, 2155. AL HYM ONE, AL HIs ONE, by himself, 749, 1048. See OnE. A-LOSED, p. p. praised, Gk. 1512. Aus, ALSE, also, likewise, ek. 270, 720, 933, 1627, etc. ec. 1171, 1250; as, GK. 1067. AA.i,2, et pass. (MS. Douce generally reads As.) 66. 945. ALS0, as, GC. 153. ALTHER-GRATTEST, greatest of all, Gk. 1441. ALv1scy, elvish, having preternatural power, GK. 681. Amnant, pleasantly? ek. 806. A-MONGE, amidst, atintervals, 60.437. c.220. AMONGEZ, amongst, 6K. 1361. AN, on? 6x. 1808. if, er.K. 338. ANn-Hy3TE, ANE HY3T, on high, ec. 356,551. ANAIRMIT, p.p. armed, GG. 842. ANAMAYLD, p. p. enamelled, cx. 169. Anp, if, GK. 1245, 1509, 1647. aa. xvi. 2. 66,347. Gc.189. 7.423. er.x.36. T6,31. ANE, one, GK. 223. ANE-BAK, aback, ec. 449, 987. A-NELEDE, p. t. approached, Gk. 723. Anezrpis, pr.t.adheres, dwells with, ee. 410. ANGARDEZ, gen.c. arrogance? Gk. 681. The GLOSSARY. same word occurs as an adjective in the Scotish alliterative Romance of Alexander: Thire athils of Atenes, ther angard clerkis, Than reuerenst thai the riche seele, and red ouer the pistille. MS. Ashm. 44, f. 40°. It is possible that the word in both the above instances should be spelt with a «. See Jamieson, v. Ogart, and Roquefort’s Glossaire, v. Angarde. Antovs, wearisome, fatiguing, 6x. 535. ANLAS, pointed blade or spike, aa. xxx. 13, MS. D. The reading of the Linc. MS. is a corruption. ANOTHER, otherwise, Gx. 1268. ANTERUS, adventurous, 6G. 393. APENDES, APENDEZ, pr.t. appertains, belongs, 6x. 623, 913. APERT, openly, manifestly, ex. 154, 2392. APPERTLY, openly, AA. xix. 6. APPAREMENTIS, adornments? AA. xix. 5. ARE, ere, previously, GK. 239, 1632, 1891. AA, xxxi. 13. MS. D. 6c. 197. See Arr, Er. ARERED, p. p. retreated, Gx. 1902. AREWEZ, ARWES, ARWEZ, alrows, GK. 1160, 1455, 1460. ARN, are, GK. 280, 1094. ARSOUNEZ, ARSOUNZ, 171, 602. An3E, timid, fearful, 6x. 241. AxR3E8, subj. should waxtimid, 6K. 2301. AR3Ez, pr. t. waxest timed, 2277. AR3ED, p. 7. waxed timid, 1463, 2271. Asay, n. the point in the breast of the buck, at which the hunter’s knife was inserted, to make trial of the animal's fatness, GK. 1328. See the Book of St. Alban’s, and Boucher’s Glossary, v. Assay, new edit. Asay, to try, tempt, xe. 2362. ASCRYED, p.¢. shouted, ek. 1153. Printed by Guest astryed, and explained opposed, in Hist. Engl. Rhythms, ii. 168. ASKEz, ashes, GK. 2. ASOYLED, p.¢. absolved, ex. 1883. saddle-bows, Gk. GLOSSARY. ASPYE, to discover, ex. 1199. Assaut, assault, ex. 1. ASSWYTHE, quickly,e¢x.1400. See SwiTHE. ASTALIT, p. p. decked, ee. 63. AsTrr, suddenly, 6x. 1210. See Tir. Astonait, ASTONAYT, p. p. confounded, stunned, 66. 107, 575. Ar, for, 6x. 648; of, 703, (a modern Scoticism.) In Stevenson’s Additions to Boucher the line in 66. 1006 is quoted as an instance of the Northern use of the relative at for that; but I regard it as a mistake of the scribe, since no other example of such a form occurs throughout the poem. ATHEL, noble, good, 6x. 5, 171, 241, 904, 1654, 2466. See Hatuet. ATHER, either, Gx. 1357. ATTLE, pr. t. aim, design, Gx. 27. p.t. 2263. See ETYLLEDE. ATTANIS, at once, GG. 985. AT-WAPED, p. p. escaped, Gk.1167. Explained by Guest, let fly at, Hist. Engl. Rh. ii. 169. The word occurs again in another of the poems by the same author in the Cotton MS. Nero A. x.f. 73». ATLED, Thay stel out on a stylle ny3t, er any steuenrysed, & harde hurles thur3 the oste, er enmies hit wyste; Bot er thay at-wappe ne mo3t the wach wyth oute, Hize skelt wat3 the askrythe skewes an vnder, etc. AvEN, AWEN, own, GK. 10, 293, 836. AUMAYL, enamel, 6K. 236. AUNCIAN, aged, Gk. 1001, 2463. Used substantively, 948. AUNTER, AWENTURE, AWNTIR, adventure, GK. 27, 29,2522. aa.i.l.lv.13. AuNTERE}, pl. 2527. AUNTERED, p. p. ventured, Gk. 1516. AUTHER, either, GK. 88, 702. aa. xvi. 3. MS. D. Pinkerton misprints this word anyes, which is explained by Mr. Guest once! A-vANTERS, portions of the nombles of a deer, which lay near the neck; a term used in wood-craft, 6x. 1342. Then dresse the nombles, fyrst that ye recke ; Downe the auauncers kerue, that cleuyth to the necke ; And down wyth the bolthrote put theym anone. Boke of St. Alban's, 1496, sign, d. iv. One croke of the nombles lyeth euermore Under the throte-bolle of the beest before, That callyd is auauncers, whoso can theym kenne. ib. sign. e. i. AUVENAND, AUENANT, AUENANTE, comely, AA.XXIv.3. 66.339, Used substantively, man being understood, ec. 1194, 1283. Avynantis, pl. 648. AUENTAYLE, the open and moveable portion of the helmet which covered the mouth, for the purpose of respiration, ¢k.608. So in the alliterative Scotish romance of Morte Arthure, He brayedez one a bacenett, burneschte of syluer, The beste that was in Basille, wyth bordurs ryche; The creste and the coronalle enclosed so faire, Wythclasppes of clere golde, couched wyth stones; The vesare, the aventaile, enarmede so faire, Voyde wt owttyne vice, wt wyndowes of syluer. MS. Line. A. 1. 17. f. 63. This term isfrequently used in early writers for the whole front of the helmet, including the visor, and much confusion has hence arisen. Consult Allou’s paper Sur les Casques du Moyen Age, 4"*epoque, published in the Memoires des Antiquaires de France, Nouv. Ser., tome i. pp. 161-191, 8vo, 1835. It must be also remarked, that in the prose French romances of the Round Table, the ventaille is a distinct piece of armour, and put on before the helmet. See particularly Roman de Perceval, f. cxii, cxiv?, ed. 1530; Roman de Lancelot, vol, i. f. xlii. ed. 1513; Rom. de Meliadus, f. clxxi. ed. 1528; and Rom. de Merlin, vol. ii. f. cxÞ, ed. 1498, AUVENTURUS, adventures, &k. 491. A-vysE, AwYsE, tothink, devise,¢x.45,1389. AUYSED, p. f. viewed, observed, 771. Avow, A-vowE, vow, oath, Aa.xvi. 11. GG. 273,296. 60.518. Axc. 22, 129, 147. Aw, pr. t.owns, possesses, GG. 262 ; demands, requires, 730. See AzT. A-wuarr, p. p. whirled round, 6K. 2220. A-woNDIRDE, p. p. astonished, aa. xxvi. 9. Axyp, p. f. asked, ec. 334. Ajayn, A3AYNES, A3AYNEZ, A-3ENST, towards, 6K. 815, 971; against, 1459, 1661, 6c. 388, 478; opposite, 362. A3LEz, fearless, GK. 2335. A3r, A3TE, p. ¢. owned, possessed, GK. 767, 843, 1775, 1941. See Aw. B. BacniLER, BACHILERE, bachelor, 66. 94, 1335. BacenerTr, BASNET, a light helmet, worn with or without a moveable front, aa.xxx. 3. 66. 601, 844, Bang, BarD, p. ¢. abode, tarried, ex. 1699. aa.iv.1. 66.841; endured, persisted, 686, 936. See Bove. Bay, round, @K. 967. Bay, Baye, bay or baiting of a wild-boar, when attacked by dogs, ex. 1450, 1564, 1582, Barn, n. delay, ec. 1349. See ABArD. BAYEN, pr. t. bay, bait, bark at, ex. 1909. BAYED, p.t. 1142, 1362, 1603. Baitu, BaLE, harm, evil, grief, ex. 2041, 2419. AA, xxili.4,xxv.9. aa. 293, 716, 1134. 6c. 530. er.x. 222. c. 197,418. Bates, pl. AA. viii. 12. Batnt, Barn, BAYNE, BANE, prompt, ready, GK, 1092, 2158. 66.1209. T6.108. c.308. Used adverbially, ec. 74, 79, 921. See Bown. Bair, boar, 66. 733, 822. Bayst, p. t. was abashed, 6K.376. A word of no unusual occurrence, from the Fr. abaisser. Stevenson quotes it incorrectly the bayst, and then, without any authority, converts bays? into a substantive, and explains it blow. On re-considering the pas- GLOSSARY. sage, I think he will be convinced of his mistake. See Boucher, v. Baist. Bavrus, to grant, ex. 327. Bayrur, BayTHEN, pr. t. 1404, 1840. Stevenson is here again greatly in error. He prints the line, schal bay then thy bone, and interprets bay by obey! It is in defence of my own explanations that I feel obliged to notice these mistakes in a truly valuable work, which I still trust will be continued. Bars, belly, ¢x.1333. In Stevenson’s Add. to Boucher, this word is, I conceive, erroneously interpreted the scrotum. BALEFULLE, evil, noxious, AA. xvii. 3. Baez, bowels, cx. 1333. Bax3z, ample, swelling, 6x. 2032, 2172. Mr. Stevenson, however, explains it in the sense of plain, smooth. Ban, to curse, T6. 157. Banne, BANNENE, pr.t. aa. vii. 11. MS. D. xvi. 7. Bankers, BanNKowRes, table-clothes, aa. xxvii. 4. MS. D. xxxv. 2. Banrent, banneret, noble, es. 207, 1335. BANRENTIS, pl. 5, 1274. Barayng, barren, applied to hinds not gravid, Gk.1320. Baraynes, BARRAYNE, pl. used substantively, aa. iv. 2. Barse, edge of an axe, Gx. 2310. BEZ, pl, points of arrows, 1457. BaRBICAN, out-work or tower of a castle, GK. 793. BaRBORANNE, barberry, a shrub, aa. vi. 6. See BERBER. BARCELETT, species of bow, AA. iii. 12, iv. 1. See Stevenson’s Add. to Boucher, v. Berselet. Bare, mere, unconditional, ex. 277. Inex. 1141, it is applied to the motes or blasts of a horn, and seems to mean short, or without rechate. It is used adverbially, 465. BaRELy, unconditionally, certainly, ex.548. BARE-HEVEDIS, boars’ heads, AA. xxx. 8. See BER-HEDIS. Baret, BARRAT, strife, contest, ex. 21,353. 2115; grief, Gx. 752. aa. xxiii. 4. 66. 1133. Bar- GLOSSARY. BARFRAY, tower, &6. 774. By the mention of bells in the following line the connexion between this word and belfrey would seem to be established. See Stevenson’s Add. to Boucher, in v. BarLay, apparently a corruption of the _ French par loi, ex. 296. Barng, child, aa. xxiv. 11. MS. D. Applied to Christ, xviii. 1. See Berne. Bare, p. p. striped diagonally, ex. 159, 600. See Tyrwhitt’s Notes on Chaucer, iv. 150, ed. 1822, and Warton’s Hist. Engl. Poetr. ii. 213. Stevenson interprets it cross-chequered, but, I think, erroneously. Barres, diagonal stripes, ex. 162. Bartynit, p. p. struck, battered, ee. 716. The Editor of the reprint of 1827 is mistaken in wishing to read Barkynit. Basnet, see BACENETT. BasTEL-ROUEZ, turreted or castellated roofs, GK. 799. Bars, debate, conflict, cx. 1461. BarED, p. ¢. abated, 7. 88. Baro uit, p. p. imbattled, ec. 43. BavDERYE, strap by which the shield was suspended round the neck, ex. 621; belt or lace, 2486. _ Bawe, bow of a saddle? ex. 435. Bawer-MEN, bowmen, GK. 1564. Bg, by, 6x. 652, 1216. Bzav, fair, 6x. 1222. BE-CALLE, pr. ft, require, challenge, aa. Xxxii. 7. Be-com, p.t. went, 6K. 460. Beppez, pr.t. bids, ex. 1374. bade, 1437, 2090. Bzps, to proffer, 6x. 374. BED, pr. t. and imp. proffer, offer, 382, 2322. Bzps, Beppe, p. te. 1824, 1834, 2248. aa.1.8. Bz-DenE, BE-DEENE, BYDEENE, continously? together? moreover? Aa. i. 11, xxiv. 6. xxvi. 6. xxxvi. 4. x1. 9. a6. 29, 239, 319, 322. er.K. 230; forthwith? ec. 48. Consult Boucher's Glossary inv. with regard to this difficult word. BEpIs, prayers, AA. xvi. 5. Beng, p. ¢. -BEENE, are, TG. 22. Berorne, Byrorne, before, Gr. 1375, 1577, GG. 87. Bert, p. p. beaten, ee. 870. Beez, big, ec. 229. BEGGYNGE, mansion, 66. 159, SEE BieGING. BziLD, Bexps, protection, shelter, ee. 445, 641, 650, 822, 935, 1184. Bezripine, place of shelter, ac. 32. Berto1t, p.t. imaged, formed, ee. 390, 1146. See Jamieson, v. Beldit. I think he is mistaken in the explanation given under Beild, Berrois, ladies, ee. 1146. BuRDE. Berrnis, Berrnys, men, knights, ae. 204, 686. See BERYN, Burn. Bets, pr. t. is or will be, 66. 821. BEx1RE, to attack, act hostilely against, aa. iv. 2, _ Bz-KNeEw, sulj.shouldacknowledge, 6s. 903. BE-KNOWEN, p.p. acknowledged, 2391. See Bi-KNowE. Breve, see BEILpD. BELE-CHERE, good company or presence, GK. 1034. Beer, badge? 6x. 2486, 2517. Has this word any connexion with the Fr. belif, as it appears in the following passage? © Et quel escu portiez vous? Dame, je portay a la premiere foys ungescu blanc A une bande de belif vermeille.” —Rom. de Lancelot, i. f. lxxxii. Elsewhere I find © une bende blanche de bellif.”’—ib. i. f. exxx. BELIFE, BE-LYFE, quickly, aa.xxxix. 3. 66. 369, 622. See Bruive. BELLE, bonfire, aa. xv. 6. Bex, part of a lady's dress, perhaps the mantle, AA. xxix. 3. Bemys, trumpets, ec. 467. Bemyt, p. p. summoned by sound of trumpet, ec. 746. Ben, prompt, ready, c.302. See Bains. Bz-NamgE, p. ¢. took, acquired, ea. 227. BzNDE, band, bond, ex. 2505, 2517. See Brrpe, Benne, p. t. and p. p. bent, ek. 305, 2224 3 put down, 2105. Beng, to be, Gk. 141. Ben, pr. t. are or will be, 1646. Beng, well, fair, ex. 2402, 2475. 66. 601, 688, 844, 1032. AA. vi. 6. xxix. 4. xxx. 3. li. 8. In every instance but one this word is coupled with ful. It is impossible to interpret the majority of these passages by quickly, as Stevenson would have us. See his Additions to Boucher, in v. Bent, plain, field, so denominated from a coarse grass growing on open lands. GK. 353, 1465, 1599, 2115, 2233, 2338. aa. xxvi. 5, xlix.5. 66. 156, 637. c. 68. Ber, beer, ek. 129. BrR-HEDIS, BERE-HEDES, boars’ heads, AA. xxx. 8. MS. D. ec. 605. See BarEHEUEDIS. BERBER, barberry, ashrub, aa.vi. 6. MS. D. Ber, BERE, p. ¢. bare, carried, 6x.637, 1913. BERE, noise, AA. x. 8. BERIALLIS, BERYALLIS, BERYELL, BERILES, beryls, precious stones, aa.xlvi. 2. G6. 896, 952, 1086. BeryNE, BERNE, man, knight, noble, ee. 59, 91, 115. aa.x.5. BERYNs, Berns, Brerwnys, pl. 66.5, 378, 637. AA.iv. 1, xiv. 5, xxxvili. 9, xlix. 5. See Brrrnis, Burn. Bern, barn, ec. 52. Ber3, Ber3z, mount, hill, ex. 2172, 2178. BESANDIS, BESANTES, besants, AA. XXix. 4. 36. 1086. Best, beast, animal, ex. 1436. Bestus, pl. 1377. BE-STAD, p. p. circumstanced, 1. 428. Bere, to amend, better, aa. viii. 12. Brrre, p. p. applied to fire, ex. 1367. Berte, to beat, ec. 148, 158. Bzr, Berit, p.t. 66. 626, 680, 989. Buren, p. t. pl. GK. 1437. Bzren, BETIN, p. p. worked, embroidered (Fr. battu), ax. 78, 1833, 2028. 66.317. Beverace, drink, liquor, ex. 1112, 1409. From the first passage, and one in Piers AA. 553. GLOSSARY. Plouhman, it would seem to hate been the custom to drink, when making a bargain. BEvEREN, flowing? AA. xxviii.6. MS. D. The Lincoln MS. reads burely. Jamieson seems inclined to explain it shaking, but I think he is wrong. - The word occurs again in the alliterative Morte Arthur. The bolde kynge is inabarge, anda-bowtherowes, Alle bare-henedefor besye, with beveryne lokkes. MS. Line. A. 1. 17. f. 91°. BEUVER-HWED, color of a beaver? GK. 845. Is there any connexion with the preceding word? Bewes, Bewis, boughs, AA. iii. 13, x. 10. 66. 468. By-BLED, p. p. made bloody, aa. xliv. 11. BY-CLAGGEDE, p. p. besmeared, AA. ix. 2. Bycomgs, pr.t. befits, 6x. 471. Bicoms, p.t. became, 6. Bivs, Bypz, Bypen, to abide, endure, Gk. 374, 520, 1582, 2041. ec. 1037. BiDzs, Bypzz, ByDis, pr. ¢. abides, awaits, stays, GE. 376. AA. iii. 3, x. 5, xxv. 9. By-DENE, See BE-DENE. Brees, pr. f. builds, 6x. 9. BicctD, ByeGED, BYGGEDE, p. p. inhabited, built, 20. AA. vi. 6, lit. 8. Bieeine, mansion, Cc. 109, See BEGGYNGE. B16Ly, Byety, loudly, ex. 1141; deeply, severely, 1162; boldly, 1584; strongly, ec. 43. The second of these instances is interpreted hugely by Guest, Hist. Engl. Rh. ii. 167, but under a misapplication. BIGRAUEN, P. p. engraved, GK. 216. BI-GRYPTE, p.t. grasped, 6x. 214. BiHALDEN, BIHOLDE, p. p. indebted, beholden, ex. 1547, 1842. BY-HODE, p. ?. behoued, ex. 717. Brxs, building, ae. 406. BYKENNEN, pr. t. commend, 6K. 1307. B1KENDE, p.t. 596, 1982. See Stevenson’s Add. to Boucher, v. Bekenne, which is, however, far from satisfactory as to the etymology. GLOSSARY. Bi-KNowE, B1-KNOWEzZ, pr.t. acknowledge, acknowledges, ek. 2385, 2495. See BrKNEW. By ep, p. t. boiled, ex. 2082. By-Lrvuys, pr. ¢. remains, AA. vi. 4. LEVEDE, p. p. left, xxii. 2. BiLIvs, BIiLYVE, BY-LYVE, quickly, ex. 132, 1128, 1136, 1171, 1715. aa. xxxvii. 9. See BELIFE. ByNxs, bench, table, ae. 204. Birps, Byrrp, lady, Aa.iii.3,xiii.2. 66.351. Brrors, Byrois, pl. AA. xii. 2, xiv.5, xxix. 10. G6. 134. See Berrpis, BURDE. Byre, shed, cowhouse, ae. 32. Birkin, birchen, 66. 31. BIRNAND, burning, eG. 78. Binney, cuirass, coat of mail, ce. 94, 199, 567. Birnets, Brrnys, pl. 680, 688, 757, 844. In the last passage the plur. seems written by error for the sing. See Brenz, Bruny. Byrsit, p.p. bruised, 66. 870. Byse, white or grey, ec. 609. Bisemez, pr. t. befits, 6K. 1612, 2191. BrSEMED, p. t. befitted, became, 622, 2035. BisipEs, Bisypez, on the side, ex. 76, 856. Bisiep, p.t. agitated, ex. 89. Brs03T, p.t. besought, ek. 96. Biranp, biting, sharp, eG. 934. BrriDDE, By-TYD, BY-TYDE, p. ¢. befell, ex. 2522. aa.i.1,lv.13. Bitte, Bytre, the steel part of an axe, GK. 2224, 2310. Bi-wY¥LED, p. p. beguiled, cx. 2425. By37, hollow, cavity, ex. 1341, 1349. BLAN, p.#. caused to cease, ee. 1210. BLINN. BLANCHART, white (horse), G66. 556. BLANDE, p. p. intermixed, blended, ex.1205, 1931. BLA8OUN, shield of arms, 6K. 828. BLaving, blowing, 66.467. Pinkerton chose to turn thew into a v, and Jamieson uselessly perpetuates the blunder. BLAUNNER, a species of fur? 6s. 155, 573, 856, 1931. Compare Ly beaus Disconus, 1,116. It is left unexplained by Ritson, By- See and not found in any other Glossary consulted. Buz, Buzz, hue, color, complexion, aa. xvii. 4. GG. 134, 212, 316, 895, 1016, @c.427. MG.4. BLEES, pl. features, aa. li. 9. BLEAUNT, species of rich cloth or stuff, also a robe or mantle, cx. 879, 1928. Sir W. Scott's error in explaining this word in Sir Tristrem, is adopted in Jamieson's Dict. See the latter work in v. Bland, Roquefort’s Glossary, v. Bliaux, and Michel's Charlemagne, v. Blianz. BLED, p. p. interpreted by Jamieson sprung, 66. 608; but may, perhaps, be a misprint for bred. BLEDAND, bleeding, ae. 870. BLENCHED,p. ¢. receded, drew back, 6x.1715. BLENDED, p. ¢. blinded, 6x. 2419. BLENDIS, pr. ¢. mingles, curdles, aa. xvii. 4. BLENDE, BLENT, p. t. and p. p. mingled, blended, ex. 1361, 1610, 2371. aa. 68, 1134. axc. 274. Jamieson is mistaken in his interpretation of Blent. BLENK, to shine, cx. 2315. BLENKED, BLENKET, BLENKIT, p. t. shone, 799; appeared, looked, aa. xlii.4. cs. 74. BLyYcanDE, BLYKKANDE, shining, glittering, GE. 305, 2485. BLYKKED, p. t. shone, glistened, ex. 429. BLYNDIT, p. p. blended, ae. 896. See BLEnDis. Bunn, BLYNNE, to stop, delay, ec. 358. c.471. BLYNNE, imp. cease, GK. 2322. BLyssE, fortune, prosperity, ex. 18. BLYTHE, gay, bright, ex. 155. Bion, BLONEE, steed, GK. 434, 785, 1581, AA. lil. 3, xlili. 2, xliv. 4. oe. 551, 560. Buionxes, BLONKIS, BLONKKES, pl. GK. 1128, 1693. AA. xxxix.5. G6. 306, 754. See Brunk. BLUBRED, p. ¢. foamed, blubbered; applied to a stream of water, ex. 2174. BLuNDes, confusion, trouble, ex. 18. Buiunx, steed, ex. 440. See BLonk. BLUNKET, a white stuff, aa. xxix.3. MS.D. See PLONKETE. 3B BLvuscn, n. look, ex. 520. Buuscuep, BLUSHED, p. p. looked, ex. 650, 793, er.x. 388. BLvussCHANDE, blushing, glittering, ex. 1819. BLw, BLwe, p. ¢. blew, ex. 1141, 1362. Buwe, blue, ex. 1928. BoBBAUNCE, boast, GK. 9. Bops, bidding, proffer, ex. 852, 1824. Bons, p.t. abode, e&x.785, 1564, See Bape. BoDEN, p. p. prayed, asked, ex. 327. Borp-worp, message, 66. 55, 123, 171. Boist, threat, ce. 436. BoKkE-LERED, p. p. book-learned, aa. lv. 3. MS. D. Boxit, p. f. vomited, 66. 571. BoLDe, used substantively, men being understood, ex. 21. Bots, trunk of a tree, cx. 766. BoLLE, bowl, cup, 6c. 289. BoLLvs, pl.622. Boing, pr. ¢. swell, 6x. 512. BoNCHEF, gaiety? ex. 1764. Bons, Boones, prayer, request, GK. 327. er.K. 175, 522. BoNE-HOSTEL, lodging, ex. 776. Bons, bank, height, ex. 511, 700, 710, 785, 1571. BonkKEs, BONKKEzZ, pl. 14, 1562, 2077. Jamieson prints the plural from boukes, and explains it solitudes!! +Boome, perhaps a mistake for Goome, man, AKC. 119. Boro, Borps, Burp, BusDs, table, 6x.481. AA. XXXV.7. G6G.1164. T6.83, 165. To begin theburd or tabull, 6K.112. 66.1155, 6c. 359, See Warton’s Hist. Engl. Poetr. ii.5. Bo8Ds, pl. c. 206. Bore, border, cx. 610. Bones, pl. 159. Borpez, jests? ex. 1954. See Bourne. Borpour, apparently a piece of armour attached to the cuirass, ce. 938, 977. ‘Borz.ycu, burly, huge, strong, ex. 766, 2148, 2224. See BURELY. Borns, bourn, stream, 6K. 731, 1570, 2174. Bornyst, Burnyst, p. p. burnished, ex. 212, 582. Bor3, Bor3z, Bur3, Burze, burgh, city, GLOSSARY. castle, Gk.2, 9, 259, 843, 1092. BuRGHES, pl. aa. lil. 7. BosTFULLE, boasting, 6c. 169. Bost ye, boasting, c. 115. Bor, Botir, unless, cx. 1782, 66. 268, 716, 1300. ' Bor, Bort, p.t. bit, wounded, 6x.426, 1162, 1562; ate, AA. xliii. 2. The third of these instances is interpreted erroneously by Mr. Guest beat. Bors, Bute, salvation, remedy, safety, AA. xliii. 3. 66. 39, 935. 1. 143, 176. Boruem, bottom, ex. 2145. Bovn, Bouns, Bowne, ready, prompt, obedient, ex. 548, 852, 1311, 1693. aa. xxii. 3. Ge. 51, 330, $13. Te. 9, 49; promptly, ec. 523, BouNE, imp. go, 66. 1184, Bounit, Bownyt, p.t. went, 59, 455, 1348. Bour, Bours, Bower, chamber, ex. 853, 1519. G6. 330. 6c.4. AKc. 89. BovnDs, sport, joke, 6x. 1409. BourpEz, pl. 1212. See Borpzz. BovRDED, p.¢. joked, ex. 1217. Bourpyng, joke, sport, ex. 1404. Bovurpovurg, circlet round the helmet, aa. xxx.4. Bourpurgs, pl. xlvi. 2. Bovsum, Bowsum, obedient, affable, ec. 125, 351, 445. Bovr, Bouts, without, ex. 361, 1285, 1444. BowLER, boiler? T6. 219. Bowne, see Boun. Bo3z, to move, rise, go, ex. 344, 1220. Bozes, Bozen, pr. t. 434, 1311, 2077, 2178. Bo3xp, p. t. 481, 550, 1189, 2524. Bozez, boughs, ex. 765, 2077. Bra, an acclivity, ec. 1021. Brace, armour for the arms, Gx.582. See BratHenris. Brace, to embrace, s. 3. Bracues, BRAcHEZ, hounds, G@x. 1142, 1563, 1610. Bracuetes, hounds, GK. 1603, Bra, p. f. and p. p. roasted, Gk. 891. aa. xxvii. 4, MS. D. BRADDE, p. t. extended, ex. 1928. GLOSSARY. Bracine, boasting, 66. 467. Bray, good, bold, ex. 1909. Bray, imp. throw, T6. 191. BRAYDEN, p. p. embroidered, ex. 220, 1833. See BrawpENn. BrarDss, BrayDss, BRAyDEz, pr.t. draws, GK. 621, 1584, 1609, 1901. a4a.x.5. MS. D. xxxv. 7. Braid, Brarpit, Bravn, Bravvs, Braypit, p. ¢. started, leapt, GK.429. Ge. 921. er.x. 194; turned, ex. 440. ce. 79; cast, threw, ex. 2377; drew, 66. 757,867. BraiDE, BRAYDEN, p.t.pl. drew, Gk. 1339. aa. xxxv. 7, MS. D. BravDs, p.p. drawn, thrown, 6x. 2069. Brayen, pr. t. pl. cry, as deer, ex. 1163. Brayn, Brayn-wop, mad, violent, cx. 286, 1461, 1580. Braissit, Pp. p. inclosed, ea. 844. Braist, p. ¢. burst, 66. 754. See Brisr. BRAITHLY, forcibly, violently, ee. 462, 626, 641, 716, 870, 1134. + Brake, probablyan error for Buaxe, black, aa. xxx. 8. MS. D. Branp,Branpe,sword, aa.x.5.1.8.6r.K.22. Branpes, pl. aa. xxxix. 10. See Bronp. BRANDENE, p.p. roasted, AA. xxvii.4. MS.D. xxxv. 2. MS. D. BRrassE, explained by Mr. Guest gledes, but I know not on what authority, aa. xv. 6. BrATHERIs, vambraces, armour for the arms, ee. 994. © Item, bracheres knet to the shuldres of the cuyrie.” MS. Harl. 6149, f. 46, where the original French text has bracellets. BRAUDED, p.p. embroidered, aa. xxix. 4. MS. D. Ithas been printed inadvertently BranDED, as in Pinkerton, Laing, and Jamieson, which is interpreted bordered by the latter. +BRAvDURE, apparently an error, AA. XXX. 4. MS.D. Jamieson prints it Brandur. See BoURDURE. BRAWDEN, p.p. Woven, GK. 177, 580. See BRAYDEN. Brawen, Brawne, brawn or flesh of a - wild-boar, ex. 1611, 1631. . BRAWNDECHE, P, ¢. brandished, Aa. x. 5, BRrEeaD, Bev, breadth, aa.xlv.13. c.183. See ON-BREID. Brzaxs, to cut up the deer; a hunting term, c. 20. Brex, p.t. x. 1333. BREKEN, p.t. pl. brake, 1564. BreppEn,p.t.pl.were bred, flourished, ¢x.21. Brepez, bounds, limits, ex. 2071. Brem, Bremg, fierce, bold, cx. 1142, 1155, 1580, 2200; loud, shrill, 1601; rugged, 2145. See Brym. Breme, Bremiy, BREMELY, BreMLycu, quickly? ex. 779, 781; fiercely, boldly, 509, 1598, 2233, 2319. Bren, Brenn, to burn, ar.K. 252. T6. 163. Brennez, pr. f. ax. 1609. BrenDE, BRENNED, BRENT, p. 2. and p. p. 2, 195, 832, 875, 2165. Aa. xxix. 4. MS. D. Brene, Bryne, burny, cuirass, 6K. 580. AA.XXX.3, MS, D. xxxviii.4.MS. D. xli.7. Brenes, BRENYES, pl. aa. xxx. 3, xliv. 11. See Birny, Bruny. Brenine, burning, c. 181. +BreNNE, an error probably for BrEemeg, T6. 36. Brerp, surface of the earth, ea. 1084. BRESED, p. p. broken? ex. 305. Breru, rage, anger, 66.571. See Britu. BRETHER, brethren, ex. 39. BRETYNIT, p. ft. cut down, ea. 468. See BRITNED. Brevg, to tell, inform, speak, ex. 1393, 1488. BreveD, Brevit, p.p. told, esteemed, accounted, Gc. 281, 417, 465; marked, ex. 1436; written, 2521. Inthe old edition of es. the word is misprinted beevit, which is repeated by Pinkerton and Jamieson, and the latter endeavours, as usual, to find an etymon, but is very wide of the mark. Brews, p.p. brewed, made, Aa. xlvi. 7. Brypvzs, BRYDDEZ, birds, ex. 166, 509, 746. Brym, loud, shrill, ec. 523, 534; fierce, cruel, 733, 822. See Brem. Bryn, flood, river, 6.2172. Brimzs, pl. seas, waters, Gr.K. 288, 3B2 (5 Bryne, See BRENE. BryiMty, fiercely, 66. 687. See BREME. Brunt, Brynr, p. ¢. and p. p. burnt, refined, AA. XxXvii. 4. 66.317 ; flashed, 769. See Bren. Baist, to burst, 66. 641. See Bratst. Britu, wrath, contention, ce. 125. See BRETH. Britnez, pr. t. breaks, cuts, cx. 1611. BRITNED, BRITTENED, p. ¢, and p. p. broke or cut in pieces, 2, 680, 1339. See BRETYNIT. BrocueE, spit, 66. 80. Brocues, pr. f. spur, aa. xxxix. 5. BroCHED, BROCHIT, p. ¢. spurred, AA. xxxix. 5. MS. D. xliv. 4. ee. 306, 754. BRokETEs, torches, tapers, AA. XXXV. 9. BRONCHED, p. t. pierced, aa. xlv. 5. BronDE, Bront, sword, 6x. 561, 588, 828, 1584. aa.xliv.8. Bronpss, pl. aa.xliv.9. Bronpez, embers, Gk. 2. BROTHE, angry, GK. 2233. BROTHELY, angrily, violently, ex. 2377. BROTHER-HEDE, brotherhood, ex. 2516. Brown, used elliptically for the brown deer, 6x. 1162. Mr. Guest is greatly mistaken in interpreting it branches. Browe, brow, 6K. 1457. Bro3zs, Bro3zz, pl. 305, 961. Bruny, cuirass, GK. 861, 2012, 2018. See Brene, BIRNY. BRVUSTEN, p. t. burst, Gk. 1166. See Brist. Bug, fair? axc. 65, 67. BULLERAND, weltering, ee. 716, 1016. Butt, p. t. built, dwelt, ex. 25. Bur, blow, ex. 290, 374, 548, 2322; force, violence, 2261. See also the Glossary to William and the Werwolf, v. Bere, and Boucher, v. Birr. Burp, see Bos. Burpg, lady, ex. 613, 752, 961. aa. xiti. 2. MS.D. Burpzs, Burpsz, pl. ex. 942, 1232, 1373. See Birvs, Berrpis. BuRDE, 7. 7. ought, behoved, ex. 2278, 2428. Hence may be corrected the inter- Bx1srT, p. t. 306. GLOSSARY. pretation of Birde in the . Glossary to Havelok, 1. 2761. Cf. also Jamieson, vv. Byrd and Boot. BUREDELY, forcibly? aa. xlvii. 11. MS. D. The Linc. MS. reads swyftly. Bury, BuriicnHe, BURLYCHE, BURELY, huge, big, aa. xvi. 8, xxviii. 6, xxx.8, xli. 8, xhi. 4. 66.317, 551,934. Used'substantively, man being understood, Aa.1. 8. Burroxzst, biggest, strongest, aa. xliii. 2. Burn, Burne, man, knight, noble, ex. 20, 73, 337, etc. aa. ili. 3. MS. D. xlii. 4. Gr.K. 88. TG. 12. Burnes, gen. GK. 1616. Burnes, Burnez, pl. ak. 259, 272, 481. AA. xxxvill. 9. MS. D. xlvi.7. See BzirNIs, BERYNE. Buss, pr. t. behoves,aa. xxv. 3. SeeBURDE. Buss, to array; Gk. 1220. Busx, imp. prepare, 2248, 2284, Busxes, BUSKKEzZ, pr. t. goes, 1136, 1448, 2476; arrays, AA. xXxxviii, 4, MS. D. Busken, pr. ¢. pl. prepare, Gk. 509, 1128. BuskED, Busxir, BUSKYDE, p. ¢. and p. p. went, 1411. aa. xliv. 8. 66. 204, 304, 548; prepared, cx. 1693. 60.48, T6. 9. This verb generally implies motion with a degree of haste. Busx, bush, 6x. 182. Bvusxzz, pl. 1437. Busy, to be active, cx. 1066. But, without, 66.35, 98, 190. Bur, Bur anD, unless, ec. 522. J. 32. Bure, see Bore. C. Cacn, to catch, take, acquire, &x.133; to go, 1794. CacuEz, Kacuez, pr. t. 368, 2175. CacHEREs, hunters, Gx. 1139. Camevrs, hooked, ec. 251. Can, pr. t. know, knows, 60. 193, 279. Cc. 268. Cannrsr, knowest, ec. 314. Can, is extensivelyused as an auxiliary before verbs in the infinitive mood, to express a past tense, and is frequently, particularly in poems of later date, supplied by gan, asan equivalent, as CAN ENCLYNE, inclined, GLOSSARY. Gk.340. CAN PAYNE, pained, 1042. Can REMOVE, removed, eg. 14. Can FANG, took, 554. Can paw, dawned, 609, Can FOUND, went, 884, 933. Can FARE, CAN GOE, went, er.K. 371, 506. CANN BEGINN, begun, c.471. Can praw, drew, xe. 19. See Con. CaNnEL-BoNE, collar-bone, Aa. xl. 12. Cant, strong, ce. 334, CANTELL, CANTELLE, corner, angle, aa. xli. 1. 66.937. Capapos, hood or close cap, from the Fr. cap-a-dos, Gk. 186, 572. CaPLE, horse, ex. 2175. CARANDE, caring, anxious, GK. 674, 750. Cares, grief, concern, 6x. 1979, 2379. Carr, p.#. carved, AA. xIvii. 5. CaRIANnD, going, journeying, ee. 611. See Cary. CarNELEZ, battlements, embrasures, GE. 801. Carp, speech, conversation, Gk. 307, 1013. Carp, Karp, to say, tell, speak, cx. 263, 696,704. c. 128. Carpis, CARPPEZ, pr. t. GK. 377, 1979, AA, xxviii. 9,xxxii.6. CaRPED, CaRPIT, p.t. ek. 1088. aa. 1.11. MS.D. ea. 46, 92. Cary, to go, ec. 1098, 1332. Carvez, Caryis, pr. t. &k. 734. 66. 366, 728. Carys, CaYREZ,imp.Gk. 2120. 66. 1249. Caryit, p.t. 873. Casar, KAYSERE, emperor, AA. Xxxil.7. GG. 1120. Cassin, p.p. cast, ee. 1108. Cast, to speak, address, ex. 249. Cast, pr.t. contrive, GG. 323. Caste, stratagem, aa. xlviii. 2. CasTEs, pl. actions or wiles, ek. 1295. CaveLounz, disputes? cx. 683. Perhaps a mistake forCavELactounz. Cf.1.2275. CEMMED, p. p. folded, twisted, ex. 188. CERcLE, circle round the helmet, ex. 615. CzRKELYTT, p. p. encircled, AA. x. 3. CHaceLET, CHASSELETT, small tower or castle? AA, xxxviii. 11. CuaFrer, merchandise, Gk. 1647, 1939. Cuartis, chops, jaws, AA. xl. 2. Crap, pr. t. escape, GG. 279. Crarvs, jowls, cheeks, aa. xi. 2, the reading of MS. D. as an equivalent for chaftis. Jamieson’s singular blunder in explaining this word will be noticed under CHOLLE. Cuare, matter, cx. 1940. CuarGEaunt, dangerous? Gk. 1604. Cuarrg, pr.t. return, 6K. 1678. CHARRED, p. ¢. led, turned, 850, 1143. Cuarres, pl. business, task, cx. 1674. Cuaste, chastity, aa. xx. 5. MS. D. Cuavre, CHAWFFENE, to warm, AA. XXXV.4. CuHauNCcELY, accidentally, ex. 778. Cuauntrg, religious service, GK. 63. CueEre, upper part? aa. ix. 10. Cuers, Carry, CHEvE, to obtain, Gk. 1271. AA. Xxi. 9, GG. 1193; to arrive, 6K. 1676. CuEvep, p.¢. obtained, ex. 1390. See ACHEUE. CuHEFLY, CHEUELY, speedily? ex. 850, 883, .978, 1940. Cuex, fortune, ex. 1107, 1857. ill fortune ? 2195. CuHELDEz, shields of a boar, ek. 1611. Cuemne, chimney, 6K. 978. Cures, CueEpzz, bargain, terms of buying and selling, or goods sold, ex. 1939, 1940, 1941. CueEpen, to bargain, ex. 1271. Cuer, CHERE, countenance, spirits, behaviour, GK. 562, 711, 883, 1745, 2169, 2496; entertainment, 1259. aa.x. 6. Carre, chair, ec. 403. Cues, p.t. saw, beheld, ex. 798, 946. + CHEUARONE, chanfron, armour for a horse’s head, aa. xxx. 10. Carvicaunce, CHEUISAUNCE, CHEUYSAUNCE, booty, gain, ex. 1390, 1406, 1678, 1939. CHn1LD-GERED, p. P. of childish manners, GK. 86. CroLLE, jowl, jaws, AA. ix. 9. xi. 2, The second of these passages has occasioned Jamieson to make a very ridiculous mistake. He says cholle and chalus are birds, CHEKKE, and then explains chynne, the chin, by oak!!! The reading of the Lincoln MS. at once shows the fallacy and folly of such an interpretation. Cuortg, churl, ex. 2107. Cuyiper, children, 6x. 280. CuyMBLED, p.p. folded? ex. 958. CLap, p. p. covered, GK, 885. CLary, p. t. clove, eG. 937. CLAMBERANDE, clustering, Gk. 1722. CLAMBRED, p. p. clustered, joined together, GK. 801. CLanLy, wholly, ex. 393. CLanNEs, purity, chastity, ex. 653. CLATERANDE, clattering, bubbling, ex. 731. CLATTERED, p. p. resounded, GK. 1722. Craueut, p. ft. caught hold of hastily, clutched, ee. 82. CLEF, p.¢. cleaved, aa. xl. 13, xli. 1. + Cieyne, probably a mistake of the scribe for CLETHYNGE, clothing, aa.x.2. MS.D. Jamieson trifles with the word in his usual manner. | CLzis, CLE, CLERE, fine, fair, bright, beautiful, noble, ek. 631, 942, 954, 1489. aa. xxx. 2. MS. D. ae. 53, 366, 672, 747, 1157. cc. 507. er.K. 326. +CuerR.y, for CLEIR, 66. 1332. Cueuis, pr. ¢. strikes or seizes, AA. xlvili. 7. CLexs, fair, Gk. 163. aa. vi. 2; wholly, ax. 1298. See CLANLY. CLENGEz, pr. t. contracts or causes to shrink with cold, ex. 505, 2078. CLENGED, p. t. 1694. CLEPEs, pr. t. calls, ex. 1310. CLERGYE, erudition, GK. 2447. CLEewes, cliffs, aa. x. 12, xii. 7. MS. D. reads | clowes, which Jamieson explains a hollow between two hills. Curprzs, eclipse, AA. viii. 3. +CLoLLE, an error of MS. D. for CHoLLE, AA. ix. 10. Jamieson here again is sadly at fault. CLOMBEN, p.t. climbed, 6x. 2078. CLovr, blow, ec. 323. C. 234, 260. LovuT. See GLOSSARY. CLow1s, nails, splinters, ee. 683, 942. Cocxwarp, CocKEWARDE, cuckold, akc. 92, 104. Cort, p. t. bought, ee. 1057. Corty, speedily? ex. 2011. CoLD, p. t. of Can, knew, c.41. akc. 195. See Con. CoLEen, to cool, assuage, Gk. 1253. CoLzse, collar, aa. xlviii. 7. CoLLAINE, COLLEN, Cologne, AKc. 164,168, 176. Swords manufactured here seem to have been in repute. Com, Comz, CoMEN, p. ft. came, Gk. 824, 942, 1004. 6c. 494. +ComaunDEz, imp. commend, Gk. 2411. Come, coming, arrival, ee. 161. Comrorr, p. t. comforted, 6r.x. 229. See Gloss. to Will. and Werwolf, in v. ComLy, ComLycn, CunmLy, comely, fair, Gk. 469, 539. G6. 1057. Used substantively, man being understood,¢k.674,1755. Used adverbially, 648, 1307, 1629, 1794. CoMLYLY, courteously, ex. 974, 1118, 1389. ComLorER, comelier, ck. 869. ComLoKEST, sup. 52, 81, 767. Com’NYE, communing, discourse, AKC. 122. Compas, form, stature, cx. 944. Con, Conxs, can, ex. 2455. aa.xli.5, xliii. 4. Connez, pr.t. knows, 6x. 1267, 1483. Counz, Cours, Coutue, CowTHE, p. t. could, knew, 45, 1125, 1139, 1389, 1486. ee. 67,920. ac.85. Couru, CouTHE, p.p. known, Gx. 1490; skilled, &6. 376. See Can. Con, Conne, pr. ¢. Coup, Couru, p. ¢. used as an auxiliary before verbs to express a past tense, as Con 8TvDIE, studied, GK. 230. Con ANSWARE, answered, 274. Con rRouN, communed, 362. Con FELDE, folded, 841. Con nymg, took, 993. Con LETE, looked, 1206. CoNNE FALLE, fell, AA. vi. 7. MS. D. Conne cALL, called, xi. 3, (in both which instances the Linc. MS. reads gunne.) CONNE RYDE, rode, Gc. 65. Con stanp, stood, cr.x. 471. Coup FLING, flung, MG. 89. CovurTH HINT, re- GLOSSARY, ceived, ce. 674, Courn new, hewed, struck, 962. CovTa rEHETE, cheered, 1158. CovrTn FORBERE, forbore, 1200. See Can. ConaBLE, famous, oraccomplished, &x.2450. CoxqQueRE, conquest, eg. 1251, ConTERFELETTE, CONTREFELED, interwoven? AA. xxix. 6. ConvuENABILL, befitting, ae. 363. Conysaunce, CUNYSANCE, badge, cognisance, GG. 488, 1057. Cop1LLEs, couples of dogs, AA. iv. 3. Coprounss, capitals? ax. 797. © Coperum, capitellum,” Prompt. Parv. See quotation under ENBANED. CoRBELES, gen. raven's, GK. 1355, With regard to the fee, see Scott's Notes on Sir Tristrem, p. 388, ed. 1833. Cors, body, ex. 1297. Cortays, CorTAYSE, courteous, GK. 276, 467, 539. Cortaysy, CouRTAYSYE, 247, 263, 1300. CoRTAYSLY, courteously, ex. 775, 903. CortTyNEs, curtains, &x. 854. Corvon, p. p. carven, Gk. 797. Cossz, kiss, gx. 1300. Cosszs, Cossez, pl. 2351, 2360. Cost, manner, business, ck. 546. Cosrxs, Cosrez, pl.manners, qualities, virtues, 944, 1272, 1483, 1849, 2360, 2495. Hence may be interpreted Cust, in the Owl and Nightingale, which in the Glossary to that poem is left without explanation. Cost, side, aa. xlvii.5. Costes, pl. ways? GK. 750. CosrEz, pr. t. coasts? ex. 1696. Corus, p.t. quoth, ex. 776. Coupe, chrysom-cloth atbaptism, aa. xvili.3. Covps, CoutHe, Cowrue, see Con. Counpug, to conduct, guide, ex. 1972. CounDuTEs, songs, (Fr, conduis, cantique,) GK. 1655. The same word occurs in the poem of the Owl and Nightingale, 1. 483, which is not explained by the editor. CouNTENAUNCE, custom, ex. 100, 1490. courtesy, GK. CovunrTis, to encounter, ae. 798. ConTirs, pr. t.815. Countirpas, counterpart, like, ae. 1212. CourcueEres, head-covers, caps, AA. xxix. 8. Covuruty, familiarly, ex. 937. CovenTis, convents, AA. xvi. 6. Cover, pr. ¢. recover, regain, ea. 586. CoverTor, Covertour, cover or trapping of a horse, ex. 602; canopy of a bed, 1181. CoveRToOREZ, pl, canopies, 855. CowrTErs, pieces of plate for the elbows, ex. 583. See the Norss, p. 315. Coyrnt, Koynt, curious, quaint, Gx. 877 ; skilful, cunning, 1525. CornTLy, CornTLYCH, KoyNTLY, cunningly, 578, 934, 2413. Coze, p. t. derided? shouted? ex. 307. Crarry, skilfully made, ex. 572. CRAKKANDE, resounding, loud, ex. 1166. Crakxyng, blast, blowing, ex. 116. CRASEDEST, most crazy, GK. 2196. CRrATHAYN, craven, coward, GK. 1773. In Douglas, Crawdoun. Crest, top of a rock, ex. 731. CrEgvissE, fissure, cavity, Gk. 2183. CREWELLE, valiant, used substantively, man being understood, aa. xlviii.1, SeeCRVEL. CrranDE, crying, Gk. 1088. Crocuit, p.p. covered? 66, 1280, 1352. CROKED, p. p. bent aside, GK. 653. CRroPoRE, CROPURE, crupper, Gk. 168, 602. Croys, cross, Gk. 643. Crust, keen in battle, aa. xlvii.3. 66. 334, 541. CrvEeLTs, valour? es. 1135. Crystenmas, Christmas, GK. 985. CUMMEN, p.p. come, GK. 60, 62. Cumpas, purpose, ac. 596. CunysaNce, see CONYSAUNCE. Cure, care, anxiety, ca. 1098, 1229. D. Da, Daa, doe, AA. v.2. ce. 226. Dasarx, strife, Gx. 2041. Dait, part, 66.782. See Dore. Daty, to dally, ¢x.1253. DAYLYEDEN, p.t. 1114. Datr, p. f. and p. p. dealt, ex. 452, 1114, 1664, 2449. Danes, p.#. struck, c. 134. See Dyne. Dare, to manifest fear, tremble, ex. 2258. Dare, Darzs, Darys, pr. t. as. 315. AA. iv. 12. Dargis, Darxys, pr. t. lie hid, aa. iv. 12. v. 1. See DurKENE. +Daxrs, harm, er.x. 401. See Dzzre. Dasz, the phrase here, on dase, ac. 712, is explained by Jamieson, alive, and I have no better interpretation to offer. Daw, to dawn, ee. 609, 732. DaweD, p.t. @) Gk. 1805. Dawynee, dawning, AA. xxvii. 5. +Dayn, disdain, ec. 179. DarNnTETHs, dainties, aa. xv. 1, xxxvi. 4, XXxviii. 3. DAYNETYUOUSELY, daintily, aa. xxvii. 2. Dz, Det, Dez, to die, cx. 996. 66. 511, 808, 1035. Deas, to injure, 7.172. DERED, p. ft. GK. 1460. DEBETANDE, debating, ex. 2179. DEBONERTE, good manners, politeness, GK. 1273. Dect, Detsz, Dzs, Dxsss, dais or table of estate, Gk. 61, 75, 222, 250. aa. xiv. 13. MS. D. xv. 1. ee. 66, 1154. Dens, death, AA. v. 2. viii. 7. @@. 270, 1215. + Depts, probably a mistake for Taps, aa. x. 4. Desre, Deir, Dene, harm, evil, 66.497, 808, 1266. er.K. 387, 407. DEFENDE, p. t. defended, ex. 1156. DEFOLD, p. p. vanquished or disgraced, ec. 967. Deir, Der, joyful, delightful, ex. 47, 92, 1012, 1026, 1047; precious, costly, 75, 121, 193,571. 66.66, 319, 860, 897; honorable, 564. Used substantively, man or knight being understood, in the sense of worthy, noble, honorable, ex.'678, 928. AA.i.4. G6, 206, 600, 785, 1284, Jamieson's in- GLOSSARY. terpretation of bold, daring, is, I think, wholly inadmissible. See DERELY. Derr, Des, DzRs, deer, beasts of chace, cx. 1151, 1322. 66. 226. Dztsz, see DEcs. Dez LE, to deal, (a blow,) ex. 295, 560; to give, bestow, 1805, 2192; to partake, 1968. Dares, DELEN, pr. t. 397, 1266. DzLE, n. part, share, ar.x. 494. DzLEz, the Devil, ex. 2188. DzeLFur, DELFULLE, doleful, &x. 560. aa. xii. 11. MS. D. See Dunrut. DELFULLY, dolefully, aa. xxiv. 3. MS. D. xlvi. 8. DzLIves, active, nimble, ex. 2343. DELIVERLY, quickly, ex. 2009. Demay, imp. dismay, Gk. 470. Dene, to judge, deem, ex. 246, 1322, 2183. DemeEn, pr. ¢. judge, think fit, 1082, 1529. Demep, Deny, p. ¢. and p. p. esteemed, judged, determined, 240, 1089, 1668. ea. 805. DzNars, to deny, refuse, 6K. 1497. DENAYED, p. f. refused, Gk. 1493. Denez, Danish, 6x. 2223. Compare axc. 166, and see the Note of Du Cange on Villehardouin, p. 298, fol. Par. 1657. DENT, p. p. indented, aa. 66. Dentre, blow, ec. 396. Depaynt, DEPAYNTED, p. p. depicted, cx. 620, 647. DEPARTED, p ?. severed, divided, ax. 1335. Deprece, to vanquish? Gx. 1219, DzPRECED, DEPRESED, p. ¢. vanquished, bore down, 6, 1770. Dzxay, disorder, aa. xl. 6, MS. D. Derg, see DEERE, DEIR. DzRED, see DEARE. DERELY, joyfully, honorably, ex. 817, 1031, 1253, 1327, 1559. See Derr. Derr, strong, stern, ex. 564, 1000, 1233, 1492. 66. 859, 976. Derr ty, DERFELY,Strongly, fiercely,sternly, GK. 1183. AA, xxiv. 13. Ge. 671, 680. Derng, secret, privy, GK. 558, 1012, 1047. G6. 840. GLOSSARY. DzrxLy, DERNELY, secretly, Gk. 1188 ; silently ? 2334. Derrest, noblest, ck. 445, 483. ae. 805. See Derr. Derworru.y, honorably, ex. 114. Des, DzssE, see DECE. DEsTENYNG, destiny, ee. 270. Deus, to confound, cx. 1286. DEVED, p.p. confounded, aa. xxii. 4, MS. D. Devinis, pr. t. decrees, ee. 1228. Devore, Devorr, service, duty, ee. 1048, 1266. Dev, p.¢. dawned, ee. 600. See Daw. Dz3z, see Dz. Dicar, p. p. made, 66, 319, See Di3r. Dip, DippeEn, see Do. Drerss, diets, repasts, AA.xv. 1. MS.D.reads diotes, which Pinkerton and Jamieson misprint Drotes, and the latter explains by nobles! Mr. Guest has been deceived also by this false reading, although he might have found thegenuine textin Laing's work. D1iens, DyNeNs, worthy, ex. 1316. 66.9, 184. DiLLE, dull, foolish, ex. 1529. DymMe, covert? aa.v. 1. MS. D. Dyn, noise, revelry, GK. 47. Drxs, pr. t. smite, 66, 860. See Danae. + Dynnez, pr. t. strikes, GK. 2105, perhaps an error for DynexEz. Dywnvrt, p. ¢. roared, 66. 84. Dynrt, stroke, blow, ex. 315, 560, 2105. ee. 829. Dintez, Dintis, DYNTEs, DYNTEZ, Dyntis, DyNTTEzZ, pl. Gx.336, 202, 1460, aa. XI. 9, xlvi. 8. @@. 67, 542, 946, See Dunt. Discever, to discover, ex. 1862. Discryrg, to describe, ex. 81. D1SPLESES, imp. displease you, &K. 2439. D18POYLED, p.p. undressed, ex. 860. Disstryez, pr. ¢. destroys, ek. 2375. Distance, dissension, strife, ee. 448, 1362. DyswoR8H1P, disgrace, J. 419. Dit, p. p. fastened, ex. 1233. D131, topronounce, make, 6K. 295, DY@HTI8, pr.t. get ready, aa. xxxix.1, Dieut, 3c Dyeut, imp. prepare, look after, 3. 28. er.k. 312, Dieut, Diente, Dyeut, Dyeutez, D3t, Dytz, Dy3t, p. ¢. and p. p. prepared, dressed, placed, disposed, made ready, GK. 114,678, 994, 1559, 1884, 1223, 1689. aa.i. 6, xiii. 4, xxvii. 2,11, 11. 66. 600, 732, 1029. 6c. 372, 550. 3.130. c. 469; treated, circumstanced, aa. xlv. 8, xviii. 12. Do, to cause, ec. 27; place, lay, ex. 1492, ec. 1111. Dos HER FORTH, goes out, GK. 1308, Dos, imp. do thou, ex. 1533. Dorug, do ye, ec. 619. Dor, pr. e. doth, GE. 2211, Dip, DiDDEN, p. ¢. caused, GK. 1327. 66. 1298, Don, p. p. placed, GK. 478. Doz, Doxz, Door, sorrow, torment, 6K. 558. AA. xvi. 13, xliii.8. GC. 537. Doeuety, Do3ty, Du3try, doughty, brave, GK. 724, 2264, Used substantively, man being understood, 6K. 2334. AA, i. 11. Doveurv1s, pl. Ge. 712. Dox, tail, ex. 193. DoLE, part, @K. 719. See DaiL. Dom, Dome, judgement, sentence, Gk. 295, 1216, 1968. Doxxanvs, damp, moistening, ex. 519. Doszs, back of a seat, gk. 478. In the Prompt. Parv. the © Docer of an hall,” is explained dorsorium, auleum, i.e, hangings. Dossovss, cushions for the back, aa. xxxv. 2. Doren, p. ¢. and p. p. became foolish, demented, ek. 1151, 1956. Dovcn-sPERE, nobleman, ae. 1334. DucHEPERES, pl. Aa.i.4. See DUGtPERs. Dovr ty, boldly, sternly, ee. 860. Dovrs, fear, 6x. 246, 442. Dovru, Dourtue, people, nobles, ex. 61, 1365, 1415, 1956. SeealsoNeroA.x.f.73d. +Dowss, probably a mistake of the transcriber, aa. xv. 2, The reading of MS. D. is, doubtless, correct. Dowrtovs, fearful, Aa. xl. 9. Drap, p. p. afraid, aa. ix. 8,9, MS. D. DRavELED, p. f, slumbered fitfully, ex. 1750, Dxazr, drawbridge, ex. 817. Drecucu, delay? ex. 1972. DreEvrutte, fearful, ec. 249. DreEDLES, void of dread, Gk. 2334. Dreeue, Dreien, see ON-DREIGH. DREPED, p. p. put to death, ex. 725. Dres, to prepare, go, Gk.474. DRESSES, DressEz, pr. ¢. prepares, addresses, rises, 417, 445, 566. Dress, pr. ¢. pl. treat, 66. 997. DREssED, p. ¢. and p. p. placed, set, cx. 75, 2033; went, addressed themselves, 1415; rose, 2009. Drevcu, p. f. drew, ec. 706. DREVEDE, p. p. confounded, aa. xxii. 4. Dre;, strong? ex. 1750. Used adverbially, 2263. DREz3Ly, vigorously? ex. 1026. Dre37, see ON-DREIGH. Dryer, Dry3z, to endure, suffer, ex. 202, 560, aa. xi. 11. DRYE, pr. ft. aa. xvi. 13. Drieutin, Dry3tyn, the Lord, ex. 724, 996, 1548. ee. 1111, 1228. DR1VANDE, driving, advancing quickly, ex. 222. DRIVE, Þ. t. drove, &r.K. 7. Dry3z, see ON-DREIGH. Dry3z, calm, patient, Gk. 335, 724; enduring, tough, 1460. Dror, p. t. drove, rushed, passed, ex. 786, 1151, 1176. DRONEEN, p. &. drank, Gk. 1025, 1668. Drovpine, DrowPpine, slumber, 6k. 1748, 1750. Dro3, DRO3EN, p. ft. drew, 6K, 1188, 1463, AA. xliv. 3. DRrozr, drought, dryness, ex. 523. Drury, Drwryez, amour, love, ex. 1507, 1517, 2449; love-token, 1805, 2033. DuBBED, p. p. ornamented, dressed, clad, GK. 75, 193, 571. Ae Ducuery, dukedom, 6&6, 1072. DvcarELY, doughtily, ae. 785. Dvzren, dwarf, ac. 79, 84. Ducepers, DUSSIPERES, the Douze-Pairs of France, AA. xxii, 4. GLOSSARY. Dvx1T, p. p. ennobled, made duke, 66. 1072. DvULEFULLY, dolefully, aa. xlviii. 12. DvuLeuL, DULEFULLE, doleful, grievous, cx. 1517. aa.xiii.4. See DELFUL, Dunt, DunTE, blow, 6x. 452, 1286. See Dynrt. DvuranDLY, enduringly, 66. 335. Dore, to endure, 7. 398. DuRKENE, pr. t. lie hid, aa. iv. 12, MS. D. v. 1. Pinkerton and Jamieson interpret this falsely, affright. See Darxis. Duscuanp, smiting hard, ee. 860. Dut, mirth? ex. 1020. Dur, Durre, p.t. doubted, feared, ax. 222, 784, 2257. E. EFFRAYT, p.p. alarmed, eG. 1259. Erte, after, afterwards, ex. 641, 700, 788, 2388. Ert-soNez, FEFTER-SONES, thereafter, Gk. 1640, 2417. Ecce, edge, ak. 212. Used for the aze itself, 2392. Eq@une, Enz, YENE, pl. eyes, AA. ix. 12, xxviii. 5, xIvi. 9, xIvii. 1. ELDE, age, Gk. 844, 1520. +E te, for ILLE, ex. 1811. ELN3ERDE, ell-yard, ex. 210. Em, Ems, uncle, ex. 356, 543. EMDELEZ, with equal sides, ex. 629. EMELL, amidst? eg. 1230. Pinkerton prints this in mell, which it may also possibly be meant for. Empriour, emperor, 6G. 1230. ENBANED, p. p. ornamented? cx. 790. The same term is used by the author in another poem, when describing the vessels used at Balthazar's feast : forthwith, For ther wer bassynes ful bry3t of brende golde clere, Enamaylde w* azer, and eweres of sute ; Couered cowpes foul clere, as casteles arayed, Enbaned vnder batelment w* bantelles quoynt, GLOSSARY. & fyled out of fygures of ferlyle schappes ; The coperounes of the canacles, that on the cuppe reres, Wer fetysely formed out in fylyoles longe ; Pinnacles py3t ther apert, that profert bitwene, on MS. Cott. Nero A. x. f. 17. ENBELYSE, to embellish, ex. 1034. ENBRAUDED, ENBRAWDED, ENBRAWDEN, p.p. embroidered, adorned, ex. 78, 166, 606, 856. ENcHEIF, to accomplish? ea. 1059. EnvITE, p. f. put (to death,) ex. 1600. ENDORRED, p. p. gilded, AA. xxxvi. 4, Jamieson renders it adorned. ENDURAND, enduring, Ge. 434. Ene, see EGHNE. ENESED, p. p. covered? Gk. 184. Enevcu, enough, ee. 1071. ENFOUBLED, p. p. wrapt up, GK. 959. ENGRELEDE, p. p. interspersed, aa. xl. 2. ENGREVIT, p. ¢. angered, 66.975. EnxER, deep, intense? applied to color, GK. 150, 2477. ENNOURNED, ENNURNED, P.P. adorned, GE. 634, 2027. Enqussr, inquiry, ex. 1056. EnscHEw, to prove, try, 66. 663. ENSENYE, ensign, war-word, 66. 474, 845, ENSENYES, pl. 315. ENSPRINGING, springing forth, ce. 1238. ENTAYLED, p.p. interwoven, embroidered, GE. 612. EnTYRE? 66. 704. EnTYsE, to acquire, GE. 2436. ER, ere, before, previously, cx. 92, 197, 712, etc. See Air, ARE. Erar, comp. rather, sooner, 66. 511. ERBER, the conduit leading to the stomach ; a hunting term, ex. 1330. See A Jewell for Gentrie, 4to, 1614, 8ign.*F. 2. “To make the erber,” says Sir Walter Scott, “is to disembowel the animal;” but the erber certainly did not extend to the paunch, which is separately mentioned. See the Notes, p. 322. Erp, Erpg, earth, ox. 27, 140, 881. 66. 303, 1024. Erpez, pl. lands, ex. 1808. Erp y, earthly, 66, 1241. ErvyaunT, errant, cx. 810. Ernp, ERNDE, errand, GK. 257, 559, 809. Ernest, a first payment by way of pledge to receive a larger, c. 248. ERTAND, enterprising, GG. 393. explains it, ingenious. Esre, (?) AA. vii. 6. ETAYN, giant, ex. 140. 723. ErTHE, pr. t. ask, ak. 379, 2467. ETHE, easy, GK. 676. ETTAND, p. pr. eating, ec. 303. ate, GK. 113. ETYLLEDE, p. ft. aimed, aa. xlviii.5. See ATTLE. EvENDEN,evenly? perpendicularly? 6x. 1345. Evez, borders? ex. 1178. Evyss, ivies? er.x. 459. Expoun, to describe, explain, ex. 209, 1506. Jamieson ETAYNEZ, pl. Erte, p. t. F. Fa, Faa, foe, ee. 911, 933. for sing. aa. xIvil. 12. Fapsx, wan? GE. 149. Fay ty, to fail, 6x. 1067. Farting, FariYEIS, FAYLEZ, pr.t. GK. 278,455, 66. 1139, 1239. Farr, action, proceeding, enterprise, 66, 570, 576, 731... Jamieson is in error in interpreting the last of these instances, funeral solemnity, and has totally misunderstood the passage. FALE, fallow? grassy? ex. 728: Fa, FALLE, to befall, happen, ex. 483. AA, xxiii, 13. Ge. 1007. FALLEZ, pr. ¢. befalls, appertains, 6x. 1303, 1358, 2327. FALLETH, pr. ¢. behoves, c. 253, 277. FALLED, p. ¢. belonged, appertained, cx. 2243. FALLEN, p. p. befallen, happened, 23. See FELL, Fatsset, falsehood, 66. 1173. Faas, pl. used See Fay. 3c 2 Famrr, p. f. foamed, bubbled, ee. 636. Fanve, FAYND, imp.try, aa.xv. 11. 66.357. Fans, vane, ec. 255. Fang, Fayn, glad, joyful, ak. 388,840, 1067. G6. 83. In rarn, joyfully, 26. Jamieson interprets the last example, fondly. Fane, Fance, FANGIN, to take, receive, accept, Gk. 391. G6. 45, 357, 554, 902. Fane, Fanais, pr. t. 576, 1002. Faneit, P-P- 421. Fannanp, flowing, ex. 181. Fantise, FAyNTYSE, deceit, cowardice, GK. 2435. 66. 1222. Fanrtoun, phantom, illusion, ex. 240. FaranD, goodly, ex. 101; going, riding, G6. 18. Farar, fairer, more honorable, 66. 1035. FARDELLIS, pieces, shivers, ee. 1019. Fare, unusual display, cntertainment, ex. 537, 694 ; behaviour, conduct, 1116, 2386; course, path, 1793; proceeding, adventure, 2494 ; onset, aa. xxxi. 9, xli. 6 ; conduct, speech, ec. 169. c.115; step, movement, action, ec. 181, 451, 466. c. 343. See Farr. Fare, to go, journey, er.x. 506. Farr, pr.t. c6. 1293. Farez, imp. go ye, Gk. 2149. FAREN, p. p. gone, 1231. Favcanron, falchion, er.x. 83, 461. Favour, appearance, AA. xili. 10. Favr, fault, ex. 1551, 2435. Fautes, Fawres, pr. ¢. fails, aa. xxv. 7, xlv. 2. Favutine, loss, failure, 66. 1222. Faut es, FAUTLEZ, faultless, &x.640, 1761. Faw, FaweE, variegated, aa. vii.2. 66.475, 1279. FAwLDE, to embrace, AA. xxix. 12. Fawn, pr. t. caress, GK. 1919. Fawry, faulty, ex. 2382, 2386. Fax, Fax, hair, ck. 181, aa. xxix. 5. Fay, Fave, faith, aa. xxxi. 8. 66. 17. 3. 443. T6. 92. Fay, foe, ae. 56. Fars, pl. 486, See Fa. Fayrnp, see Fano. Fayry3z, enchantment, magic, Gk. 240. GLOSSARY. FAYTHELY, certainly, ex. 1636. FzaLD, truss (of straw,) c. 239. It isso explained on the authority of Dr. Grainger in a MS. note in the Percy MS. FEARD, p.p. afraid, er.x. 232. Fecutin, p. t. fought, 66. 758. FzDyRrT, p. p. feathered, ec. 106. Fecurtanp, fighting, ec. 719. FziLL, Fer, FELE, FELLE, many, GE. 122, 239, 428, 1566. AA. xxi. 2. 66. 28,485. ec. 638. FELE-FOLDE, manifold, ex. 1545, Fzis, Ferg, demeanour, conduct, ec. 160, 810, 1264. See Arrers. Fzir, Frere, companion, fellow, mate, cx. 676, 695, 915, 2411. 66. 280, 911, 1115. Ferres, Ferez, pl. 6k. 594. MG. 163. In Fz1s, IN FERE, together, in company, GK. 267. aa. xxvi. 6. 66. 411, 565. ec. 516. 6r.x. 250. Ta. 64, c. 103. Fer, Ferr, FELLE, fierce, bold, furious, cruel, GK. 291, 847, 874. aa. iv. 8, xv. 4. 66. 570, 802, 932. ec. 340. 7.366. Te. 229. axc. 246, Used substantively, ex. 1585. Fz1.43ts, fellows, ex. 1702. FELA3SCHYP, fellowship, 6k. 652. FzLDE, to fold, embrace, cx. 841. Fervs, fold? ex. 890. FELER, more, greater, GK. 1391, See FEILu. FzLL, FELLE, hill, moor, ex. 723. Aa, iii. 6. e6. 193, 1290, 1318, FeLL1s, pl. aa. i. 8, iv. 10, vii. 2. ee. 26. Fer, FELLE, p. ¢. should befall, befell, ex. 1588. 66. 1200. Sce Farr. FELLE, skin, hide, ex. 943, 1359, 1944. ae. 352. FELLEZ, pl. ex. 880, 1737. FELLELY, FELLY, fiercely, cruelly, boldly, GK. 2302. ea. 576, 762. FELLOUNE, cruel, fierce, aa. 670, 707. FELONOSLY, keenly, aa. iv. 8. Femep, p. t. foamed, ek. 1572. FEnp, to defend, er.K. 84. Fewnve, to feign, ec. 1187. Fenye, FENYEING, deceit, ec. 745, 856, 1117. GLOSSARY. FEN3EING, feigning, ec. 16. Ferp, fourth, ec. 656. Ferpe, host, troop, aa. xv. 4. Ferpe, fear, ek. 2130, 2272. Ferpe, FERDEN, p.¢. proceeded, acted, Gk. 149, 703, 1282, 1433. See Fars. FzRDE, p.f. and p.p. feared, afraid, ex. 1295, 1588, 2382. Ferre, bold, ex. 103. Ferx, to proceed, ride, GK. 1072, 1973. Fa=RKEZ, FERKEES, pr. t. rides, rises, 173, 2013. FERKED, p. e. ran, 2173. FerLy, wonder, marvel, ek. 716, 2414. AA. vi. 7, xxiii. 13, 6c. 228. FERLIES, FERLYES, pl. GK. 23. AA, xxiii. 13, MS. D. xxiv. 1, MS. D.1lv.7. See FURLEY. FeErLY, FERLYLY, wondrous, wondrously, GK. 388, 741, 766, 1694, 2494. ce. 475, 795. Fermysoun, FERNYSONE, a hunting term, applied to the time in which the male deer were closed, or not allowed tobekilled, ex. 1156. aa.i.8. Mr. Guest interprets it winter season. Ferre, afar, ex. 1093. FzrUM, see ON-FERUM. Fest, to secure, fasten, 66.421. Fest, pr. t. 66.1324, Fest, p.t. cx.2347, FESTNED, p.p. 1783. FETED, p. ¢. (?) Gk. 1282. FETLED, p. p. joined, ex. 656. Fetty, featly, ex. 1758. Fert, Ferre, p. p. fetched, brought, ex. 1084. 6c. 430. c. 467. Fzurz, FEwrTE, fealty, ec. 431, 1324. FEUTRED, p. ¢. fixed in the lance-rest, 3. 50. See Feurer in Gloss. to Will. and Werwolf. Fey, p. p. dead, slain, aa, xxii. 2, MS, D. Ge. 610, 1067, 1110. Fycu, to fix, &x. 396. Ficusps, Fycuep, P-P. 658. AA. xxxix. 6. Frmrs, fierce, spirited, 7.158. Fyrxep, p. ¢. shrank, was troubled, ex. 2274. FiLDoRE, gold thread, Fr. fil d'or, ex. 189. FYLED, p. p. ground, GK, 2225. FyLYoLEz, round towers? cx. 796. In Douglas the same term occurs in the form of fyellis. See Jamieson, in v. and also the quotation under Enbaned. Fyuit, p. p. disgraced, ee. 1038. FrLiLs, to fulfil, 6x. 1405, 1934. FryLoR, grindstone? ex. 2225. Fyiter, to weave? Gk. 986, See Jamieson, iv. Fywe, perfect, unconditional, ex. 1239. FyNISMENT, end, finish, ex. 499. Fynty, wholly? ex. 1391. tT Fire, perhaps a mistake for Fes, fear, GE, 1304. Firmyscuamis? aa.i.8.MS.D. Omitted in the Glossaries of Pinkerton and Jamieson. It has undoubtedly some connexion with FeErmysoun. Firre, Fyrrez, further, ex. 378, 411, 1105, 2121, First, early, youthful, ex. 54. Firtu, an inclosed wood, 66. 193, 1293. FigTHES, FIRTHIS, pl. AA, xxvi. 6. ae. 27. See FriTHE. Fyskez, p. 7. runs, Gk. 1704. Fitr, division of a poem or lay, 6r.x, 263. Fr3eD, p. t. were fair? 6K. 796. Frat, ground, field, ex. 507. Fraveu, FLaw, FLaz, Fran, p. t. flew, fled, GK. 459, 2274, 2276. ee. 857. 224. FLEKERIT, p. p. spotted. ce. 475. FLENDRIS, splinters, 66. 915. FLEt, FLETTE, floor, GK. 294, 568, 832, 859, 1374, 1653, 1925, FLETE, p.t. flitted, flew, ex. 1566. Fiynp, flint, ec. 28. FLONE, arrow, GK. 1161. nus, pl. 1566, ec. 106, FLoscus, flood, pool, ex. 1430. bour, Flouss, FLoTEN, p. p. removed, distant, ex. 714. FLurs, flory, floured, aa. xxxi, 11, MS. D. FxasT, FNASTED, to breathe hard, ax. 1587, 1702. See Glossary to Havelok, in v. and Reply to Singer's Remarks, p. 35. AKC, FLoNnzz, FLon- In Bar- Forwe, p. é. kicked, ax. 428. Forsoun, plenty, ex. 122. Foun, Forps, Foutps, earth, ground, ex. 23, 196, 396. 422. aa. xxxiv. 2, xxvii. 8. G6. 56, 570. Forpen, p. p. folded, ex. 959; plighted, 1783. ForLpez, imp. grant thou, Gk. 359; pr. t. accords, 499. For, fool, ex. 1545. FoLoweD, p.p. baptised, aa. xviii. 4, MS.D. See FULLEDE. Fory, foolishly, ex. 324. ForzanDe, following, suitable, ex. 145, 859. Forzzs, pr: 2. follows, 6x. 1164. FoizeD, p. t. followed, 1895. FonbeE, to try, endeavour, prove, GK. 291, 565, 986. Fonps, subj. might find, 1875. Fonpet, FounneD, p. ft. attempted, proved, 1549, 2125, 2130. FonDENE, see FounD. Fonprep, FounDERIT, FoUNDRIT, Þ. fk. foundered, gave way, AA. xlii. 9. 66, 640, 1022, Foxes, to take, receive, Gk. 816, 1556, 1622. FoNGEN, pr. t. 1265. Fone, FoNes, p.t. 646, 1363, 1315, Fonez, FoNGED, p.p. 919, 1315. Foo, large, largely? 6x. 1430, 2326. For, because, ek. 258 ; before? 965, 1822. For-BETT, p. p. thoroughly beaten, aa. li. 8. For-BLEDE, p.p. covered with blood, aa. 1.8. Force, matter, T6. 265. ForDoNE, p.p. destroyed, Aa. xxi.10, MS.D. + Forpwarp, covenant, 66.1329, See ForWARD. Fore, p. p. fared, c. 228. See Fare, +Forzross, to destroy, kill, T6. 32, ForFERDE, P. f, GK. 1617. FORFAREN, p. p. GK. 1895. ForE-LETE, to loose, ec. 209. Fore-THOGHT, p. ¢. repented, ec. 336. Forea, to lose, ag. 1183, 1189. FoRLANCYNG, cutting off, ex. 1334. FoRLORNE, p. p. destroyed, eG. 277. GLOSSARY. Forms, beginning, ex. 499 ; foremost, ex. 2373. Forns, formerly? ex. 2422. Forovurtin, without, ec. 499, 1286. For-sakg, to deny, Gx. 475, Forsoxz, p.t. 1826. Fors1xst, mightiest, eg. 786. Forswnes, strength, ex. 646. Forss1s, pr. ¢. enforce? ee. 202. Forssy, powerful, mighty, 66.487. Used substantively, 719. Forst, frost, ck. 1694. Forrn, Fortuez, Forz, ford, stream, ex. 1585, 1617, 2173. For-tH1, For-ruy, therefore, 6x. 27, 240, 283, 455. aa.xxxiv.9. 66. 364, Forwarp, ForxwarDE, covenant, GK. 1105, 1395, 1636. Forwarpes, Forwarpez, FoREWARDES, pl. 378, 409, 1405. 7. 35. For-woNnDRED, Þ. p. astonished, ex. 1660. AA. xxvi. 9, MS. D. Forzare, p. ¢. forgot, ox. 1472. For-3ELDE, subj. requite, 6x. 839, 1279, 1535. Forez, feet, ex. 574. Forrs, to fetch, ex. 451. . Founp, to go, journey, ae. 884, 933. Founpez, Founpis, Fownpis, pr. t. 6x. 1585, 2229, AA, xxi. 1,2. es. 109, 370, 660. FonpENE, pr.t.pl. aa.xxi.1,MS.D. Found, FowNDEDE, p. ¢. journeyed, aa. xxxi.9. 66. 636, 909, 1293, Founpezp, P. p. GK. 267. Fourcuez, pl.a hunting term, applied to the Forks or haunches of the deer, ck. 1357. The same term is used in the Boke of St. Alban’s, 1496. And after the ragge-boon kyttyth euyn also, The forchis and the sydes euyn bytwene, And loke that your knyues ay whettyd bene ; Thenne turne vp the forchis, and frote theym wyth blood, For to saue grece ; so doo men of good. Fra, from, 66. 58. Fraist, FRAYST, to ask, seek, Gk. 409. aa. xxxli, 9. G6, 121, Frayst, FRAYSTEZ, GLOSSARY. pr.t. ask, askest, Gk. 279, 455 ; tries, 503. Frayst, FRAYSTED, p. p. asked, 324, 391, 1395; tried, proved, 1679. Frastyn, to prove, 66. 902. FResTIN. Fratit, p. p. fretted? wrought? eG. 889. Fravce, deceit? er.K. 355. Frauncuis, Frauncnysz, frankness, liberality, 6x. 652, 1264. Fray, to frighten, ee. 486. See Arrray. Frayn, to seek, ax. 489. FRAYNED, p. ft. and p. p. asked, 359, 703, 1046. Fre, noble, ex. 101, 847, 1156, 1885, 1961. G6. 138, 379. Used substantively, lady, being understood, ex. 1545, 1549, 1783. FREELY, noble, lovely, used substantively, AA. xxix, 12. Freest, most noble, ck. 2422. Freik, FREE, FREKE, man, warrior, GK.149, 196, 241, 651. AA. xxi. 1, xxxi. 8. 66. 56, 83,106. Freez, gen. man's, GK. 537. Frexes, FREKEZ, Frexis, pl. men, 703, 840, 1172. 66.370; persons, AA. vii. 1. FREYNDFULLY, friendly, ee. 1173. FREMEDLY, as a stranger, GK. 714. Fremmyt, strangers, 66. 909, 1079. Frenp, p.t. asked, er.K. 256. See Frayn. FrENKYSCH, French? frank? jocular? ex. 1116. Inthe Chester miracle-play of The Deluge the term is used by Noah’s wife, See Fraist, In faith, Noe, I had as lief thou had sleped, for all thy frankish fare, For I will not doe after thy red. It is explained by the editor nonsense. See A Collection of English Miracle-Plays, etc. By W. Marriott, 8vo, Basel, 1838, p. 6. FrenYEls, fringes, 66. 318, 889. Fres, p.t. froze, 6K.728. Frescu, vigorous, 66. 1259. FRESCHLY, quickly, ex. 1294. Fresone, Frieseland horse, AA, xxxi. 8, xiii. 5. Frezstin, to prove, 66.911. Frest, p. ¢. 695. See Fraist, Frastyn. Frere, FRETT, FRETTE, p.p. fretted, laced, braided, aa. xxix. 5, GC. 422, @r.K. 278. Fryppe for Frytu, aa.i.7, MS. D. Fritue, FRYTH, FRYTHE, an inclosed wood, GK. 1430, 1973, 2151. aa. xxvi. 6, MS. D. er.K. 60, FrITHEs, FRYTHES, FRYTHEZ, Frytuis, pl, ex. 695. aa. i. 8, MS. D. liii. 6. FRYTHEDE, p. p. wooded, aa.i.7. Fro, from the time that, ax. 8, 62; from, 1336, FroTE, pr. t. rub, ak. 1919. Frounsss, pr. ft. wrinkles, contracts, ex. 2306. Frount, forehead, ex. 959. + Frowe, from, ec. 118, Fruscuit, p. ¢, rushed with violence, ec. 565, 617. FuLys, explained by Jamieson, leaf-gold, GG. 939. FoLyEIT, p. ¢, and p. p. injured, destroyed, 66. 928, 1110. FULLEDE, p. p. baptised, aa. xviii. 4. See FoLowep. Fuxsum, to help, aid, ex. 99. FuNDEN, p. p. found, 6x. 640. FUNNESTANE, font, AA. xviii. 4. Fure, p. f. went, rode, aa. lv. 10. 66. 676. Furey, m. wonder, marvel, or.K. 354. Fur eys, pl. 286. See FERLY. Furey, adj. wondrous, 6Gr.k. 280. FurLENTE, furlong, &6. 1279. Fusioun, abundance, ee. 222. Fust, hand? ex. 391. Fure, Furr, track of a fox or beast of chace, by the odour, 6x, 1425. See Boke of St. Alban’s, and Malory’s Morte d' Arthur, B. 18, ch. xxi. Also Gloss. to Will. and Werwolf, v. Feute. G. Gaa, Gay, to go, aa.v. 8. 66.54, Ga, Gays,pr.t.aa.v.9. 66.591. SeeGanz. Gay, an epithet, used substantively, and applied to both sexes, 6K. 970, 1822, 2035. AA. xli. 10. 66, 988. Hence we may, perhaps, correct the doubtful reading in GE. 1215, GarLYyaRDE, sprightly, gay, used substantively, aa. xxxviii. 12. Gayn, to require, befit, cx. 584. Gayn, prompt, ex. 178 ; fit, proper, 1241. Gayn, Gayng, promptly, quickly, ex. 1621, AA, Vii. 7. Gavnzsr, nearest, speediest, GK. 1973. Gayn ty, fitly, promptly, ex. 476, 1297. Gaystyn, GEYSTYN, to lodge, ec. 146, 164. Garr, GaTz, way, road, path, ex. 696, 778, 930. 66. 54,131, 381. 3.121; enterprise, Ge. 124, 744, 791. Gates, Garls, pl. roads, ways, GK. 709. AA. ili. 2, vii. 7. GaMBESOUNNS, GAMESONS, quilted doublet to defend the body, aa. xxxi. 3. Gamen, GamMENE, GAMYN, sport, game, AA.V.7,xii. 3, MS.D. xxxiv. 7.. 66. 1144, GamMENES, GamNnes, GAMNEZ, pl. GK. 1319. AA. Xi, 3, xxxi, 12, See GOMEN, Gang, to go, 66,8, See Gaa. Gans, prompt, 66. 1027, See Gayn, Ganvs1s, darts, arrows, 66. 465. Gar, Gann, Garr, GaRRE, to cause, AA. xvii. 2, xlix. 11. 66.472, 1080. er.x. 147. T6. 23, GARED, Gart, GARTE, p. f, and P- Þ- GK. 2460, AA, xxxvil. 13, Iv, 1, Ge. 295, 880, 952. GaRaToOuRIs, watch-towers, aa. 482. Garer, turret, watch-tower, 66. 525. GaRYTEZ, pl, GK. 791. See Du Cange, v. Garite. GARGULUN, part of the inwards of a deer, apparently included in the numbles. GK. 1335, 1340. See Scott's Notes to Sir Tristrem, p. 387, ed. 1833. Garsone, GARYSOUN, treasure, reward, GK, 1255, 1807,1837. aa. xii.4, MS. D. Garsommzs, Garsons, GERSOMEsS, pl. AA. xii, 4, liv. 8. : Gast, p. p. afraid, 6K. 325. Gaunt, ornament? ex. 167. Ger, p. 2. see Grr. Gzlr, Gere, Gere, armour, Gx. 569, 584. GLOSSARY. G6. 738, 987. ar.K. 234; applied to spears, 672. GERez, pl. apparel, Gx. 1470. Gent, fair, comely, 66.72. @c. 364, Used substantively, king being understood, ee. 1285. GexTRICE, GENTRISE, courtesy, honor, es. 139, 1105, 1202. Geez, pr. ?. arrays, GK. 1872. Gerrzp, p.t. and p. p. dressed, arrayed, 179, 957, 2227 ; disposed, 791; made, fashioned, 1832, GERSE, pr. 7. causes, AA. xvii. 6. See Gar. GESERNE, GISERNE, axe, GK, 288, 326, 375, 2265. Ger, booty, gain, GK. 1638, GETEN, p. ¢. and p. p. got, ex. 1171, 1625. GEeTERONE, GYTTORNE, gitern, a sort of guitar, ec. 599, c. 466. +Gewes, pr. 7. probably a mistake for GLEwEs, look, AA, x. 11. MS. D. reads GLowss. Guxstine, lodging, hospitable reception, AKC. 65, 67. Grvx, attire, gown, AA, i. 2, xxix. 2. Gir, to give, Gx. 288, 365, Gp, p. f. ax. 370, 668, 2349. Gre, Girre, GINE, if, aa. xlviii. 13. G6, 56, 329. Ta. 25. GyLp, p. p. gilded, ex. 569. Gy tis, glens, aa. xxxiii. 2, The word occurs in the same sense in La Bone Florence of Rome, ap. Ritson, iii. 60. The MS. D. corruptly reads grylles, which consequently finds a place in Jamieson’s Dictionary. Gyne, assembly, ar. 224. Grp, to strike, smite, (governed by lef) aa. 106, 936. Gyrpsz, pr.t. strikes, spurs, GK, 2160. Guirp, Gyrp, pr.t. pl. spur, strike, cc. 912, 999. GrrDEeDe, GirpirT, p. t. struck, aa, xlvii. 8; drew, ea. 848. See GuRDENE. GirpanpD, spurring, riding, ec. 86. GYRSE, grass, AA. xxix, 2. GLaDE, to gladden, ex. 989, entertained, ea. 208. GLapiT, p.t. GLOSSARY. GLADLOEER, gladlier, ex. 1064, GrLarp,p.t.glided,rode, 66. 888. See GLop. Gram, noise, cry, clamor, cx. 1426, 1562. See also MS. Cott. Nero, A. x. f. 68». GLAVERANDE, noisy, yelping, ax. 1426. The same term is used in the metrical Morte Arthure, MS. Linc. f. 80. GLavis, swords? Ge. 558. GLaumannps, riotous, ex. 46. GLzDs, GLzsD, GLEID, burningcoal, ember, GE. 1609. AA. xxxi. 3, MS. D. ea. 558. Gc. 237. AKC. iii. 262, GLeDez, GLeDis, Guepys, pl. Gs. 891, AA. ix. 13, xxxi. 3. GLENAND, gleaming, ec. 557. GLENT, n. glance, ex. 1290. Guenr, p. ¢. glanced, looked, ex. 82,476; shone, 172, 569, 604; brightened, started up, 1652 ; shrank, 2292. GLETERANDE, GLYTERANDE, glittering, 6x. 2039. AA, ii. 2, iii. 1, xxxvi. 3. GLYDANDE, gliding, ex. 2266. GLyYFTE, p.t. looked, 6K. 2265. AA.xxvili. 5. MS. D. reads Guirrep, which is misprinted Guissep by Pinkerton, and thence inserted in Jamieson’s Dictionary. GLISNAND, glistening, glittering, ec. 525, 652. GLISTER, pr. ?. glitter, axc. 111. Gty3t, p. t. looked, cx. 842, 970. Probably only another form of GLyFTE. GLop, p. #. glided, ex. 661. GLops, clump, hillock, tuft? ex. 2266. Guopes, pl. 2181. GLoMEDE, p.t. gleamed, glowed, Aa.xxxi. 3. Guoprn, GLOPPYNNE, pr. f. wail, lament, AA. Vii. 13, GLOPPENED, GLOPPENYDE, p.t, wailed, mourned, AA, viii. 1, xli. 10, xlii. 10. GLowaND, glowing, AA. ix. 13. 6&6. 558. GLowes, pr. t. looks, aa. x. 11, MS. D. » GoaNnDE, going, walking, ex. 2214. Gopamercy! an exclamation easily corrupted from God have mercy! ar.x. 138. GopLy, Gopiycu, GouDLy, goodly, courteously, Gk. 273, 584, 1933. Gos, a corruption of Gop, ax. 390. 3D Gone, man, knight, warrior, ex. 151, 178, 325,375. AA. xxxiv. 7, MS.D. (Inthislast instance Jamieson makes a strange blunder, by joining the part. graithe on to the noun.) 66. 583, 698. Gomes, GommEs, Gomys, pl. aa. v. 9, xxxvi. 3. 66. 1169. GomEN, game, sport, ex. 273, 661, 1014, 1376. Gomnes, Gomnez, pl. 495, 683, 1894. See Gamen. GomENLy, playfully, ex. 1079. Gopnyng, affright? ex, 2461. Gore, p. p. gird, ex. 1851. Gorpzz, pr. t. strikes, spurs, GK. 2062. See Gimp. Goraer. wrapper or covering for the throat, GK. 957. : Gosr, spirit, life, ax. 2250. Gostiycu, ghostly, ex. 2461. Gorz, pr. t. goeth, goes, ex. 375, 1293; imp. go ye, 2119. GovLEez, Goviis, GowLez, Gow ts, gules, Gx. 619, 663. ee. 21, 603. Gracons, Greek? ex. 216. GRAIED, p. p. a contracted form of GraiTHED, arrayed, aa. xxxi. 4, MS. D. Graves, pr. ft. becomes gray, Gk. 527, GRAYNE, to groan, 66.472, GRANES, pr. t. AA. xlvii. 9. GrarTH, imp. prepare or undertake thou, ec. 124, Graituis, GRAYTHEZ, pr. t. makes ready, goes, GK. 2014. ea. 170. GratTHIT, GRAYTHED, GRAYTHEDE, p. t. and p-p. arrayed, dressed, prepared, ex. 74, 109, 151, 666, 876, 2259. aa. xxxi. 4, xl. 1. 66.131, 482, 547, 603, 1262; accomplished, 1267. Graytu, GRAYTHE, ready, prepared, GE. 448, 597, 2047. GRarTHLY, GRAYTHELY, readily, speedily, Gx. 417, 876, 1006, 1335. aa. xl. 1. 6a, 54, 1023; steadfastly, cheerfully? ex. 1470, 2292. Grams, anger, 3.98; mischief, cr.x. 392. See Grem. GramEst, most angry, e¢. 471. Jamieson chooses to interpret this warlike. Granes, pl. groans, AA. xlviii. 9. GRANT-MERCI, GRAUNT-MERCY, gramercy, thanks, ex. 838, 1037, 1392. +Grasss for Grease, c. 19. Grat, p. ¢, wept, Ge. 1141. See Grete. Graruest, readiest? AA. xxxiv. 10, MS. D. GRATTEST, greatest, 6K..207, 1441. Gre, degree, dignity, superiority, 66, 698, 1162. Grecugs, pr.t. grows angry? Aa. xli, 4. GREIF, rage,. passion, 66. 925, 960. Grey, adj. heavy? G6. 1262. GREIS, steps, Gc. 482. Grem, GREME, anger, GK. 312, 1507, 2370; mischief, 2251. See Grams. GREMED, p. f. was grieved, aa. xli. 4. Gren, to roar, c. 213. GRENNE, pr. ¢t. made game, GK. 464. Gres, GRESSE, grass, GK. 235, 2181. Gret, p.t. greeted, accosted, Gk. 842, 1933. GG. 377. Grete, used substantively for nobles, great men, GK. 2490. GRETE, 2. cry, AA. XXV. 12, xxvi. 1. Grete, GRETYNE, to cry, weep, GK. 2157. AA. Vili. 8, xxii. 5, GretEs, GRETE, pr. t. vii. 13, xlvi.9. Gert, p. f. viii. 1. GREUE, grove, copse, GK. 1355, 1707, 1898, 1974. .Greves, Grevez, Grevys, pl. 207, 508. aa.v.8, xxvi. 2, MS. D. lii. 2. Graves, greaves, leg-armour, GK. 575. GrevuNnDEs, greyhounds, aa. v. 8, MS. D. Jamieson’ most absurdly explains this grandees ! Gryvep, p.¢. trembled, wasagitated, cx. 2370. GRILLE, to torment, aa. xlix. 8. GRILLES, pr.t. torments, «xxiii. 6. - GRYLLE, hideous, frightful, aa. xlviii. 9. +Gry.uzs, see GYLLIS. Grymngz, cruel, ex. 2260. GaynDEL, wrath, fierce, Gk, 2338. GRYNDEL-LAYK, anger, fierceness, GK. 312. GryNDELLY, wrathfully, ex. 2299. GRYNDELSTON, grindstone, GK. 2202. Grip, possession, tenure, &6. 1169. GriPPIs, pl. grasp, gripe, 347. GLOSSARY. GrippreD, GrIPPIT, GRYPED. p. t. grasped, Gr. 421, 1335. G6. 1026. Gaisty, horribly, fearfully, aa. xlvii. 2,9. GaryTHs, respite, AA. V. 7. Grome, GrUME, man, knight, ex. 1006. Ge. 105, 148, 1000, 1114. Gromys, Grumys, pl. 8, 1027, 1144. GRoNYED, p. ¢. grunted as a wild-boar, GK. 1442. . GRos8E,—IN GR0S8E, all together, 66.1168. Grown, to bellow, ec. 238. GrowELyneg, grovelling, aa, xlvii. 8. Grucn, to grudge, ex. 2251, Grucuyng, misliking, ex. 2126, GruLinets, gen. abs. in a grovelling attitude, 66, 1024. Grume, Grumys, see Grome. Grwe, will? ex. 2251. Compare Grieu and Gre in Roquefort. GvDLy, courteous, complaisant, AA, li. 2. GuRDEs, pr. t. smites, aa. xlv. 10, GurDENE, pr. f. pl. spur, xxxix. 1, MS. D. See Girp. H. Hasse, HanBxs, HaBBEZ, pr. . have, hast, GE. 327, 452, 626, 1252. Hacugs, racks for hay, aa. xxxv. 6, MS. D. See Hecke. Hapen, p. ¢. pl. had, ex. 52, 1446. Haper, p. p. at enmity? ex. 681. Hay! exclamation or cry of the hunters, ex. 1158, 1445. In the former instance it is most incorrectly rendered hedge by Mr. Guest, Hist, E. R,ii.169. See Hyene. Hair, all, ea. 434. Haytce, to embrace, salute, ex. 2493. HavrLsEs, pr. ¢. 972. Hayuszp, p. t. 223,810,829. See Hatca, Hausen. HarLLy, HALELY, wholly, 66.175, 1299, 1317. HairsINne, encounter, ea. 703. Hair, eager, courageous, ce. 742; used adverpially ; hotly, fiercely, 949. HALAwWED, p, p. hallooed, ex. 1723. +HaLcs, neck, 6K, 427. GLOSSARY. Har.cn, to salute, embrace, xc. 65. HatCHED, p.t. and p.p. Gk. 939. ma. 73. See HaLseD, Hartuce. Harcnez, pr. t. fastens, ex. 1613. HarCHED, p. f. looped, fastened, 185, 218, 657, 1852. Ha tp, stronghold, ea. 371, 583. Harvanp, holding, ec. 259. Ha pe, to hold, ex. 1125. Harps, HatDEZ, pr. t. holds, 53, 627. Haxpen, p. 7. held, 124; p. p. obliged, bound, 1040, 1828 ; esteemed, 1297. Hatt, p. p. held, 2079. In the last instance we recognise the common phrase of hold up, as applied to the heavens. Hatz, whole, ae. 602, 1344. Haue ty, see HAILLY. Haus, pr.t.drives, rushes, 6x.136, Hart, HALLED, p. ft. rushed, 458; rose, 788; pulled, hauled, 1338; shot, discharged, 1455; p. p. pulled? 157; gone, 1049. In most if not all the above instances the radical meaning of quick motion is predominant. See Ihre, Gloss. Suio- Goth., v. Halla, in the 7th signification. HarLFy, behalf, ax. 2149, See Harve. HaLyDan, reliques of the saints? ex. 2123. See HoLyDomE. Harm, handle, 6x. 218, 330, 2224, Hats, Hause, neck, ex. 621, 1353, 1639. HarsED, p. fe. saluted, aa. xxvii. 8, MS. D. c.190. See Harcn, Haytcez. Hatsum.y, comfortably, ex. 1731. HarLTANE, haughty, proud, used substantively, 66.962; precious, 963. See HawTANE. HaLvs, behalf, cx. 326, 692, 2119; side, 742, 1552. Hatus, pl. sides, ek. 2070, 2165. See Hatr. HALVENDELLE, half-part, aa. 1.2. Harzez, saints, GK. 2122. HAmLoUNEZ, pr. ¢. a hunting term, used of the wiles of the fox, 6x. 1708. So in the Boke of St. Alban’s, 1496. And yf your houndes at a chace renne there ye . hunte, And the beest begyn to renne, ashartes ben wonte, Or for to hanylon, as dooth the foxe wyth his gyle, Or for to crosse, as the roo doth otherwhyle. And in the older treatise of Twety, MS. Cott. Vesp. A. x11. f. 6>. © Sohow gothe to alle maner of chaces, and couplyng, and dyscouplyng, but if yowre houndes renne to one chace, that is to seye, rusezt, or hamylone, or croisethe, or dwelle, and they conne not put it no ferthere, ye shal seye, Ho so, amy, so, venez a coupler,” Hence also may be explained the passage so miserably glossed in Hearne’s Peter Langtoft, p. 308. With hanelon tham led, to mak the purale. Han, pr. t. pl. have, ax. 23, 1089, 2093. HANSELLE, specimen, first occurrence, ex. 491, See HonDE-sELLE. Hap VPoN HEE, & phrase somewhat equivalent to hap-hazard, ax. 48. Hapnest, most fortunate? ex. 56. Happen, p. p. fastened, ex. 655 ; wrapped, 864. Happunys, pl. fortunes, chances, 6c. 825. HARBARROWE, p.p. lodged, er.z. 348. HarBorows, Harzsorrow, HarBROWE, lodging, ec. 137, 147. er.x. 300. c. 145. See HerBERROW. | Harpyng, (?) ec. 241. | Harz, hoary, aa.iv.6. See Hors. HarLs, pr. t. drag, aa. xv. 5. Haren, p.p. drawn, trailed, 6x. 744. : Harrowss, pr. ¢. robs, plunders, ex. 420. The oath here used may be found also in Chaucer and Lyndsay. Has, pr. ¢. have, eg. 453. Hasppez, pr. t. clasps, 6x. 1388. Haspep, p. p. clasped, closed, 281, 590, 831. Hast errez, part of the inwards of a wild boar, &x. 1612, In modern writers spelt harslets and haslets. See Richardson’s Dictionary. Hat, Harte, pr. ¢. am named, ex. 253, 381, 2445; is called, 10. Harrss, art named, 379, 401. See Heeur. 3D2 Harrusr, Harri, properly an adjective, but used substantively to denote generally a noble person, knight, or warrior, ex. 221, 234, 256, 309, 655, 844. ea. 900, 952,963. Applied to God, ex. 2056, and to an attendant, 2065. HaTaHELEs, HaTHELESE, HATHELLES, HaTHELEZ, HaTHILLIS, pl. 6K.829, 895,949, 1138, 1602. aa.iv. 5, MS. D. x. 13. xxxviii. 7, xlvi. 1. eg. 1299, See ATHEL. HATTERIT, p. ¢. shattered, 66. 702. Har3, hath, ex. passim. HavuBercHe, Hawserke, HawsBrGn, hauberk, cuirass, cx. 203, 268. ar.xK. 82. Haws, azure, AA. ii. 5. HAwrTANE, proud; used adverbially, 66. 923, and substantively, 949. See Hatrane. HAWTESSE, nobility, power, ex. 2454, Hazes, more noble, 6x. 352, 1738. +HEATHENNEST, heathendom, Aaxc. 55. Hecar, promise, vow, 66. 293. Hecke, rack for hay, c. 232, 258. HeKxEs, pl. AA. xxxv. 6. See Hacues. Her, p. ft. heaved, hove, raised, ex. 120, 826, 1587. Heeut, p.¢. was named, ec. 654, 742. See Hat, Hert. Heeute, HEIGHT, n. Heicn, tall, ec. 900. HEIL1, to submit? ee. 1309. HevnD, HzvNnDLY, see HENDE. Her, host, army, 66. 1299. See Hers. HzLÞAnDE, bowing, inclining, cx. 972, 1104. HELDEN, to ride, follow, 6x. 1692. HELDEZ, pr.¢. moves, advances, 221. HELD, HELDET, p.f. set, went down, 1321; moved, went back, 2331; went, led, 66. 126, 132. HELDEN, p. ¢. pl. went, rode, ox, 1922. | HELDER, more, in a greater degree, GK. 376, 430. A word still preserved in Lancashire and the North. See also Ihre, v. Heller. Hexz, Hexxz, health, prosperity, ee. 1103, 1176. ec. 171. See ON HEGHTE. GLOSSARY. ' Hetyn, to heal, ae. 882. Heine, covering, aa. ix. 4, MS. D. See HILLYNGE. Hem, them, ex. 862. aa. passim, MS. D. Heme, close, tight? ex. 157. HEMELY, secretly, closely, ak. 1852. Dan. hemmelig. ak Hzewps, Heynp, fair, courteous ; an epithet applied to both sexes, ex. 108, 405, 467, 647, 896, 1104, 1731. AA. xxix. 13. as. 126, . 924, 1246. Used substantively, knight or lady being understood; ax. 827, 946, 1252, 1813, 2330. aa. liv. 9. 66. 183, 219. Hxwps, pl. used substantively, G6. 132. HENDELAYK, courtesy, GK. 1228, MS. Cott. Nero A. x. f. 68>. HENDESTE, fairest, Gk. 26. AA, xi. 1. HenprLy, HenDeLy, HevNDLY, fairly, courteously, well, 6x.773,829, 895, 1228, aa. iv. 5, xxvii. 8, xxxv. 6. G6. 132, 358, Hanes, pr. ¢. hangs, 6x. 182, Hanesp, p.t. hanged, 732, 1345. See Hynes. HEzNNE, hence, ex. 1078. < Henr, to take, receive, ax. 827, Hanes, pr. t. 605. HenT, Hents, p. ¢. 864, 983, 2277, 2317. 6c. 393. er.x. 82. Hunt, Pp. Pp. GK. 2323, 2484. AA, xxxviil. 7. Her, Here, their, ex. 54, 120, 428; et pass. aa. iv. 3, MS. D. ef pass. ec. 175, 648. HERANDE, hearing, cx. 450. Herser, lodging, ex. 755, 812. See also HzRBER, to lodge, Gk. 805. HERBERED, p.t. 2481. Hersperrow, Hersorow, Hersrow, lodging, ac. 126, 173, 342. c. 167. See HARBOROWE. HzrBoRow, to lodge, ac. 143. HerBosy, lodging, ec. 184. ‘Herpes, coarse? aA. ii.5, MS.D. Here, host, army, ek. 59, 2271. ee. 1147. See Herr. Hers, hair, ex. 180, 436 ; bristles, 1587. Hee, loss, injury, 66. 703. Hee, to praise, ex. 1634. GLOSSARY. HERED-MEN, HIRDMENNE,courtiers, nobles, attendants, ex. 302. AA. iv. 5. Hertz, twist, fillet, ex. 190. Herre, higher, ex. 333. Hersvum, devout? 6x. 932. Hes, Hest, order, bidding, ex. 1039, 1090, 1092. HesreEs, pl. promises, aa. xix. 1, MS. D. Hest, highest, noblést, ex. 550. Hers, to promise, ¢k.2121. Herz, Hert, Hervez,pr.t.GK.448. aa. xix.1. 60.411. c.462. Herre, p. p. ex. 450. See Hy3r. Hereriy, HETTERLY, violently, strongly, cx.1152, 1446, 1462, 1587, 2311; quickly, suddenly? 2291, 2317. See Gloss. to Will. and Werwolf, v. Hetterli. Heres, pl. promises, ex. 1525. Hetuen, Hetuynne, hence, 1879. AA, xx, 13, Hert, p. ft. was named, Gr.x. 40. See Heeut. Hevcu, p.¢. hewed, ae. 702. Heve, heavy ? ex. 289. HEvEN, pr. t. pl. raise, 6K. 1346. HEvenED, p.p. raised, GK. 349. See MS. Cott. Nero A. x. f. 64, HEVEN-RYCHE, heaven, 6x. 2423. HEWEN, p.p. forged, ex. 211. Hewes, colors, ¢k.1761. See Huws. Hewyne, heaven, ec. 1317. Hewvys, pr. f. strike? AA. xv. 5. He3, Hz3z, high, ex. 48, 222, 593 ; noble, 812, 831; important, 1051. Used adverbtally, 1417. See Hrs. HzzLy, loudly, devoutly? ex. 755, 773, highly, greatly, 949; nobly ? 983. Hrcar, height, ee. 900. Hips, Hyves, skin, body, ex. 2312, ee. 564. Hrper, hither, ex. 264. Pe Hipwies, hideous, aa. 727, 861. Hye, Hy3, to hasten, ex. 2121. axc. 72. Hr3zzs, Hy3zz, pr. t. 521, 1351, 1462. Hrzzn, Hy3zen, pr. t. pl. ek. 1910. aa. x. 7, MS. D. Hyz, Hy3n, imp. hasten thou, ex. 299. 7. 127. Hep, Hyit, p. t. 6K. 111, 826, 1153. GK. 1794, | Hrens, Hy, Hy, Hye, Hv3s, haste ; always preceded by tn or on, Gk. 245. aa. iv. 5, MS. D. xxxii. 1, xxxviii. 7, MS. D. liv. 9, MS. D., eg. 735, 926, 949. ac. 287. Hyeue! shout or exclamation of the hunters, GE. 1445, See Hay. Hieut, Hizr, Hyens, Hygur, Hyzr. See ON HEGHTE. HILLYNGE, covering, AA. ix. 4. See HeLING. | + Him for Hem, ex. 49. Hynes, p. ft. hung, ec. 535. See Henezs. Hint, Hywr, to take, receive, ea. 674, 803. Hynr, p. t. and p. p. took, taken, received, 527, 703, 727; went, 62. Hyprep, p.¢. hopped, jumped, ex. 1459, _ 2232. HirpMENNE, see HERED-MEN. Hrr, it, joined to a plural noun, as in German, GK. 280, 1251. Hz, Hyeuz, Hy3z, noble, ex. 120; loud, 307, 468, 1165, (not long, as Mr. Guest would have it,) 1602; tall, 1154. Used substantively for heights, high ground, ax. 1152, 1169, 2004, in the two former of which instances Mr. Guest explains it very erroneously by hedge. Hist. E. R. vol. ii.p.169. So, in the Wycliffite Bible, 1 Kings, cap. 9: © To-day forsothe he came into the cytee, for to-day is sacrifyce of the peple in the heeyz.” MS. Trin. Coll. Dubl. A. 1.9. H13Lica, noble, admirable? ex. 183. Hrzr, pr. ¢. promise, ec. 378. Hyeure, Hy3t, p. f. promised, ex. 1966, 2218. ec. 591. Hy3r, height, stature, 6x. 332. Hy3Tuet, high, tall, ac. 259. HizrLy, fitly, ax. 1612. Ho, she, ex. 934, 948, 1001, 1191, 1206. AA. iil. 1, ef passim, MS. D. Hocus, houghs? aa. 674. Hop, Hops, hood, ex. 155, 2297. Hos! Hoo! halt! stop! ex. 2330. ra@.121. Hor, Hore, Hote, whole, entire, ex. 1338, 1406, 1613, 2296. Horp, Hops, castle, mansion, 6x. 771. | ec. 146, 186. er.x. 348. c. 100. HoLvs, faithfully, ex. 2129. HoLvzLy, faithfully, carefully, ex. 1875, 2016. HoLKEDE, p. p. sunk, aa. ix. 12. Hotz, Hou}, hollow, ex. 2182. AA. ix. 12. HoLLEen, the holly, me. 55, 102. HoLyNBOBBE, holly-bough, ex. 206. Hotty, wholly, ex. 1049, 1257. Ho st, pr. ¢. holdest, ec. 481.. Hott, Hotre, forest, ex. 1677, 1697. aa. Iv. 8. Houtzz, Hours, pl. ex. 1320. AA. iv. 6, v. 5, lv. 9. ec. 234,470. Horr | WODEZ, GE. 742, See Chalmers’ Gloss. to Lyndsay, in v. : HoLyDoms, salvation? 3.372. See HaLyDAM. Hom, them, ex. 99, 819, 979, 984. Homerep, p. ?. hammered, struck, Gs. 2311. HonbE-sELLx, gift conferred at a particular season, GK. 66. See HANSELLE. Hong, Hovne, delay, ex. 1285. Gs. 849. Also used by Barbour. Hoes, pr.?. think, trust, ex. 140, 352, 2301. Hopss, thinkest, trustest, 395. Hos, their, ex. 130, 1014, 1127, 1139. Hors, hoary, &x. 743. See Harz. HoRLoTEz, vagabonds, ex. 244. Hors, pl. horses, ea. 674. Hose, pr. t. embrace, akc. 151. Not in Brockett, but inserted by Grose as a North country word. It is evidently formed from ' halse, Ho so, whoso, AA. ii. 3, MS. D. ix. 9, MS.D. HosrTEzL, inn, dwelling, ex. 805. Hovan, tarrying, waiting, ea. 905. Hoven, p. ¢. tarried, Gx. 785, 2168. Hovit. Hoves, pl. hoofs, ax. 459. Hours, p.z. heaved, ec. 356. Hovynz, p.p. heaved, raised, 551. Hozzs, houghs, ex. 1357. Hutt, hilt, ex. 1594. Hunt, huntsman, hunter, ex. 1422, 1701. See GLOSSARY. Honrzs, pl. 1147, 1604, 1910. Aa, v.5, MS. D. Hurpys, hurdles, ee. 470. Hoursres, woods, aa. v. 5, MS. D. | Huvit, p.¢. tarried, 66. 840. Misprinted by Pinkerton and Jamieson Hewit. See Hoven. | Huwsz, Hwe, color, complexion, ex. 147, 234, AA. ix. 4, MS. D. Hwzs, Hwez, pl. ax. 707, 867, 1738. Howes, hills, aa.v. 5, MS. D. | Hwen, pr. 7. hew, cut, ex. 1346. I. J. I-anmyp, p.p. armed, ec. 74. I-BoNDE, p. p. bound, ec. 91. I-cyarelD, p. p: loaded, ec. 567. Icuz, each, ex. 126, 1811. | I-cLePPYDE, p. p. named, ee. 16. | J-cowERT, p. p. covered, ac. 357. I-pyveute, I-DyzT, p. p. prepared, ec. 504, 640. See Dit. | ]-ryeRE, together, 6c. 554. See Fer. | I-HoLDE, p. p. held, accounted, ec. 90. Ti88E-IKKLES, icicles, Gx. 732. I-KEUVERID, p. p. covered, ec. 552. InycueE, (?) ex. 44. 11x, ILKE, same,-6x. 24, 1062, 1256, 1385. AA.i,10. 66.1157. Ins, ILKA, ILKEA, each, AA. iii, 10. 6e. 473,474. | ILKANE, each one, 66.348, 1244. ILLUMINAT, p. p. enlightened, ec. 394. | In, Lyn, castle, mansion, ee. 1161. 6c.217. ce. 139. | INcLINAND, INCLYNAND, bending, ec. 383, 387. In uieut, on high, aloud, er.x. 423. ON HEGHTE. | In noen, In NoGas, Ino3, Ino3z, In NowE, YNoGHE, enough, GK. 77, 219, 404, 514, 1401, 1948. sa. xxix. 12. +I-norg, a mistake of the scribe for I-no3z, enough, aa. xxix. 11, MS. D. Jamieson, however, inserts itas a legitimateform, and See finds an Armoric root for it!!! GLOSSARY, INTROMETTING, admission, eg. 1171. In-wytu, within, gx. 1055. In Pinkerton’s text this word is printed erroneously Ruwith, which is inserted by Jamieson in his Dictionary, and the latter hazards on it, as usual, one of his absurd conjectures as to meaning. I-PERESCHDE, p. p.destroyed, lost, ec. 374. +I-quzss, every where, cx. 660. See AyQUERE. Trat, (?) aa. xlvi.5. See Notes, p. 334. It is misprinted Sral by Pinkerton, and admitted in this disguised form by. Jamieson. Perhaps it is the same as orielle, which we are told by Sir John Maundevile, “is a ston well schynynge.” Voiage, p. 48, ed. 8vo., 1839. Inxs, incommoded, aa. vi. 12. IRKED, p. ft. were angry? strove? ex. 1573. Iscns, to issue, GG. 253, I-sET, p.p. set, ec. 84. ITrHANDLY, diligently, ee. 231, 308. I-TOLDE, p. p. told, ec. 96. +1-v1s for I-wis, es. 549. I-wis, I-wisz, I-wvyis, I-wys, I-wyssz, Y-wys, truly, certainly, ex. 252, 264, 1035, 1065, 1226, 1230, 1276, etc. AA. xiii, 3, xv. 12, xvii. 1, MS. D. xix. 13. ee. 177, 288, 341. oc. 17, 266, 658. 35. 215, 309. I-wrssz I wor, 6x.1487. I-wyssz I weng, AA. xxiv.4, Manifestly the Saxon adjective gewis, used adverbially. Several writers, and among them I include myself, (Gloss. to Will. and the Werwolf,) have erroneously explained this word I know, considering it equivalent to the Germ. ich weiss; but - although satisfied about its origin, I still have my doubts whether it was not regarded as a pronoun and verb, by the writers of the fifteenth century. I-wRYTE, p. p. written, ec. 18. T-wroo3t, p. p. made, formed, ac. 333. JapEz, jokes, jests, ek. 542, 1957. Jappyst, pr. t, jokest, ec. 201. JENTYLE, gentle, of noble birth or breeding, used substantively, ax, 542. JoyFNEs, youth, ex. 86, JorLEz, pl, jewels? ax. 542. Joie, JoLYLY, gaily, ¢x. 42. aA. xxxix.8. JourRNAY, enterprise, ca. 789. K. See also C. Kacuanpg, catching, reiningup, 6x.1581. Kay, left, 6x. 422. A word probably introduced by the Danes. See Molbech's Dansk Dialect-Lexikon, in vv. Kau, Kei, and Outzen’s Gloss. der Friesischen Sprache, in v. Kei. Karns, to journey, depart, cx. 1048, 1670. Kayre, pr. ¢. go, return, aa. liii. 13. Kayrep, p. f. and p. p. turned, returned, travelled, 6x.43. Gr.x. 123. Kane , collar, neck, 6x. 2298. See CANELBONE, KAvTELLE, guile, caution, aa. xviii. 2. KAVUELACIOUN, strife, Gk. 2275. Kazr, KAzTEN, pr. ¢. received, took, ex. 643, 1118. KELE, to assuage, AA. iv. 4, xvi. 6. Kzrr, KzLLE, dress for a lady's head, caul, AA. xxix. 6. Gr.k. 261. Kempys, knights, re. 6. KeND, p.p. known, ce. 1211, 1325. KENDE, p. ft. taught, ex. 1489. Keng, bold, brave, gk. 321. ec, 185. Kener, hound, ex. 1701. KEnermis, pl. Aa.iv.4, Jamieson in his Supplement inserts this word from Sibbald, at the same time professing his ignorance whence the former had derived it, a tolerably convincing proof how carelessly he had read the poem of Sir Gawan and Sir Galaron, as printed in Pinkerton. Ken ty, boldly, ex. 1048. KENNE, pr. ft. commend, ex. 2067. KENNEs, pr. ¢. teaches, Gk. 1484. KePE, 2. care, heed, ok. 546. AA. xxxviii. 2. 5.74. Keys, to heed, or meet in a hostile way, GK. 307. KrPs, imp. take heed? 372. KEppEs, pr. ¢, catches, strikes, aa. xlviii. 7, MS. D. Kepit, p. ¢. and p. p. received honorably, ee. 178 ; guarded, 44. Kercuores, kerchiefs, coverings for the head, ex. 954. f +Kere, to recover, cure, AA. xvii 6. Apparently a mistake for, or contraction of keuere. In The Erle of Tolous, ap. Ritson, iii. 119, occurs dyskere for discover. Mr. Guest misprints the word keen, and explains it drive from! Hist. E. R. ii. 292. Kerre, rock, ex. 1431. Kxsr, chance, blow? ex. 2298 ; twist, knot, 2376 ; stratagem, 2413. Kest, p. ¢. and p. p. raised, Gx. 64; cast, 228, 1192, 1355 ; thought, formed a plan, 1855; set, appointed, 2242. Kersten, p.t.pl. cast, 1649. KEvER, to arrive, accomplish, ex. 750, 804 ; gain, 1221, 1254; recover, 2298. KEVEREZ, pr. ¢. obtains, brings, 1539 ; descends, 2221. KEVERED, p. f. recovered, 1755. This participle occurs in aa, xlvii. 1, MS. D., and is misprinted by Pinkerton kenered, which is repeated by Jamieson, who both in his Dictionary and Supplement wastes a great deal of absurd and useless argument on it. The real reading is established by couerde, i.e. recovered, of the Lincoln MS. Kyp, Kyppr, KYDE, p.p. known, renowned, GH. 51, 263, 1520. aa.i. 3, xi. 9. Kyp, Kyppz, p. p. directed, 6x. 775; shewed, manifested, 2340. + Kine, for Kira, country, aa. xii. 8, MS.D. Falsely explained by Jamieson, shew, appearance. Kin, Kyn, 2. kind, ex. 890, KYyNNES, gen. c. GK. 1886. KynDE, n. lineage, race,¢x.5; nature, disposition, reason, 321, 1348, Krynps, adj. suitable, ex. 473. KyNDELY, suitably, ex. 135. Kynaiz, kingdom, 6&6. 407. Kyer, cut, blow, ex. 372. Kyreg, church, ex. 2196. KIRNELDE, p.p. embattled, Aa. lii, 4. es, 517. GLOSSARY. Kyrret, tunic, gown, GK. 1831. Kitu, Kytu, KyTas, country, land, territory, kingdom, ex. 460, 2120. AA. xii, 8, Xxviii. 9. GG. 192, 320, 1251, 1352. Krrn, to shew, ea. 376, 669, 873, 1212, 1229. Kyruit, p. t. 159, 488. KNnacsD, p. p. nailed, riveted, 6x. 577. Knap, man, Gk. 2136. KNarRe, rock, cliff, 6s. 1434. KNarrez, pl. 721, 2166. See the Owl and Nightingale, 1. 999. KNELAND, kneeling, 66. 383. KN1TTEN, pr. ¢. cut? joined? ex. 1331. KNoKLED, p. p. with craggy projections, rugged, ex. 2166. KNoRNED, p. p. rugged, Gx. 2166. Knor, a hunting ,term, borrowed from and used as the French neud, ex. 1334; crag? 1431, 1434. KnorTEz, pl. knobs, rivets, 577. KoryNnTYSE, cunning, GE. 2447. KrYSOMMEDE, p.p. anointed with chrism, or sacred oil, at baptism, AA, xi. 8, xvili. 3. L. Lacn, to take, receive, accept, Gx. 234, 292, 1502,1676. Laccusz, Lacuss, LacneEz; pr.t.@K.595,936,1029. LacuEn,pr.t.pl. 1027, 1131. Lacuer, clasp, tie, ex. 591. t Lang, lady, ex. 1810. LaDLIcas, hateful, odious, ec. 95, 160. Laer, p.t. granted, delivered, 6x. 369. Laeut, Laveut, La3t, p. ¢. and p. p. took, caught, received, 6x. 328, 433, 667, 1830, 2499. Ge. 623, 764, 922, 1260; taken, received, GK. 156, 971, 2507. G6. 454, 615; captured, 1182. Laemon, (?) Gk. 1729. Lavysx, Larxe, LaxE, sport, game, ex. 1023, 1125, 1513; strife of battle, aa. xlii. 5. 66.832. LayKez, pl. cx. 262. Lars, to play, to sport, &k. 1111. LayKEZ, pr. ¢t. 1178, LAYKED, p. t. 1554, 1560, GLOSSARY. Layxyne, playing, ex. 472. Laine, concealment, falsehood, cr.x. 482. Layne, to conceal, keep secret, ex. 1863, 2124, 2128. aa, vil. 5. 66.1031. er.k. 6. Layne, pr. ¢. and imp. 6K. 1786. AA, xvi. 9, MS. D. Lats, teaching, instruction, 66, 364, 832. Lair, Late, features, countenance, AA.xxvii. 6. as. 746, 1271. Laites, Lartis, pl. looks, gestures, AA. xxxviii. 1. 6&.95, 160. See Lote. Larr, lightning? ex. 199. Larr, to look, seek, 6x. 411. LavTEs, pr.t. GK. 355, LAYTE, subj. 449. LarTHLES, unmannerly, 6G, 157. Lax, mischief, ec. 919. Lance, Launce, to utter? to ride forth? Gk.1175; totell,2124. Launces, pr. ¢. rides forth, 1464. LANCEN, pr. tf. pl. fall quickly, 526. Lancep, Lansit, Launcep, p.t. rode, 1561. 66. 901; uttered, threw out, Gk. 1766, 1212. LANGABERDE, pl. Lombards, Gx. 12. LANGES, pr. t. belongs, 6G. 800. Lans, lance, ee. 485, Compare 1.615. In the edit. 1508, and Pinkerton, it is printed laus, and explained by the latter fires ; Jamieson, more suo, repeats the word, giving an absurd meaning and etymology. Lantz, p.f. lent, gave, Gk. 2250. Lap, p. ¢. leapt, 66. 614. Lappe, lappet, or hem, ex. 936. Layesz, pr. t. embraces, 6K. 973, LaPPED, Layer, p.f. and p.p. wrapped, folded, 217,575. 66. 991. Lappez, pl. flaps? ex. 1350. LaRce, extent, a6. 241; bodilystature, 7.350. Larges, LARGESSE, liberality, ex. 2381; cry of the minstrels at feasts, c.478. Largessg, largeness, GK. 1627. Lassen, to lessen, ex. 1800. Latue, n. injury, harm, ex. 2507. Larue, adj. hateful, AA. xxxiv. 3. LATHED, p.t. (?) &x. 2403, Perhapsaform of Lazed, laughed. LAavenr, see Lacut. Launpg, clear level space in a wood, plain, lawn, GK. 765, 2146, 2154, 2174, 2333. LAUSEN, to loose, 6K. 1784. Lawssz, pr. t. 2376. Lavre, Lawrs, faith, loyalty, «6.394, 1107, 1308. See LEwTE. Laws, mount, hill, 6.765, 2171, 2175. aa. ili. 5, MS. D. vii. 5. See Lovens. Laws, manner, 6K. 790. Laws, adj. low, aa.iii.6. MS. D. here reads Toze, which is misprinted lore by Pinkerton, and explained by Jamieson, solitary, q. forlore!! Law1r, p. p. unlearned, lay, 66. 1080. See LEwD. +LawriNnes, laughing? Te. 56. LazaNnDE, laughing, cx. 988, 1068, 1212. La3z, to laugh, ex. 472. Lazes, LazEz, pr.t. 316, 1479. Lazs, La3zn, pr. t. pl. 464, 2514. Laj3xp, p. et. 69, 909, 1079. La3t, see LAGHT. : La3TER, laughter, ex. 1217. LazyNs, laughing, ex. 1954. Lez, LEE, land, plain, ex. 849, 1893. ec. 312, 341. Ta. 47. + Leane for Layne, to conceal, c. 199. LzasinG, Lesine, LESSYNGE, falsehood, ea. 338. 6c. 442. c.201. Lecuts, physicians, eG. 883. LEDANDE, leading, ek. 1894. AA. xxvii. 6. Lene, Lerp, man, person, 6K. 98, 540, 1063, 1195, 2095. aa. vii. 5, MS. D. xxxiv. 4, xliv.7. 6s. 70, 157, 262; people, folk, ex. 258 ; land, country, territory, 833, 1113. G6. 172, 186, 653. ec. 9; speech, language, AA. vii, 5. LeDEZ, LeDrs, pl.men, GK. 38, 126, 679, 1231. ae. 277, 369. See LzuDB. : LzELE, LELE, faithful, loyal, ¢x.1516. es. 71. er.x. 361, 490. See Lex, - Legere, LEis, to learn, 66. 364, 653, 3.418, Lair, pr. t. teach, ce. 832. Ler, dear, agreeable, 6K. 909, 1111, 1924. See LEUE. Lzecs, liege, GK. 346. Leetance, allegiance, ae. 263, 442, Lx1D, to rule, govern, 66. 48. Lerr, to believe, give credence, ec. 1107, 1305. Ler, imp. 71. See LEVE. Lezir, pr. t. live, 66. 1189. See Levs. Leims, gleam, light, ec. 1254. Lexame, body, ee. 1043. See LIKAME, Lexe, p.t. fastened, encircled, Gx. 1830. Su G. lycka. Lex, LELL, loyal, faithful, 6x. 35, 1513. GG. 1308, See LEELE. LELELY, LELLY, loyally, faithfully, 6x. 449, 1863, 2124. 66. 1031, 1183. Lemanp, LEMANDE, gleaming, shining, GK. 485, 1119. LEMANE, LEMMAN, LEMMANE, mistress, GK. 1781. aa. xlii. 3, xIviii. 8. LEme, to shine, gleam, ec. 424. LemeD, Lemrr, p.t.6K.591,1137, 2010. 66.615. LenDs, Leynp, to dwell, tarry, continue, GK. 1100. 66. 152, LENnDE, pr. t. ex. 1499. LENDE, imp. aa. xxxii.11. LENT, pt. and p.p.sate, was stationed, 6K. 1002; occupied, 1319; dwelt, remained, 2440. ea. 70. Lenz, to grant, aa. xviii. 7, MS. D. Lene, LENes, to dwell, tarry, remain, GK. 411, 254, 1068. aa. xvii. 6, xxxii. 11, MS. D. ii. 7. Lenezs, LENGEZ, pr. t. GE. 536,693. LENnGev, p. t. 1194, 1299, 1683. Lentoun, Lent, ex. 502. Lepris, pr. t. pl. leap, aa. li. 3. Lerp, p. p. learned, the clergy, 66. 1080. Lerg, countenance, ek. 318,418. 66,1253. See Lyre. Lzse, to teach? ax. 1109. Lezsz, falsehood, ec. 7, 265. Les, to lose, Gk. 2142. AA. xxii. 12, xxxiv. 3, MS. D. LESTAND, lasting, 66. 1227. Let, Lert, Lerrs, hindrance, ex. 2142. AA. ili. 10. ac. 597, 615; delay, ee. 755. Ler, LETTE, p.t. caused, cx. 1084; feigned, acted, 1201, 2257. Ler not, was not able, 1733. Lerz, to look, ex. 1206. See LEERE, GLOSSARY. LETHE, to depress, moderate, Gx. 2438, Leruek, skin, ex. 1360. LerTTE, to stop, tarry,¢x.2303. Lerrez Bz, imp. leave off, 1840. LETTED, p.¢. hindered, 1672. Lertyneg, hindrance, aa. li. 10. LETTRURE, science, GK. 1513, Leung, LuDs, man, knight, ex. 133, 232, 449, 675, 851, 908 ; territory, land, 1124. Lzupss, gen. c. man’s, 2499. Lzevupez, pl. men, 849, 1023, 1413. See Lepz. LEUDLEz, companionless, ex. 693. Leven, p. ¢. laughed, 66. 1065. LevanD, LEUEANDE, living, AA. xxxiv. 4. ea. 70, 430. Used substantively, ae. 954. Lzvg, pr. ?. live, 6x. 1035. See Lzrr. Lzvs, to believe, ex. 2421. Levs, pr. t. 1784, 2128. See Lzir. Lzvs, dear, beloved, 6x. 1133, 2054. aa. xlix., MS. D. See Ler. Leven, Levit, p. p. left, aa. xxii. 2, MS. D. xxii, 6. 66. 661. Lever, rather, liefer, Gx. 1251. Te. 95; dearer, GK. 1782, Lxvxsr, dearest, most precious, Gk. 49, 1802. LEVIN, scorn, Ge. 1043. Lewp, LEWED, p.p. ignorant, unlearned, cx. 1528. T6. 30. Lewrz, loyalty, faith, ex. 2366, 2381. See Laure. Lx;, p. ¢. lay, ex. 2006. LE3TEN, p. ¢. took, 6K. 1410. See Lacur. Lyanp, lying, c. 229, 255. Licutit,p.t.alighted, 66.677. See Ligure. LytRE, Lyrz,complexion, countenance, GK. 943, 2228. 66. 614, 1003, 1145. aa. xiii. 6; skin, flesh, cx. 2050. In aa. xiii. 6, MS. D. reads lere, which Pinkerton misprints lever, and the word, thus disguised, is duly introduced into Jamieson’s Dictionary. LirLop, livelihood, ex. 133. Lyre, sky, heaven, ex, 1256. Lreez, pr. f. lies, ex. 1179. Licutz, Lyeute, Ly31, to descend, alight, GK. 1175, 1373, 2220. AA. xvii. 6, xxi. 8. GLOSSARY. Lizrez, LyzTEz, pr. tf. ex. 1906, 2176. LyYGHTE, imp. aa. xxxii. 11. LIGHT, Lieate, LieutiT, Lyente, Lyv3T, p. t. GK.822. AA.ii. 6, vi. 12, xliv. 7, 66.623, 755. T6.78, 288. Lieutit, Lyt, Lyeuts, Lyzr, p.p. 6K. 1924. aa. vi. 5, MS. D. — xiii. 8. 66. 130. +Licuru, member, limb, er.x. 57. See Lyrue. LixamgE, body, 66. 294. Lrxanp, agreeable, pleasant, ec. 241, 258, 573. Lyk&E, body, personal stature? 66. 858. L1x1Ne, joy, pleasure, ae. 267, 1065. Lykxer-wys, delightful, delicious, ex. 968. Lyme, to happen, befall, &x.1109. LyMpzD, LYyYMPEDE, p. t. 907. aa. xlviii. 4. LynD, LyNDE, wood, tree, lime-tree, ex. 526, 2176. 66. 289. ac. 114. 7, 406. LyYNDE-WODES, pl. GK. 1178. Lynpes, loins, Gk. 139. Lyne, linen ; whence for female apparel in general, cx. 1814. Line, Lyng, line, file, ee. 766, 858, 1261. ‘Lippin, to have confidence, ec. 832. Lis, to assuage, GG. 173. List, pleasure? cx. 1719. LysTE, pr. t. pleases, 6K. 2133. Lrvsr, p.t. desired, willed, 941, 1784, 2049. LysSTENNYTH, imp. listen ye, ec. 1. LisTEs, listsinclosed for combat,aa.xxxviii.9. Lystity, LYySTYLY, promptly? ex. 1190, 1334. Lyt, Lyrz, little, ex. 701, 1776. short while? ax. 2303. Lytu, LyTHEN, to listen, ex. 1719. 66. 875. Lyruis, imp. listen ye, 1163. Lyrue, member, limb, ec. 190. LyTHss, territories, AA. liii. 2. + Lirys, pl. delights, aa. xvii. 5. LyveEray, bounty, allowance, T. 117,476. Ly3s, to lie, recline, ex. 1096, 1994. Lvzr, lightly, ex. 87. Ly3TH, light, not heavy, ex. 608. Ly3TLY, easily, ex. 1299. Lopez, guidance, ex. 969; behaviour? 1284. as. 901; +LodrLy, for LovpLy? ex. 1634. Lopty, LoDLYE, uncourteously, ek. 1772 ; loathly, c. 182. arc. 119, 158. Lorven, p. f. loved, GK. 21. Lor1T, p. t. praised, ae. 1145. Loer, Lorrs, chamber, ex. 1096, 1676. Lo1s, fame, ce. 1078. See Los. Loissit, p. t, lost, ea. 677, 755, 874 ; p. p. destroyed, 277. Loxs, subj. guard, ec. 214. Loken, p. p. secured, inclosed, fastened, ck. 35,.765, 2487. Loms, tool, axe, ex. 2309. LoncneD, perhaps weshould read Lovcnep, bending down? aa. xiii. 6, MS. D. Loneez, pr.t. belongs, 6K. 2381, Lonexp, Þ. t. belonged, appertained, 1524, 2515. 7.9, LonevNes, regret, trouble, ex. 540. LoPEN, p. f. and p.p. leapt, Gk. 1413. aa. li. 3, MS. D. Los, learning, skill, ex. 665. Lorere, LORRERE, laurel-tree, AA. iii. 6, vi. 5. Lorne, p.p. lost, AA. xxxvii. 2, + Lorre for LorRERE, laurel-tree, AA. iii. 6, MS.D. Pinkerton misprints it Jone, and Jamieson, as usual, places the word, thus misrepresented, in his Dictionary, with an Icelandic derivation ! Lortscuyp, lordship, ex. 849. Los, Losz, renown, fame, ex. 258, 1528. AA. Xxxvi. 7. +Losss, to lose, AA. xxxiv. 3, MS. D, See Lzss. Lore, mirth? jest? ex. 119, 1623, 1917. LorTEz, pl. 988, 1086, 1116,-1399, 1954. It is connected with the Fr. losterie, badinage. Lots, (?) Gk. 2211, Lote, features, aspect, gesture, Gk. 639. AA. xxvil.6,MS.D. See also MS. Cott. Nero A. x. f. 42. Lorug, loath, unwilling, ex. 127, 1578. LovFESON, lovely, ec. 450. See Lursoms, Loveug, hill, aa. vii.5, See Laws. Lovkzs, LOWKEzZ, pr. t. locks, ex. 628, 3Ez2 2007. LOUKED, p. ¢. was fastened, looped, 217. ' Loves, loop-hole in a castle, ex. 792. Lovr, blow, Te. 142. Lovr, Loute, LowTe, to bow down, obey, bend to, @k. 248. AA. xiv. 7. ee. 991, 1276. er.,x. 465. Te. 314. LovrTEes, LovTEz, pr. ¢. descends, ak. 833, 933; stoops, bends, 1306, 1504. Lovrit, p. ¢. bent, ec. 1021. tLovve, for Lovie? pr. ¢. praise, cx. 1251. Lovetycu, adv. lovingly, ex. 1410. See LvuFLY. LovELOEER, lovelier, 6K. 973. LovELOK- KEST, loveliest, aK. 52. Lovy, Lovtzs, Lovyss, pr. e. love, loves, Gk.1795, 2099, 2468. Lovis, p.t. loved, 87, 702. Lovrr, p. t. praised, ee. 581, 1028. LowaNnDE, shining, @k. 236; conspicuous, 679, 868. Lowp ok sTILL, on all occasions, er.K. 342 ; a phrase of constant occurrence in the romance writers. Lows, flame, AA. vii. 5. Lows, (?) Gk. 1399. Lows, Lo3z, p. ¢. laughed, Gk. 2389. aa. xli. 3. +LowELYURE, lovelier, ec. 369. Loz, Lo3z, low, 6x. 302, 1040, 1170. aa. XXXVii. 9. LozLy, lowly, humbly, ex. 851, 1960. Lupe, see LeEuDE. Lur, love, pleasure, 1524. Lur-La3yNG, amorous play, GK. 1776. Lurty, LUFLYCH, adj. lovely, fair, comely, agreeable, amiable, ex. 38, 575, 792, 868, 981, 1469, 1480, 1657, 1757. aa. 667, 755. Luriyis, pl. used substantively, men or knights being understood, 1003. Lurty, LUFLYCE, adv. courteously, lovingly, becomingly, GK. 254, 595, 1206, 1306, 1583. 66. 991. Lurtyty, courteously, lovingly, cx. 369, 2176, 2514. GK. 1086, 1284, 4. GLOSSARY. Lursomz, Lursum, lovely, GK. 1814, aa. xxvii. 6, 66. 241, 746, 1253, 1271. Luxss, imp. look ye, AA. xxxvi. 7. Lux, loss, misfortune, ck. 355, 1284, 1682. Luscuir,p.z. encountered violently? 66.1003. Omitted by Pinkerton and Jamieson. Lust, gluttony, 6s. 82. Lusty, powerful, ec. 172, 258. Lut, LuTTE, p. ¢. stooped, bowed down, Gk. 418, 2236, 2255. See Lour. M. Maca, to encounter, meet in combat, cx. 282. 66.753, Macnep, Macurr, Dp. Þ+ matched in fight, arranged, aa. xxxiv. 8, xlvi. 11, ee. 1159. +Macs, pr.t. makes, ex. 1885. See Mars. Mapps, subj. should rage with love, ex. 2414. Ma Fay! ma foi! ex. 1495. Maery, Macrers, in spite of opposition, GG. 771. Gc. 164. See Mawerer. May, Maye, maiden, ek. 1795. e6.97. ac. 71,491. Mayte, MaiLys, coat of mail, aa. xlviii. 6. @a.965. Maries, Maityeis, MAayLEs,pl. coats of mail, rings of mail, aa. xxx. 5, xxxix. 11, x1. 10, xlvii. 6. 66. 851, 1013. Mair, company, 66.215, See MELLE. Marn, great, powerful, strong, Gk. 94, 187, 336,497. Mayn, Mayng, strength, aa. xxxviii. 10. 3. 49. Mayne, moan, sorrow, 66. 796. MAYNTEMES, pr. ¢. maintains, GK. 2053. Maiss, Mas, Mass, pr. t. makes, GK. 106. AA. XX1.12, G66. 796. Maistri, Mastery, strife, conflict, ec. 96. T6. 65. Maxanp, making, aa. 216. Maxs for Maken, p.t. made, ac. 518. Maxe es, MakLEs, matchless, AA. xxvii. 10, MS. D. xlviii. 10, 1. 6. Mates, Mazz, bags, trunks, 6x. 1129, 1809. GLOSSARY. Marr, p.f. dissolved, ex. 2080. ManuHeEDE, manhood, doughty deeds, ca. 69. Manzir, p.¢. maimed, impaired, ee. 1013. ManREDENE, MANRENT, homage, aa. 1. 5. 66, 1218. MansED, p. ¢. menaced, Gk. 2345. Marre, to destroy, Gk. 2262, p.p. Ge. 96, 720, 965. Marreps, p. ft. moaned? aa. ix. 6, MaseErz, maple, cc. 434. Mart, Mars, p. p. discouraged, wearied, ex. 336, 1568. Martens, Matynez, MATYNNES, morning prayers, GK. 756, 2188. aa. xvi. 3, xviii. 8. Maw-erer, inspiteof, 6K.1565. SeeMaery. Majrv ty, mightily, forcibly, ex. 2262, 2290. ME, used absolutely, as the Fr. on, 6x. 1214. Often, as an expletive, 1905, 1932, 2014, 2144. MEBLE, goods, AA. xvi. 4. See Mosit. MeEpILERTHE, MEDLERT, the earth, aa. 1. 6. See MippLeartuH. MEEN, to make mention of, remember, Aa. vi.9. Mens, pr.t.vi.8. See Mens, Min, MyYwne. Mexit, Mexuz, much, great, aa. xliii. 6. ac. 303, 796. Met, Meuz, Metts, to speak, talk, ax. 2295, 2503. 66.299. Mer, MErLEz, Metts, pr. ?. Gk. 543, 974, 2336. aa. xxvi. 8. 66.395, Gr.K.37. MEL, imp. GG.354. MELED,p.t.cKx.447, 1280, 2373. Metz, MELL, to join in battle, fight, ee. 69, 543. Ms, p. t. 572, 1012, 1119. MzLLle, MzELLeE, MeLLy, conflict, battle, GE. 342, 644, 1451. ee. 696, 851, 1148. MELLE, company, IN MELLE, together, aa. xxv. 8. MEmMERED, p.¢. murmured, AA. ix. 9, The word is still preserved in the North. See Brockett, v. Mammer. Jamieson explains it, erroneously, to recollect oneself. Meng, to signify, Gx. 232; devise, 985; make attempt on, 1157; commemorate? AA. XVili. 8, 9; intend, ec. 96. Menez, imp. commemorate? aa.xxv.8. In the Marnrit, third and fifth of these instances, MS. D. reads Mynge, Mende, and Menge. See Mzzn, Min, Mynneg. + MENEWITH, (?) aa. xxvii. 3, MS. D. Pinkerton and Jamieson neglect the contraction, and print mewith, which the latter interprets, moveth, changeth! Mzenes, Myneg, Aa. xviii. 8, MS.D. xxv. 8, MS. D. Jamieson explains it, to soothe; but from xviii. 9, it would seem to be only another form of Menp, or Meng, to remember. MENGED, p. p. mixed, 6K. 1720. Mensk, MENSKE, honor, worship, &x. 834, 914, 2052. aa. xviii. 9, MENSKEs, pl. GK. 2410, Mensx, adj. worshipful (used ironically), ox. 964, Mensx, to honor, treat with respect, ce. 446. Mensxep, Mensxir, p. p. honorably decked, ex. 153; honored, ee. 215. MeEnsxFuvt, honorable, 6x. 555, 1268, 1809; goodly, noble, ee. 408, 481. Mensg iy, honorably, ex. 1312, 1983. Meny, Meyny, retinue, household, company, Gx. 101, 1372, 1625, 1729, 2468. Menyrne, knowledge, remembrance, ex. 924; commemoration? aa. xix. 2, lv. 4, 6. See MynnYNGE. Mer, to be in confusion, ec. 1013. also in Wallace. Merz, adj. simple, pure, good, ek. 153, 878, 924, 1495. Merz, n. appointed place of meeting, ex. 1061. Perhaps we should read Merk, q. v. MERELY, an instrument of music, ec. 599. Merk, appointed term or place, ex. 1073. GG. 1237. Merge, dark, used substantively for night, T6. 69. Merxirt, p.t. rode, ea. 176. Megs, mess, meal, ex. 999. MeEsovre, moderation, 66. 355. Messg-quy Lz, the time of celebrating mass, GK. 1097. Merz Ly, measurely, fitly, 6x. 1004, 1414. Used METHLES, uncourteous, GK. 2106. Mevep, p. ft. moved, ek. 90. Mzzz1-was, Michaelmas, ex. 532. MippizartH, MYDDELERDB, the earth, ex. 2100. T64.40. See MEDILERTHE. Myeurv1is, pl. used substantively, men being understood, ea. 1012. Min, Myn, to mention or remember, ©. 140, 162. See Mens, Mynne. Myn, Mynnez, less, &s. 1881. 66. 1159. Mynees, see MENGE. Mynesp, p. t. assembled? ex. 1422. Mywneg, to think, remember, devise, 6x.141, 1800, 1992, Mynzz, MyNnNs, pr. t. 995, 1681, 1769. MyNNED, p.t. 982. See Meng, Min. Mynnyne, commemoration! aa. xix. 2, MS. D. See Menyne. Mynrt, aim, blow, ex. 3345. 2352. Mynt, p. t. attempted? ee. 771. Mynrest, MyNnTEz, pr.t. didst aim or strike, aims, strikes, Gk. 2274, 2290. Myrxg, obscure, aa. vi. 11. Mrs, Myssz, fault, offence, aa. xv. 11, xvi. 3. 66.97, 291. 3.196. Mysszs, pl. cx. 2391. Mys-BopEn, p. p. offered wrong, Gx. 2339. Misy, quagmire, GK. 749. Still used in the North. MrsTzR, necessity, AA. xviii. 9. MrsT-HAKEL, cloak of mist, ex. 2081. Myre, smallest piece of money, 66. 1069. Mrrn, to shew, ee. 871. My3rxz, pl. might, power, Gx. 282. Mo, more, Gk. 23, 730,770. AA. xxv. 2. MoziL, property, goods, ee. 807. MoBYLLES, pl. aa.xvi.4. See MEBLE. Mocug, great, 6c. 253. See Mucn. Mops, mind, 6x. 1475. Morss, imp. muse, reflect, aa. xiii. 11. Moyssep, p. t. looked fixedly, as out of the senses, ix. 6. MorLayNnss, (?) Gk. 169. Mo art, mullet in heraldry, c. 57. Morp, Mo.xpz, Mov p, earth, ground, ex. Mynrss, pl. GLOSSARY. 137, 914, 964. AA. xvi.4, 66, 350, Gr.s. (283. c.435, arc. 10, Move, form? ec. 570. Mon, used as the Germ. man, and Fr. on, for one, a person, GK. 1209, 1484. Mon, must, 6x. 1811. Mong, complaint, ec. 123. Monture, Movunture, saddle-horse, ex. 1691. aa. xliii. 9. Mos, greater, bigger, ex. 649, 2100. Morovun, MorrRowNE, morrow, Gk. 1208. ec. 496. Mot, Morte, may, 6s. 342, 387, 2053. ec. 153, 205. Te. 171. c. 113; must, ex. 1965, 2510. aa. xxv. 3, MS, D. ; might, AA, Vi. 9. More, assemblage, meeting, ck. 635, 910. More, castle? cx. 764, 2052. Mors, atom, ex. 2009. Mors, Morez, pl. notes or measures of a bugle, ex. 1141, 1364. Mowe, may, 6x. 1397. Mozr, Mo3rEn, might, ex. 84, 1871, 1953. Mozrn, mouth, ec. 253. Mvcn, great, loud, ex. 182, 2336. Mvcn-quar, many matters, 6K. 1280. Mvcxszr, stature, size, GK. 142. Mvee, p.¢. stirred, hovered, ex. 2080. MvLne, mill, ex. 2203. Mount, blow, ex. 2350. See Mynt. Mont, p. &. feigned, 6x. 2262. = Muryty, merrily, in joke, ex. 2336, 2345. MvuRNAND, mourning, 66. 1128. Mussp, p. t. (?) Gk. 2424, Mute, pack of hounds, ex. 1451, 1720; meeting, 1915. Muruez, mouth, ex. 447, 1428. Muvanp, moving, ec. 1166. Mwe, to move, ex. 1565. N. Na, than, ec. 1228. Naps, had not, ex. 724, 763. Nar, have not, ex. 1066, GLOSSARY. Nay, p. t. denied, refused, cx. 1836. NAYLET, p. p. nailed, ak. 599. NayTED, p. p. (?) Gk. 65. Naxerys, NAKRYN, pl. drums, ex. 118, 1016. See Tyrwhitt’s note on Chaucer, 1, 2513. Nas, are not, eK. 2092. Naunt, thy naunt, thine aunt, ex. 2467. See Glossary to William and the Werwolf, under letter N. NavutTHer, NAWTHER, neither, cx. 203, 430, 1095. Naxrty, filthy, aa. xv. 3, MS. D. Nazr, night, ex. 1407. NzDe, Neves, NEDEz, necessarily, of necessity, GK. 1287, 1771, 1965, 2510. NEDFULLE, in necessity, AA. XV. 3. Neeu, Necns, to approach, ek. 1054 ; to touch, 1836. See Nz. Nexep, little or nothing, cx. 1805. 4 Nemg, pr. t. take, 6x.1347. NEMMYT, p. p. taken, selected, aG. 664, See Nyms. NERRE, nearer, GK. 237, 556, 1306. Neven, Nevin, to name, GK. 58. 66. 506, 664, 823, 1039. NEVUENEs, pr. t. ek. 10. NEvENED, p. ¢. and p. p. 65, 541. NeEwiIt, p.p. renovated, 66. 1071. NewTuir, neither, eg. 1120. Nz3, Nz3z, Nig3, nigh, 6x. 929, 1771, 1922. Nz3z, to approach, 6x. 1575. Nzzes, pr. ¢. 1998. Nsx3ED, p.t. Gk. 132, 697, 929. +Nrcar, to approach, eg. 240. Nrs, Ny3z, difficulty, trouble, harm, ex. 58, 2002, 2141. The same word is twice used in the plural, MS. Cott. Nero A. x. ff. 81, 84. Nye, to harm, assault, ax. 1575. Nir, unless, ex. 1769. NIGROMANCE, becromancy, C. 405. NIKKED NAYE, GK. 2471. NYKKED WITH NAY, 706. NicKED WITH NAY, GT.K. 501. NyYKIS wITH NAY, GG. 115, 332. A phrase expressive of denial, common to alliterative poems. See Gloss. to Wil- 1062, liam and the Werwolf, and the Towneley Mysteries, for many examples. Nymg, to take, ex. 993, 2141. Nirt, n. cut, hurt, ex. 2498. Nrs, nice, strange, ex. 323. Nysen, pr. ¢. (?) ex. 1266. Nrrs, to deny, ee. 899. NoBtLay, NoBILLAY, nobleness, ck. 91. 66. 899, 1071. No zor, except, ex. 2182. +Noens, nigh, ex. 697. Woke, nook, corner, ex. 660. Nope, would not, ex. 1054, 1825. Nome, n. name, ex. 10, 408, 937. Nomg, p.t. took, ex. 809, 1407. Nomen, p. p. taken, 91. See Nymz. Nonzz, Nons, nonce, 6x. 844. The derivations of this phrase suggested by Junius, Tyrwhitt, Thomson, Jamieson, and myself (Gloss. Will. and Werw.) are certainly erroneous, and I have now not the least doubt that the original form was the Saxon for than anes; a conclusion I had formed previous to my noticing the same opinion in a note of Price upon Warton, vol. ii. p. 496. Norne, Nurne, to proffer? ex. 1661, 1669, 1823. Norne, pr. . allege? 2443. NURNED, p. ¢. proffered? 1771. The use of this verb seems to be almost peculiar to the author of the poems in MS. Nero A. x. In another passage, I find it thus : An other nayed also, & nurned this cause, “T haf 3erned & 3at 30kke3 of oxen, & for my hy3es hem bo3t, to howe hafI mester; To se hem pulle in the plow aproche me by- houe3.”—f. 57°. Nore, occasion, business, use, 6K. 358, 599, AA. xxix. 11. G6. 410, 550, 1116. Noris, pl. 501, 506. Nore, throat-knot? (Fr. neud) ex. 420. Nore, voice? 66. 823. Nore, to view? eG. 240. Norte, noted? ex. 2092. NovmBLEs, parts of the inwards of the deer, GK. 1347. See Notes, p. 322; and A Jewell for Gentrie, 4to, 1614. sign. F. e. Novumenirt, p. p. numbered, ae. 227. NovTHEe, NowTHE, now, Gk. 1251, 1934, 2466; not, 1784. Novuruer, neither, cx. 659. Nowet, Noel, Christmas, ex. 65. Noy, annoyance, 66. 1044. Noy, imp. annoy, trouble, as, 823. Nozr, nought, ex. 680, 694, 961. Nurne, NURNED, see Norne. NweE, new, anew, 6x. 60, 636, 1668. Nwez, news, tidings, ex. 1407. Nw-3er, NwE-3ER, new-year, GK, 60, 105, 284. Nw3zerEs, NWE3EREZ, gen.c. 454, 1054, 1669. O. O, of, 6x. 615. O News, anew, GK. 65. OsEyYaAnp, obedient, ge. 1217. Ozx1ss, to obey, ee. 1209, 1326. OBx181NG, obedience, homage, ea. 1322. Oxs.issine, submission, ea. 272. Perhaps a mistake for the last word. Or, from, cx. 183, 519, 1413; off, 773, 1332, 1607. Te. 287. Or-xEst, p. ¢. cast off, ex. 1147. Or-sTRAYE, astray, 7. 207. See ON-sTRAY. Ocus, p. t. ought, ax. 1526. OLDE, age, Gx. 1440. On, one, Gk. 30, 206, 864, 952; in, 867, 969. ON-BREID, extensive, around, 952. On-cHasyNne, a-chasing, a-hunting, cx. 1143. On-cooLDE, (?) GK. 2474. On-DREIGH, ON-DRE3T, ON-DRY3E, ONEDREGHE, back, at a distance, ex. 1031. aa. XI. 6, xliv. 3. as. 110. Ons, alone, unaccompanied; HYM ONE, alone, ax. 904; BOT OURE ONE, only ourselves, 1230 ; LET. THE GOME ONE, let the man alone, 2118; WE AR OURE ONE, we are by ourselves, 2245. See AL ONE. GG. 23; abroad, GLOSSARY. One-Bak, aback, aa. xl.8. See AnNE-BAK. ONE-HERANDE, in the hearing of, aa. Xxxii. 1. Onx3, once, Gk. 1090. See Stevenson’s Add. to Boucher, v. Anes. On-FERUM, afar, GK. 1575. ON FYRST, VPON FYRST, at first, ex. 301, 491, 1477. On-FoRTONE, misfortune, ea. 1225. On HEGHTE, ON HEIGHT, ONE HIE, ON HIGHTE, ON H13T, ON HYGHE, ON HYGHT, On avzT, VPoNn HY37, in height, @x.421; on high, aloft, above, 421. aa.xxxv. 6,xli. 3, xIviii. 1,1. 7. c.470; aloud, aa. xxvii. 8, xxxil. 1, MS, D. xxxii. 10, li. 1.5. 269, 414, 416. Ox-mvunTYNe, a-hunting, ex. 1102. ON LENTHE, afar, GK. 232, 1231. ON-L1FE, ON-LYUE, VPON LYUE, alive, in life, ex. 385, 1717, 1786. ee. 404. ON-Loer, ON-Lorre, VPON LOFTE, aloft, above, GK. 788, 2261. aa. 70, 485, 614, 991 ; aloud, aa. xlviii. 8, MS. D. On-Locue, below, down, ex. 1373. On-Lowpe, aloud, aa. xlii. 3. On ny3TEs, at night, in thenight, ex.47, 693. On-sxanTE, aslant, aa. xlviii. 6. On (vp)-sLEPE, asleep, GK. 244. ONn-sTEIR, astir, 66. 830. On-stRAY, ONE-STRAYE, astray, aside, ex. 1716. aa. xl. 4, xli. 12. 66. 19, 916, 992; at intervals, apart, aa. xxxi. 2. Onswas, to answer, Gk. 275. ONSWAREZ, pr. t. 386. Oon ty, alone, aa. viii. 7, MS. D. Or, than, ex. 1543. Or, Ore, before, ga. 276. cc. 137. Org, mercy, 7. 106. OriToRE, oratory, Gk. 2190. O-xvzr, aright, ex. 40. OrPEDLY, boldly, ex. 2232. l OsTExL, mansion, &x. 253, See Hosrzr. OTHER, or, Gk. 96, 702, 1246; either, 2216. Ovcuxs, ornaments, 7. 327. OvLK, week, ac. 1343, Used also by Bellenden. GLOSSARY. Our, over, aa. 3, 19, 24. Ovrcum, to overcome, ea. 348. OuraiLr, p. p. overgilt, 66. 158. Ovrtak, to overtake, ea. 1240. Ovrs, throughout, wholly, ex. 1511. Ourraeg, to fight, 7. 441. Ourray, OWTTRAYE, to injure, destroy, AA. xxiv. 12, The first form is printed by Pinkerton, Jamieson, and Sibbald, OnTRAY, and on their authority I inadvertently admitted it, but I am now convinced it should be Ourray. See Jamieson’s Supplement, in v. OvTrTRAGE, surprising, GK. 29. OvERGONE, to conquer, J. 396. OUER-THWERT, across, GK. 1438. OUER-WALT, p.p. overcome, GK. 314. OVER-3EDE, p. t. passed over, Gk. 500. O37, n. ought, 6K. 300, 1815. O3r, adj. bold, cx. 2215. Be Paps, toad, AA. ix. 10. +Pay, a misprint for cay, 66. 310, as appears from 7. 233. Jamieson however supposes it to mean region, from the Fr. pais. Pay, Pays, pleasure, aa. ii. 6, xxxi. 6. Gr.K. 504. T6. 164. axc. 126. PAYAND, paying, ec. 143. Pavez, pr. t. pleases, GK. 1379. PaILYEOUN, PAILYEOUNE, pavilion, ge. 312, 880. Payne, to be at pains, endeavour, GE. 1042. Pair, Payne, to injure, impair, ex. 1734. 66.1093. Parr, pr.t. fail, 1085. Payrep, p.t. failed, ex. 650, 1456. Parsanp, heavy, 66.463. PAYTTRURE, defence for the neck of a horse, ex. 168, 601. Paz, Paty, PaLLE, PAULLE, rich or fine cloth, aa. ii. 6, vi. 1, xxviii. 2, xxxiv. 12. ea. 3, 63, 235, 313, er.x. 112, 324. T6. 81. c. 206. 3F Patwerk, fine cloth, aa. ii, 6, MS. D. Jamieson interprets it spangled work. Pans, cloth, ex. 154. aa. xxviii. 2, ee. 1127. Panez, pl. Gk. 855. PaPIAYEz, parrots, Gk. 611. PaPURE, paper, GK. 802. PaRace, lineage, ea. 284. PARAMOUR, n. gallant? ea. 654. PaRAMOURS, courtship, c. 220. PARAUNTER, peradventure, GK. 2343. Parpye, by God! verily, 5. 489. PaRED, p. p. cut, GK. 802. PARTENYNG, possessing, consisting of, 66. 1104. Partyce, covenant? ee. 1306. Pass, to poise, 66. 463; pass, 708. PASSANDE, passing, ek. 1014. PaTROUNES, sovereigns, GK. 6. PaumMeEz, antlers, Gx. 1155. Paunce, coat of mail, ex. 2017. Jamieson's erroneous interpretation of covering for the knee is obvious, in v. Pans, Pexicocus, pl. (?) aa. xxxi. 6. Omitted in Jamieson. See Douce’s remarks on this word in Illustr. of Shakspere, vol. ii. p. 160. PzLLOKIs, bullets, eg. 463. PeLourz, PELURE, PILLOUR, costly fur, Gk. 154. aa. il. 6. eg. 313, PELUREs, pl. GK. 2029. PENCELLE, banner, AA. xxxi. 2. PENDAUNTES, PENDAUNTEZ, the dropping ornaments of horse-trappings or a girdle, Gk. 168, 2038, 2431. PENYES, pence, money, GK. 79.° PENTANGEL, PENTAUNGEL, figure of five points, 6K. 620, 636, 664. See Notes, p. 318. PENTED, p. ¢. pertained, ex. 204. PzrNYNG, picking and dressing, a term applied to birds, ex. 611. PERRE, PERRYE, jewelry, AA. ii. 6, xxix. 5, 9, MS. D. PERTLY, openly, promptly, ex. 544, 1941. 66. 927. ec. 420. Pzs, peace, GK. 266. Presang, Pesayne, Pysan, gorget of mail or plate, attached to the helmet, ex. 204. aa. xlv. 11. @@. 927. So named from Pisa, where these gorgets were probably first fabricated. In an inventory, cited by Du Cange, of the year 1316, is, © Item 3 coloretes Pizaines de jazeran d’acier.”’ PesE, measure, weight, ex. 2364. Peter! an oath, used as Mary! ex. 813. It was left unexplained in the Glossary to Will. and the Werwolf. Other instances of its use may be found in the Towneley Mysteries, p. 29. Rauf Coilear, sign. B. ii.; Ritson’s Metr. Rom. iii. 313, where the editor corrects it, erroneously, porter ; Romance of Morte Arthure, MS. Linc. ff. 81>, 83>.; and Romance of Syr Perecyvalle, ib. f. 166. PicHED, PYCHED, p. p. fastened, cx. 576; situated, 768. Picut,; Pient, Picute, Pizr, Pyeut, Pyeute, Py3t, p. p. pitched, fixed, ex. 1456, 1734. AA, xxxiv. 13, xxxv. 1, xxvii. 1. 66. 313. 7. 265. er.k. 28; arrayed, AA. Xxviii, 2, MS. D. but the Linc. MS. reads DYGHTE. Pixep, PYKED,' p. p. choice? Gs. 769; picked out, burnished, 2017. P1LLOUR, see PELOURE. Pins, Pyne, trouble, grief, pain, torment, Gk. 123, 747, 1812, 1985. Pyne, to take pains, GK. 1538. p.t. 1009. PyNeD, p.p. (?), GK. 769. Perhaps a mistake for PYNACLED. Pysan, see PESANE. Pirn, Pyru, marrow, strength, power, GK. 1456. 66. 783, 927, 1290. Pitt, p. p. put, assigned, T6, 32. PLaTEZ, pl. steel armour for the body, ex. 2017. PLEASANCE, pleasure, GK. 1247 ; (KERCHYF oF) 7. 347. See Notes, p. 351. PLicur, Pry3r, hostility, danger, cx. 266. ec. 1104, 1305; offence? cx. 2393. PLYTES, pl. 733. PyNeED, GLOSSARY. PLoNKETE, a white stuff, AA. xxix. 3. See BLuUNEET. Poyrnt, condition, 6K. 2049. Poyntz, to declare, write, ex. 1009. PoLayNEs, knee-pieces in a suit of armour, GE. 576. See Notes, p. 315. PoLD, p. p. pulled, ec. 180. PoLemvs, pl. (?) aa. xxxi. 6. Omitted by Pinkerton and Jamieson. Perhaps we Should read PoLtinus, knee-pieces. PoLiceD, PoLysED, Potyst, p. p. polished, Gk. 576, 2038; made clean, absolved, 2393. PoMELL, crest? 5.335. PovER, poor, Gk. 1538. PRAYERE, meadow, GK. 768. PrayseE, to estimate, appraise, GK. 1850. PRECE, pr. ¢. proceed, Gk. 2097. PREKETES, pl. wax tapers, AA. XXxv. 9. Press, throng, battle, ae. 236. PRESED, p.t, thronged, ex. 830. PRESENT, presence, GG. 1287. PREsT, ready, prompt, aa. lv. 3. er.K. 246. PRESTLY, promptly, ex. 757, 911. PrReEvE, privy, secret, ex. 902. PREVE, to prove, GK. 262. PREVED, p. p. proved, 79. PREWEY, privy, cautious, ec. 181, 451. Prix, to gallop, ex. 2049. PRIKED, p, fe. rode quickly, er.x. 246. Prrme, six o'clock in the morning, ex. 1675. Pris, Prys, price, estimation, excellence, cx. 1247, 1277, 1770, 1850, 2364; reward, prize, 1379, 1630. 66. 392. Pryrs, note of the horn, blown in hunting, after breaking up the game, ex. 1362, 1601. Prisz, fine, good, prized, GK. 1945. aa. xxix. 9, MS. D. ae. 236. Prisz, to attempt? ec. 116. Prisit, p. f. accounted worthy of prize? ec. 721. PRYSOUN, prisoner, GK. 1219. Proves, PRovest, PRowes, valor, courage, GK. 912, 1249. 66, 538, 598, 1290. GLOSSARY. Pure, quite, perfect, ex. 808, 1247. Purep, p. p. refined, pure, ex. 633, 912, 1737, 2393. Purep, PuREDE, p.p. furred, Gk. 154. Aa. Xxvill. 2. ? Q. QuakanpD, quaking, ce. 675. QuarTE, QuERT, good spirits, joy, AA. xx. 10. ae. 586. Quart, what, ex. 233, 460; how, 563, 2201. Quart so, whatsoever, GK. 255. +QuEL, while, ex. 822. QUELDEPOYNTES, pl, hassocks? GK. 877. QUELLE, to put an end to, ex. 752; to kill, 1449, 2109. QuELLED, p. p. slain, 1324. QUELLYS, cries, AA. iv. 9. QUEME, good, Gk. 578; pleasant, 2109. QueN, QuHEN, when, GK. 20, 130, 497. QUENTANCE, acquaintance, familiarity, ec. 1120. QUENTYs, cunning, as. 1220. QUENTLY, easily, Ge. 1223. QUERE, where, GK. 1058. wheresoever, 1227, 1490. wherefore, 1294. QuERRE, quarry, Fr. curée ; a term of hunting, Gk. 1324. To make the quarry, is to break up the deer, and feed the hounds on the skin. QuERT, see QUARTE. Quest, united cry of the hounds, ex. 1150, 1421. Quzstzs, pl. aa. iv. 9, MS. D. QusstTEpE, p. f. hunted in full cry, aa. iv. 9. QueETHE, cry, clamor, 6x. 1150. QuETHEN, whence, Gk. 461. QueztueER, whether, ex. 1109. Querttyrne, whetting, Gk. 2220. QuuHa, who, ee. 69. QuuHasa, whoso, 771. Qunars, where, ec, 107. QuueEIL, wheel, aa. 1225. QuueEtmys, pr. ft. rolls, ee. 1225, Quay, Quy, why, Gx.623. es. 96. QUERE 80, QUER-FORE, QuHIL, QUHILL, QuiLze, QuyL, Quy.Ltz, while, ex. 30, 257, 722, 1035. aa. 186; until, 6x. 536. 66. 85, 272, 586; sometimes, 1730. QUYLE FORTH, during some, 1072. QuHILK, QuILK, which, ee. 132, 607, 1165. QvaiLum, whilom, 66. 546. Qvrs, alive, cx. 2109. QuyssEWEs, cuisses, armour for the thighs, GE. 578. Quit, Quite, Quyt, Quytz, white, Gx. 799, 885, 1205, 2364. QuyTE, to requite, repay, Gk. 2244, 2324. AA. xliv. 2. 66.1101. 3.363. Quy, p.p. requited, ca. 203, 586. Quo, who, ex. 231. Quo so, whoso, 209, 306. Quop, Quopsg, p. ¢. quoth, ex. 256, 309, 343. aa. viii. 9, lii. 1. 3.212. QuornTance, acquaintance, familiarity, Gk. 975. Qwescuyns, cushions, AA. xxxv. 2. R. RaBEL, rabble, pack, ex. 1899. Race, Rass, swift course, pace, GK. 1420. Aa.ix.8. 66.1213, See Res. Race, blow? ex. 2076. Racu, hound, ex. 1903. Racn, Racuzs, Racuez, Racucuss, Racucuez, Racuis, pl. 1164, 1362, 1420, 1426, 1907. aa. v. 6. 66.1344. See The Maister of the Game, f. 71, MS. Cott. Vesp. s. xii. Rap, Raps, afraid, ex. 251. Aa. ix.8,9. Rap, Ravp, ready, quick, @x. 862. aa. xxiii. 8, MS. D. c. 326. RaDLy, promptly, readily, ex. 367, 1164, 1343, 1744. Raeit, p. p. torn? eG. 854, Raye, track? aa.v. 6. Raix, to go, proceed, ee. 371, 1070. RavykEs, pr. ¢. goes, rides, AA. xxvii. 7, MS. D. Ravzszz, imp. proceed, ex. 1076. Raixit, RaykeD, Rayxeps, p. t. went, 3F2 moved, ran, GK. 1727, 1735. AA. Ix. 8. 66. 72, 613, 1130. RaYLED, p. ¢. spread, Gx. 952; bordered, 163, 603, 745. aa.ii.4. Raysoun, reason, argument, Gk. 227. RaitH, RAITHLY, quickly, promptly, ee. 128, 371, 910, 986, 1129, 1252. See RarTH. Rak, vapor, fog, ex. 1695. Rak, encounter, ac. 918. Rake, course, road, 6x. 2144, 2160. RAMAND, roaring, 66. 1129. Ramy, to roar, growl, &c. 238. Ramyt, p. t. roared, shouted, ce. 693, 966. See Rome. KanDoNE, swift course, J. 254. + RANnDoNIT, p. p. flowed with a swift course, GG. 248. Rang, strong, 6&6. 691. See Ronx. RAPELY, quickly, ex. 2219. Raess, pr. ft. moves quickly, runs, ex. 1309, 1903. Ras, roarings, eG. 85. Rascn, encounter, shock, ec. 914. Rassz, pr. t. rushes, 6K. 1461. Rasit, p. p. abashed, ea. 396. Rasss, raised mound, eminence, GK. 1570. So also in another poem in the same MS., the author says of the Ark, Hit sa3tled on a softe day, synkande to grounde ; On a rasse of a rok hit reste at the laste. Nero A. x. f. 63. The word is not in Jamieson; but is preserved in Cumberland. See Brockett, v. Raise. Rass1T, p. t. razed, destroyed, 66. 986. Ratu, RaTHE, quickly, soon, aa.li.4. G6. 1314. See RAITH. RarTHE, savage, hasty? AA. xxxiv. 9. RATHELED, p. p. fixed, rooted, ek. 2294. RavDE, a path? ex. 1710. Ravenr, p. ¢. reached, gave, ec. 458, 630. c. 237,323 ; p. p. given, c. 330. Ravine, beasts of chace, prey, er.k. 416. Raw, row, 66. 396. Rawez, pl. cx. 513. GLOSSARY. RawtueE, terrible, jarring, 6x. 2204. Ra3t£z, pr. t. gavest, Gk. 2351. Razr, p.t. rushed, 432; reached, gave, 1817, 1874, 2297. See Ravenr. RzeBANnEs, ribbons, AA. ii. 3. +tREBE, an exror, apparently, for RuByEs, AA. xxxi. 4, MS. D. Pinkerton and Jamieson print it reve; and the latter gives us the usual quantum of nonsense on it. Resutit, p. p. repulsed, ee. 1136. Recu, Recue, to reach, give, ex. 66, 1804, 2059; attain, 1243. Rrcues, Recuez, pr. t. extends, 183; reachest, givest, 2324. Recuas, RECHAYSE, the recheat, a hunting term, applied to the notes blown on the horn to call the dogs, aa. v. 6, MS. D. v.10. The term is preserved in Shakspere. See Nares Gloss. v. Recheat. RecHaTaND, blowing the recheat, ex.1911. RECHATED, p.t. blew the recheat, ex. 1466 ; p.p. blown on with the recheat, 1446. REcHLES, careless, GK. 40. RECOMFORTHED, p. ¢. encouraged, AA. iv. 4. RecureE, remedy, ea. 1203. REeDpDovuRE, violence, AA. vii. 3. Reps, n. counsel, AA. viii. 2. 66. 120. c. 87. Revs, to maintain, ex. 1970; to counsel, 2111. aa. xli. 5, xliii. 4. REDez, Repys, pr. t. managest, ek. 373; tells, aa. il. 3. Reve, Reeve, REDDEN, pr. ¢t. counsel, GK. 363. AA, xxxiv. 9. GG. 323. ac. 133. Rep, subj. should counsel, Gx. 738. REDDE, p. p. counselled, said, 443. REDLEs, void of counsel, 66. 1130. REDLY, readily, 6k. 373. See Rap ty. REFOURME, pr. ft. renew, remake, ex. 378. Rert, p. 7. snatched, took away, ce. 81. ReEHETE, to cheer, Ge. 1158. REnavreD, p. t. cheered, encouraged, 895, 1422, 1744. Rzte, to rob, eg. 1314. REYKYNGE, running, 6c. 110. Reig, realm, ec. 1258. Reirpit, p. ¢. clamored, ee. 914; p. p. resounded, 85; reared? 238. : GLOSSARY. REKENLY, straightway ? promptly? ex. 39, 251, 821, REKNAND, riding? 66. 519. RELED, p. ¢. swaggered, ek. 229; rolled, spread, 304. Reyes, pr.t. follow? continue? aa. v. 6. REmens, to remember, ax. 2483. REeMoRDE, to blame, aK. 2434. RemweE, to change, ex. 1475. Renay, pr. t. refuse, 6K. 1827. RENAYED, p.t. refused, 1821. Reng, RENKE, man, knight, ex. 303, 691, 1558, 1821. aa. xxvi. 5,1.3. 66.72, 113. RENKEs, RENKIs, RENKKEZ, pl. Gk. 432, 862, 1134, 2246. ee. 11,133. In Richardson's Dictionary, 4to. 1837, I regret to find this by no means unusual word entered as REux, on the authority of Whitaker's vile text of Piers Plouhman. RENNANDE, running, GE. 857. RENNE, to run, @k. 1568. Rennes, RENNEZ, pr. t. runs, 310, 731, 1570. Rentaris, holders of lands, chiefs, 66. 403. Res, swift course, pace, Gk. 1164, 1899. AA. xxvil. 7, MS.D. See Race. Resayt, a hunting term, applied to the stations taken up by those on foot, ex. 1168. ReEscoweE, rescue, GK. 2302. RESETTE, RESSET, place of reception, abode, GK. 2164. aa. 38. RESYNGE, pr. t. resign, aa. 1.4. Rest, p. ¢. rested? aa. xxv. 5, MS. D. RESTAYED, p. p. stopt, driven back, ex. 1153. REsTEYED, p. ¢. constrained? ex. 1672. RzsTLEs, without rest, 66, 113, 307. RxesTLING, struggling? 66.458. RevrTH, sorrow, aa. 693, 996, 1129. Revay, festivity, ee. 1343. Reve, to take away, bereave, @x. 2459. REvEDE, p. p. bereaved, AA. xxii. 8. REVERSSEDE, p. p. trimmed, AA. ii. 3. The same phrase is found in the alliterative Morte Arthure. And with ladily lappes, the lenghe of a 3erde, And alle redily rewersside w* rebanes of golde. MS. Line. f. 87°. Pinkerton misprints this word reidsett, from the Douce MS., which is gravely received by Jamieson, and dignified with a Saxon derivation ! ! Rew, to repent, ec. 98. repents, ac. 195. ea. 1090. REWFULLY, compassionately, aa. xxv. 5. Riaz, RIALL, Riails, RYAL, RYALLE, royal, Gx. 905. aa. xxvi. 7, xlix. 3. ee. 15,72. ec. 26, 593, RYALLE, pl. nobles, used substantively, aa. 1. 4. RI1aLLEST, royalest, ee. 402. Ryatmg, realm, ex. 691. 310. RI1aLTE, royalty, ea. 1041. Riccass, Ricues, RYCHES, Pr. ¢. goes, GK. 8; prepares, dresses, 1309, 1873. RicuEn, Ricass, pr. t. pl. dress, 6x. 1130 ; march, AA, xxi. 3, MS. D. Rycuep, p. p. prepared, ex. 2206. Rewytu, pr. t. Rewir, p. ¢. pitied, RyauMEs, pl. 'Ricn, Ricuz, Rycn, Rycue, noble, proud, powerful, 6x. 8, 20, 39, 40, 397, 1744. 66.402, Used substantively in the plural, nobles, GK. 66, 362. Rycu, pr. ?. teach? ex. 1223. RIcHCHANDE, running, cx. 1898. RIcus, n. (?) 6k. 2177. RycHED, p. p. enriched, ex. 599. Ricuety, RYCHELY, proudly, nobly, ex. 308, 931. Ryp, Rypps, to release, ex. 364; rescue, 2244. Ripand, riding, ec. 189. Rupe, fierce, rough, ec. 500. Barbour. Ryne, p. ¢. proceed, ex, 1344. Ryeee, back, ex. 1344, 1608, Rieu, p. ¢. rip, cut, aa. xxxix. 11. Rieutvis, righteous, ec. 1091. RIGHTWISLY, righteously, aa. xxv. 5, MS. D: Ries, to reign, 66. 424. Used also by See RING. RyKanDE, potent, loud? ex. 2337. Rimep, p. e. vociferated? ex. 308. Rymez, rims, borders? &@x. 1343. Ryn, to run, 66. 1344. Ryng, territory, 66. 225. Rine, to reign, ac. 495, 1236, 1289. RINGAND, reigning, 66. 1041. RyNEx, ring, GK. 1817, 1827. Ryo1, royal, ex. 2036. R1oLyse, nobles, G6. 910. Ryor, revel, 66. 1345. Rypexz, pr. ¢. becomes ripe, GK, 528, Risz, Rys, bough, twig, Gk. 1698. 66. 854, 1344. RissHE, %. rush, aA. xliii. 7. Rist, resting place? aa.v.6. Ryste, p. ¢. rested, aa. xviii. 10. Rytte, pr. ¢. cut, rip, 6K. 1332. Ryve, rife, much, ex. 2046. Ryvez, pr.t. rips, rives, cuts, &K. 1341, 2290. RI1veD, p. t. arrived, AKC. 32. Ry3T, p. ?. addressed, prepared, Gk. 308. RocueE, rock, ex. 2199. Rocue_r, rock, ex. 1432. CHEREZ, pl. 1327, 1698. Ropz, RooDE, complexion, AA. xiii. 5, GO. 367. Rope, Rood, ex. 1949. Rox, peace, rest, G6r.K. 395, Germ, ruh, It is left unexplained by Ritson in Le Bone Florence, Metr. Rom. iii. 36 ; and Erle of Tolous, ib. iii. 122. Ror, blow, cut, cK. 2346. Roeu, Rocns, Roz, Rozz, rough, shaggy, Gk. 745, 1432, 1608, 1898, 2162, 2198. Roy, Rovs, king, aa. xlix. 3. 66. 189. RoKxKED, p.p. rolled, cleansed, ex. 2018. Geoffrey of Vinesauf says, © Rotantur loricee, ne rubigine squalescunt,” which Sir S. Meyrick adds, was done by putting the coat of mail into a barrel filled with sand, and rolling it about.— Crit. Ing.1.85. Hence may be explained a passage in La3amon, 1. 22287. Ryneis, pr. t. RocueEres, Ro- GLOSSARY. Rome, to growl, roar, c. 209. See Ramy. Romez, pr. t. walks, proceeds, ex, 2198. Ronez, pl. thickets, brush-wood, ex. 1466. RoNes, p. ¢. resounded, Gx. 2204. Ronk, Rownkez, strong, &x. 513. Aa. xIvii; 6. See Rank. RoNEELED, p. p. wrinkled, 6x. 953. Rooks, heap, c. 370. Rore, (?) GK. 2207. Roveut, p. fe. recked, lamented, er.x. 242. RovN, to whisper, commune, ex. 362. Rovnce, steed, 6x. 303. Rous, fame, ax. 310. Rovsg, brag, boast, er.x. 166. See Rusz. Rovt, army, multitude, ea. 307. Te. 131, 175. Rout, Rovre, violent movement, impetus, GK.457; blow, aa. xli.5. ee. 630, 940. Rovutts, pl. blows, c. 500. Rove, p. ¢. cleaved, cut, 6x. 2346. Rovez, roofs, cx. 799. Roz, Rozs, see Rocn. Ruses, rubies, aa.ii.4. The Douce MS. reads, rybees, which is only a variation in spelling, or blunder of the scribe, but which Jamieson chooses in the 8vo edit. of his Dictionary to explain “ shoes called turn-overs” 1)! Rucucuep, RUcHED, RUSCHED,p.t. moved, advanced? Gk. 303, 367, 2219, See RicCHES, Rupe, adj. strong? ee. 85. Rung, x. Rood, 66. 124. RvDEDE, p. p. ruddy, ex. 1695. RupELEz, curtains, 6K. 857. RvuDLy, speedily, ec. 561, 673. er.x. 153, See RaDLy. Rven, Rvze, rough, ex. 953, 2166. See Rocn. +RvuyscuLy, apparently an error for RuNYSCHLY, violently, Gk. 432. Runiscu, violent, impetuous, GK. 457. RUNISCHLY, fiercely, roughly, 6x. 304. See MS. Cott. Nero A. x. ff. 80%, 85>. Rurp, RunRDE, noise, clamor, ex. 1149, 1698, 1916, 2219, 2337. See Rope. GLOSSARY. Rusz, boast, ce. 98; fame, 1241. See Rovs. RuTHss, pr. ¢. moves, dresses? GK. 1558. Cf. Riccnss. Ss. Sa, so, ae. 831. Sasarounz, steel shoes, 6k.574. SeeNotes, P- 315. Sap, stable, strong, ee. 249 ; grave, 428. SADEL, to saddle, ex.1128. This word is only inserted for the purpose of pointing out a singular error of Mr. Guest, who prints the word fadel, and then explains it fettle. Hist. Engl. Rh. ii. 167. SabD.y, gravely, steadily,¢x.437,1593,1937, 2409. 66. 574. Sar, save, except, GK. 394, Sare, SAVENE, to assuage, alleviate, aa. xvii. 1. SAGE, (?) GE. 531. SaGE, man, ee. 266. Say, saint, ex. 774. SAIELESE, guiltless, 66. 3, 797. SAIL, SAILL, SALE, hall, ex. 197, 243, 349. AA. XXVii. 1. G6. 72, 133, 360, 1092. SAYLANDE, flowing, ex. 865. SAILL, happiness, ea. 267. Sayn, girdle, ax. 589. Sayn, saint, ex. 1788. Saynp, SAYNDIS-MAN, messenger, GG. 47, 326, 367. SAYNE, see SANE. SAYNED, . f. blessed, ex. 761, 1202. Saynt, rich stuff, Fr. samit, ax. 2431. SALAND, Sailing, ea. 250. SALER, salt-cellar, aa. xxxv. 8, MS, D. SaLERS, pl. AA. XXXV.8. SALF, to save, preserve, GG. 793. SALT, assault, 66.473. SALvE, to salute, ek. 1473. SALURE, salt-cellar, @x. 886. See Sauer. Saust, p. ¢. saluted, ae. 136, 382, 1278. SALUED, SALUEDE, p. p. saved, AA. xvii. 12, xix. 10. SAMBUTES, housings, saddle-cloth, aa. ii. 11, MS. D. See SEGE. Same, SAMEN, SAMYNE, together, ex. 50, 363, 673, 744. ea. 906, 914. SameEn, to assemble, ex. 1372. P.P. joined, 659. SaMYNE, same, GG. 304, 315. SANAP, SANAPE, napkin, 6K.886. Aa. xxxv. 8, MS. D. Sanapss, pl. aa. xxxv.8. “ Sanoppe, manutergium,” Prompt. Parv. Jamieson absurdly interprets this mustard!!! SANDEL, see SENDAL. SANE, SAYNE, to say, 66.4. 7.57. SANED, SANEDE, p.p. healed, aa. liv. 4, 10. +SavuDE, p.p. served? AA. ii. 11, MS. D. Jamieson prints this sande, and explains it girt. Saur, to save, ee. 1102. SavGHTILLE, to make peace, to be reconciled, AA. li. 10. SAUGHTNYNG, 1264. SAULL-PROW, spiritual benefit, ee. 269. Savanp, saving, excepting, ae. 441. SaveEp, p. p. healed, aa. liv.4,10, MS. D. Sav_Er, safer, ek. 1202. SAUERLY, savourly, carefully, ex. 1937, 2048. Saw, Sa3z, saying, speech, ex. 1202, 1246. GG. 266. Saw1s, SAzEz, pl. GK. 341. G6. 873. SAwTIRE, saltire, aa. xxiv. 8. Sawtry, SAWTRYE, psaltery, ac. 598. c. 466. ' SA3TLYNGE, reconciliation, AA. li. 11, MS.D. See SAUGHTILLE. SCADE, p. ¢. severed, Gx. 425, Scar, to frighten, ae. 279. +Scas, probablya mistake for cast, aa. xlviii. 2,MS.D. Those who wish it may see what Jamieson has made of thecorruption. ScatueE, harm, ex. 674, 2353. SCHADDEN, Þ. t. shed, dropt, cx. 727. See SHADE. SCHAFTE, spear, GK. 205. SCHAFTED, p. #. set, sank, GK. 1467. SCHAGHES, groves, AA. Vi. 2, MS, D, See SCHA3E. SAamNneD, peace, reconciliation, ee. SCHAIP, imp. go, ea. 599. SCHAIR, SCHARE, P. ?. cut, smote, ea. 930, 968. SCHALE, shall, ex. 1240. Scyark, man, knight, ex. 160, 424, 1776, 2061, 2372. 66.599. SCHALKEZ, ScHALKS, pl. GK. 1454, 6&6. 639, 891. ScHALE, gen. pl. 562. SCHANE, bright, AA. xxvi. 4. See SCHENE. SCHANKES, legs, GK. 160. See SCHONKES. SCHAP, p.t. was formed, &x. 2328. SCHAPE, to escape? GE. 1210. SCHAPEN, p. p. shaped, GK. 213. SCHAPES, pr.t. relates, cx. 1626. ScwaP y, fitly, fairly, ec. 453. Scuarp, used substantively for sword, ex. 1593, 1902; axe, 2318. ScHATERANDE, dashing, Gx. 2083. SCHAWE, to shew, Gx. 27. SCHAzE, grove, wood, SCHAGHES. ScHEDDIT, p. ¢. cut, ae. 990. SCHED, p. p. cut, shaved, 604. SCHEDER, pr. ¢. drifts ? ex. 956. ScHEDEZ, pr. ft. pours, Gx. 506. +Scnrz1Dp1s, a misprint for SCHEILDIS, eG. 668. Jamieson, however, endeavours to find a meaning, and explains the word distances ! SCHEIRLY, SCHIRLY, SCHYRLY, cleatily, GK. 1880; brightly, ee. 22, 477. See ScHIR. SCHELDEZ, shields of a boar, ex. 1456, 1626. SCHEMERED, p.t. glittered, ex. 772. SCHEND, SCHENDE, to destroy, confound, GK. 2266. 66.1077. SCHENT, p. ¢. went to pieces, 619. SCHENT, SHENTE, p. p. injured, conquered, disgraced, aa. xlix. 7. ec. 689, 1068, 1186. 7. 16, 514. SCHENE, SCHEYNE, SHEENE, SHENE, bright, beautiful, clear, ck. 662, 2314. Aa. xxiv. 8, xxx. 7, xxxix. 7, liv. 7. 66. 242, 444, 477, 639. er.x. 447. Used substantively, GK. 2268. SCHENE, p. ¢. were conspicuous, 66, 1273. SCHENT, n. disgrace, ea. 1077. Gk. 2161. See GLOSSARY. ScueEre, SCHIERE, countenance, mien, GK, 334. ec. 616. ScHERE, to shear, cut, GK. 213. p.t. 1337. See SCHAIR. Scuipzs, SCHYDES, splinters, AA. xxxix. Th, 9. +8Scn1LDs, should, ex. 1286. SCHYLDE, subj. forbid, ex, 1776. SCHINANDE, shining, ex. 269. ScHYNBAWDES, greaves? armourfor the legs, AA. xxxi. 5. MS. D. seems to read ScoynBANDES, and it is so printed by Pinkerton and Jamieson. The same term occurs again in the alliterative Morte Arthure : SCHER, The schafte schoderede and schotte in the schire beryne, That the schedande blode one his schanke run- nys, And schewede one his schynbawde, that was schire burneste. MS. Line. "a 93°. ScHYNDERED, p.t. severed, shivered, GK. 424, 1458, 1594. SCHIR, SCHIRE, Scuyire, SCHYR, SCHYRE, fair, bright, clear, ex. 317, 425, 619, 772. ec. 537, 610, 639, 690, 1331. Used substantively for skin or neck, 2256. See ScHEIRLY. Scuyrg, fairly, clearly, ex. 506, 2083. SCHYRER, fairer, clearer, ex. 955. Scno, she, ex. 1259, 1550, 1555. aa.i. 13, iii. 1, xxvii. 7. SCHOLES, pr. t. (?) ex. 160. ScxonKEs, SHONKEZ, legs, ax. 431, 846. SCcHoNEIT, p.t. gave way, failed, ce. 619. Jamieson prints it Schenkit, and interprets it agitated. See also Weber’s Gloss. to Metr. Rom. v. Schenche. ScnoRE, shore, earth, ex. 2161, 2332. ScHoRE2z, pl. 2083. Scuorg, high, eminent, ea. 340. Scuorg, threat, 66. 103. Scuorg, to threaten, ec. 276. SCHOTTEN, p. ¢. shot, ex. 1167. Scuowen, ScHowurz, Scuowys, pr. t. shove, push, throng, ex. 1454, 2161, GLOSSARY. AA.V. 1. SCHOWUED, p. t. shoved, fell with force, x. 2083. SCHRANE, p.t. sunk, pierced, ex. 425, 2313. ScaREgDs, to clothe? aa. xxxi. 5. Scuror, p. ¢. shrived, ex. 1880. ScHROUD, apparel, armour, 66. 599, 968. ScHRUEDEDE, p.p. dressed, Aa. ii. 7. ScuRYDEs, pr.t. covers or protects from ? AA.Il. 7. MS. D. reads SHEDEs. Scuunt, backward step? Gr. 2268. SCHUNT, Þ. t. shunned, shrunk, ex. 1902, . 2280. SCHUPE, p.f. purposed, disposed,ae.456,473. SCHURDE, p. p. dressed, AA. il. 7, MS. D. Scuwne, to protect? ek. 205. ScowTEs, high rocks? ex. 2167. Brockett, in v. Secu, to seek, ex. 1052. Sex, kingdom, ec. 660. SEGE, SEGGE, siege, GE. 1, 2525. SEGE, Sree, SEQGE, man, knight, ex. 96, 115, 226, 394, 437. Aa. xxviii. 8. 66. 90, 459. SEGGE, gen. c. man’s, GK. 574. SEGGES, SEGGEZ, SEG1S, pl. GK. 673, 822, 1438. 6&6. 142, 209, 651. SEGHE, p. t. saw, GK. 1705. SEY, sea, ae. 3. Sey, p.t, saw, GK. 1619. SEYE, to go, GK. 1879. SEEN, p. p. arrived, 1958. SEILL, SELE, good fortune, prosperity, GK. 1938, 2409, 2422. 66.4. SEYMLY, fair, comely, ee. 524. The edit. 1508, reads seynily, by a misprint, which Pinkerton converts into seynity. Jamieson contends that seynily is right, and means signal!!! Serr, SERE, adj. several, cx. 124, 632, 761, 822, 1982. aa. xvii. 2, MS. D. ee. 214, 251, 1338. .Szre, adv. much, eagerly? ec. 473. Sz1z, 66. 529, is so printed by Pinkerton and Jamieson, although the edit. of 1508 reads Fein. The meaning is doubtful. + Serr, probably a mistake for Scx1R, bright, GG. 242, See SEYTH, see SETHE. SEKER, SEKORE, sure, trusty, GK. 265. 66. 2, See SIKER. SELADYNES, chalcedonies, AA. ii. 9, MS. D. Falsely printed by Pinkerton and Jamieson scladynes. +SELcovenrT, pl. marvels, ee. 210. SELCOUTH, marvellous, strange, 66. 266,409, 1338. SELCOUTHES, marvels, wonders, AA. xxvi. 8, MS. D. SELDEN, seldom, GK. 499. SELE, see SEILL. SELLOKEST, most surprising, GK. 1439. SELLY, n. marvel, wonder, GK. 474, 2170. SELLYEZ, pl. 239. SELLY, adj. strange, GK. 28. SELLY, adv. wondrously, ck. 1194. SELLYLY, strangely, wondrously, ex. 963, 1803. +SELLYLY, perhaps for SELLY, excellent, GK. 1962. : SELOURE, SELURE, canopy, GK. 76. AA. xxvil. 2, See SYLOUR. SELVEN, joined to a noun or pronoun in the singular, Gk. 51, 107, 113, 1548. SEMBLAUNCE, SEMBLAND, SEMBLAUNT, countenance, appearance, behaviour, Gx. 148,468, 1273, 1658. Ge. 428, 1282. 7.8. SEMBLE, SEMBLEE, assembly, GK. 1429. ac. 214. SEMBLE, pr. ft. assemble, aa. vi. 1, MS. D. SEMBLYNGE, meeting together, aa. li. 11. SEME, (?) ek. 1085. SEMED, p. t. beseemed, befitted, ex. 73, 1929. SEMELEDE, p.t. assembled, aa. vi. 1. SEMELY, SEMLY, adj. comely, fair, ex. 672, 685. AA. xxxv. 8. G6. 1092, 1197, SeMez, seams, borders, ex. 610. SEMLY, SEMLYCH, adv. fairly, suitably, becomingly, courteously, ex. 865, 882, 916, 1198, 1658. SEMLELY, SEMLYLY, becomingly, ex. 622. AA. li. 11. SEMLOKER, more seemly, fairer, GK. 93. SnMyDE, SEMYT, p.¢. appeared, AA. ii. 10, G6. 529. SEN, since, aa. 57, 434. +Senp, for SENT, co. 198. SENDAL, SENDALE, SANDEL, fine silk, GK. 76. AA. XXX. 9. Seng, adj. (?) ex. 341. G. sann, true? SENE, to see, GK. 712. xlvi. 13. Sens, without, ec. 779. SENYEOUR, lord, master, 66. 145, 326. SERE, see SEIR. Sere, (?) ek. 1522, 2417. SERKE, shirt, ec. 535. u. 367. SERLEPES, severally, by turns, GK. 501. SERTAYN, certainly, cx. 174. SERVED, p. p. deserved, Gx. 1380. Servy, n. service? ax. 751. Cf. 940. Sesz, to receive, Gk. 1825. SESED, p. fe. held, seized, 822, 1330. SESED,P.f.and p.p. ceased, GK. 1, 1083, 2526. SET UPONE SEVIN, Or ON SEVIN, a phrase which Jamieson, v. Scheidis, gives up as inexplicable, and yet which is of such frequent occurrence as to deserve more notice than he has chosen to bestow on it. It is in most cases spoken of God, and the original idea seems to imply the creation of the world in seven days, whence it means fo set or dispose in order, ea. 1045. Compare It is allied to Su. SENE, pr.t. aa. the Pystyl of Susan, xxi.4; and Towneley Mysteries, pp. 85, 97, 118. But in ee, 508, 668, the phrase appears to have acquired another sense, namely, to encounter in battle. In the same sense it occurs in the alliterative Morte Arthure, f.75%. SETE, (?) 6x. 889. Ge. 1155. Perhaps connected with Su. G. seta, prodesse. Serz, Seren, P.t, and p.p. sat, 865, 940, 1522. Seruz, SETHYNE, Serta, afterwards, then, since, GC. 222, 290, 299, 436, 469. See SITHEN. SETOLERS, players on the citole, a species of hurdy-gurdy ? aa. xxvii. 5. GLOSSARY. SETTEL, seat, chair, 6K. 882. Szver, to part, GK. 1988. SEVERES, pr. t. 1797. Sew, p. t. follow, Aa. vi. 2. followed, ec. 62. SEwE, prepared dish of meat, perhaps a stew, Gk.892. Srwess, pl. 124, 889. Sx3, Sn3E, SEEN, p. f. saw, GK, 672, 707, 1911. SEWYDE, p. tf. SHADE, 'p. ¢. shed, flowed, 3. 90. See ScHADDEN. SHAFTMONE, half a foot, aa. xli. 2. This ., term is retained by Sir John Harrington, in his translation of Ariosto, SHINAND, shining, AA. xli. 2. SHINDRE, pr. ¢. shiver, break, aa. xxxix. 7, MS. D. SHoen, shoes, er.K. 516. SHoNTEST, pr. t. shrinkest, er.x. 469. See SCHUNT. Suourg, conflict, 7. 76. SHRED, p. p. severed, cut, aa. xliv. 10. Sic, such, ec. 274, 506. SICKERLY, SICKIRLY, SYCKERLYE, surely, truly, 66.432,773,1005. 7.210. 6r.x.215. SYFLEzZ, pr. t. whistles, blows, ek. 517. SYKANDE, sighing, GK. 1796. SIKED, SYKED, p. ¢. sighed, GK, 672, aa. Xliii. 13, er.x. 268, S$S1KER, SYKER, adj. sure, trusty, brave, GK. 96, 115, 2048, 2493. 66,484. S1KzR, adv. surely, ex. 1637. SIKING, SYKYNG, sighing, GK. 753. aa. vil. 10, MS. D. SYKkyNGEz, pl. ex. 1982. SYLOUR, canopy, ec. 66. See SELOURE. S117, p. t. sank, 66.524, Jamieson's absurd interpretation of this line is unworthy notice. See his Dict. v. Seynity, or Seynily, words which never existed at all, except by the merest typographical blunders. SILLE, SYLL, seat, throne, 6x. 55, Ge. 433, 1197. SYLUENER, silver, plate? GK. 124, Syn, Synz, SYNNE, since, Gk. 19, 24, 919, 1892; then, afterwards, 66.62, 304. 6c.515. SYNeNE, sign, token, ex. 625. GLOSSARY. SyRE, lord, master, 66. 144, 428. ec. 223, 395. SyTE, disgrace, sorrow, ae. 1099, 1202. Syris, pl. torments, Aa. xvii. 1. Syru, sight? ae. 1315. Situ, time, 66. 382. SITHE, SYTHE, SYTHES, SYTHEZ, Syruis, pl. GK. 17, 632, 761, 1868. aa. xlii. 6. ec. 354, 638. SITHEN, SITHENNE, SYTHE, SYTHEN, SYTHENNE, afterwards, then, next, since, 6K. 1, 6, 43, 115, 358, 1234, 1339. AA. iii. 6, XX, 5, XxXV. 7. 3.42. See SETHE. SITTANDE, sitting, AA. xxxviii. 7. Sy3, SY3E, p. t. saw, GK. 83, 200, 1582. +Sxarrar, injury, harm, ee. 279. SKAYNED, P. P. (?) GK. 2167. +SKELED, apparently anerror for SERKELED, incircled, aa. x. 3, MS. D. SKERE, modest? GK. 1261. SKETE, quickly, GK. 19. SKYFTED. p. p. shifted, changed, ex. 19. SKILL, SKYL, SKYLLE, reason, GK. 1296, 1509. ec. 1219. me. 167. +Sxywnez, kind; theinitial letter in pronunciation having become detached from the preceding word, 6x. 1539. See other instances in Lazamon, vol. .ii. p. 607 ; and Arthour and Merlin, p. 159, 4to, 1838. SKIRLES, pr. f. screams, AA. xlii. 3. SxyRTEzZ, horse-trappings, ck. 601 ; skirts of a robe, 865. SxowEs, SKUWES, SKWEZ, groves, shady coverts ? G&x. 2167. aa.v. 1, MS. D., x. 12, MS. D. Cf. MS. Cott. Nero A. x. f. 81, 81>. SKRIKES, SKRYKE, SKRYEIS, pr.t. shrieks, shriek, aa. x. 12, MS. D., xlii. 2, xlviii. 8. SERILLES, pr.¢. screams, AA. xlviii. 8, MS.D. Stang, SLArD, valley, ex. 2147. 66, 840. SLADEZz, pl. ex. 1159. SLAKE, gap or ravine between two hills, aa. xxiii. 12, SLAKED, p. p. drunken? 6K, 244. SLAWE, p. p. slain, c. 420. SLE, skilful, 66. 883. SLEUTYNG, shooting, letting fly, cx. 1160. SLx3s, ingenious, ex. 797, 893. SLELY, slily, softly, ex. 1182. SLE3zT, SLI3T, stratagem, &K. 1854, 1858. SLBE3TEz, pl. 916. Surxes, pr. t. slides, AA. xlviii. 6, MS. D. The Linc. MS. reads slydys, contrary to the rhythm. Pinkerton and Jamieson falsely print the word slik, and the latter makes it an adjective. SLYNGE, blow, aa. xlviii. 5. The Douce MS. reads slenk, which is only a provincial mode of pronunciation. Jamieson, however, is misled by it, and interprets it erroneously, a piece of low craft. SLy3T, skilful, ex. 1542. SLODE, p. ¢. slipt, ax. 1182. Stoxes, blows? ex. 412: SLOMERYNG, slumbering, ex. 1182. SLoT, pit of the stomach, ax. 1330, 1593. See Norzs, p. 322. SMETEN, p. ft. smote, ex. 1763. SMETHELY, smoothly, cx. 1789. Smo rt, mild, ex. 1763. SMuRE, to smother, be concealed, ec. 1204. Snart, SNARTLY, severely, sharply, cx. 2003. aa. vii.4, MS. D. SNAYPED, SNAYPPEDE, p.t. nipped, ex. 2003. aa. vii. 4. SNELLE, keenly, AA. vii. 4. SNELLES, pr. f. pierces? AA. vii. 4, MS. D. SNETERAND, drifting, AA. vii. 4, MS. D. SNITERED, P. Z. drove, drifted, ax. 2003. Socut, p.t. went, proceeded, ae. 302, 459. See Sozr. Sort, to soften, Ge. 1055. SosourneED, p. p. lodged, ax. 2048. Somer, beast of burthen, ec. 567. Sonne, Providence, ec. 150. Songs, to trust? ea. 1105. SoNYNGE, swooning, ec. 318. Sop, hasty meal, cx. 1135. Soprzs DE MAYN, pl. strengthening draughts, or viands, AA. xxxvii. 10. Dunbar uses the phrase breid of mane, which is equivalent to the pain de maine of Chaucer. Sorx, p.t. grieved, ck. 1826, 1988. 412 GLOSSARY. Son3x, inprecation, 6K. 1721; sorrow, 2415. SoTELER, player on the citole? aa. XXViL 5, MS. D. See SETOLERS. Sora, Soras, truth, ex. 84, 355. SoTHEN, p.p. boiled, sodden, ex. 892. Sounds, —IN s0UNDE, well, unhurt, Gs. 2489. SouNDER, herd of wild swine, ex. 1440. See Notes, p. 323. SoUNDYLY, soundly, ex. 1991. SoURQUYDRYE, pride, ex. 311. SoUERANEFULL, noble, Ge, 1304. SownE, number, 6x. 1321. Sozr, p. ¢. went, departed, cx. 685, 1438. Space, to require? ex. 1199. Spain, blow? es. 984. Spats, splinters, ee. 629. Spare, barren, 66. 112. Spare, several, divers, ek. 901. Sparis, imp. spare ye, G66. 274. SPARLYR, calf of the leg, GK. 158. I have only met with this word once elsewhere, namely in the early Wycliffite version of Deuteronomy, cap. xxviii. v. 35, where the later version reads © hyndere partes of the leg.” SPARTHE, axe, GK. 209. : SPED, p.¢. went, proceeded, ck. 1444. Used as p.p. with the verb 7o be, to imply success, Gr.K, 375. SPEDE, profit, ex. 918. SPEDED, P. #. hastened, ek. 979. SPEDLY, expediently? ex. 1935. Sper, SPEREZ, pr. ¢. inquire, inquires, GK. 1624. aa. 274. Spex, SPEKEN, p. t. spake, ek. 1117, 1288. SPELLE, speech, narrative, ex. 209, 1199, 2184. SPELLEZ, pr. ¢. talkest, ex. 2140. SPEND, SPENET, p. ¢. fastened, 6K. 158,587. SPENNE, (?) GK. 1074, 2316. SPENNE, spinny, quickset hedge, ex. 1709, 1896. SPERE-FEILD, field of battle, ac. 1238. Spetos, cruel, ex. 209. SPILLYNGE, failure, aa.xx.7. The MS. D. reads Speling, which Jamieson falsely explains instruction. Sprre, imp, ask, aa.xx.9. See SPEIR. Spy, injury, ex. 1444. SPITETEH, pr. t. injureth, Te. 155. SPORNE, interpreted by Jamieson to stumble, G&. 879. See Notes, p. 342. SPRENGED, p. ¢, sprang, Gk. 1415; dawned, 2009. SPRENT, SPRENTE, p. ¢. leapt, ex. 1896. J. 146, 253. er.kx. 200; shivered, split, eG. 618, 1238. Sprit, p. fe. started? ex. 2316. SPURED, SPURYED, p. p. inquired, ex. 901, 2093. Spurs, imp. dispute, aa. xx. 9, MS. D. STABLED, p. p. established, ex. 1060. STABLYE, station of huntsmen, ex. 1153. Used also by Wyntown. STACKE, p.t. stuck, 3. 267. STAD, p. p. placed, disposed, 6x. 33, 644, 2137. See MS. Cott. Nero A. x. ff. 58, 68, 70>, STAF-FUL, quite full, ex. 494. STAKERIT, STAKKERIT, STAKRIT, p.t. staggered, aa. 624, 916, 929. STALE, STALLE, seat, GK. 104, 107. STALEKED, p. ¢. approached, moved, ex. 237. STALUART, STALWART, STALWORTH, strong, powerful, brave, 6x. 846, 1659. es. 89, 353, 710,718, 741. T6. 25, Sraruarr, and STALWART1S, pl. used substantively, es. 642, 768. STANDERTIS, pl. tapers of a large size? aa. XXXV. 9. : STANGE, pole, staff, ex. 1614. STAPALIS, staples, fastenings, ce. 981. STAPLED,P.p. furnished with staples, ex. 606. STARANDE, glittering, 6K. 1818. STARGAND, starting, aa.xl.4, MS. D. START, p. ¢. started, moved, ex. 431, 1716. Stave, staff? ex. 2137. STED, STEDDE, place, ex. 439, 2213, 2323. STEIR, see ON-STEIR. STz1R, to stir, ee. 505, 671. STEK, p.¢. stuck, ex. 152. GLOSSARY. STEKILLEDE, p. ¢. strewed, AA. xxxi. 2. Perhaps we should read STREKILLEDE. STEL, p.t. stole, ck. 1191. STEL-GERE, armour, GK. 260. STEMED, STEMMED, p. ¢. stood still? spoke in a low voice? 6K. 230, 1117. STENT, p. ¢. stopt, aa. xlv. 7; p. p. restrained, aa. 559. STERAND, stirring, active, 66. 588, 890. Sterne, stout, brave; used substantively, man being understood, ea. 19, 108, 987. See STURNE. STERNYS, stars, AA. xxxi. 2. STERYNE, stout, aa. xxxi. 1. STEVEN, STEUIN, voice, sound, shout, ex. 242, 2008, 2336. 66. 2, 666, 821; conference, Gx. 1060, 2194, 2213. Strip, place, aa. xxv. 4, MS. D. See STED. Srir, adj. strong, brave, Gk. 104, 107, 322. Stir, adv. courageously, ex. 671. STIRTANDE, starting, spirited, aa. xl. 4. STYNT, n. cessation, ec. 974. Srynt, to stop, ee. 767, 863. STYTH, stout, brave, ec. 678, 718. STITHIL, pr. t. voyage? 66. 460. Jamieson is certainly mistaken in converting this word into an adverb, and explaining it eagerly. STITHLY, STYTHLY, stiffly, strongly, ex. 431,575. ST13T, strongly? aa. xlvi. 6. STI13TEL, to dispose? ex. 2137. STI3TLES, STI3TLEZ, pr. ¢. sits, dwells, 104, 2213. -STY3TEL, imp. set, dispose, 2252, STOKEN, p.p. secured, fastened, fixed, cx. 33, 494, 782, 2194. Stonay, conflict, &6. 863; trouble of the mind, 1056. Sroway, to confound, 66. 831. STONYES, pr. t. art astonished, aa, xxxii, 4. STONAYED, STONAYT, STONYED, p. p. confounded, astonished, ex. 1291. aa. xlv.9. ce, 1. 625, 821. Sronp, SToNDE, time, while, aa. xlv. 9, ac. 1. c. 45, STONDED, p. f. confounded? Aa. xlvii. 4. Stor, SToRE, adj. strong, ex. 1291, 1923. ec. 122, See Stour. SToRE, n. combat, aa.lv.11. See Stour. Srotin, to cease, stop, 66. 768. STor1T, p.t. 678. STOTTYDE, p. ¢. stammered, AA. ix. 5. STounND, STouNDE, STOWNDE, time, AA. liv. 11. ee. 642, 929. 7. 160. STOUNDEZ, pl. ex. 1517, 1567. STOUNED, STOUNNEDE, STOWNED, Þ. t. was confounded, astonished, ex. 242,301. aa. ix.5. See Stonay. STOUR, STOWRE, STURE, adj. strong, brave, AA. lv.11. ce. 87, 534. 3.73. MG. 8. Stour, Stourz, STOWER, STOWRE, n. battle, conflict, aa. xliii. 6. e6. 353, 575, 624. ec. 5. 7, 183, er.x. 46. T6. 149. C. 4. STourNe, stout, bold, aa. xxxi. 1, MS. D. See STURNE. STowr, strong, used substantively, ea. 831. STRAY, see ON-STRAY. STRAID, Þ. f. strode, ee. 616. STRAIK, n. blow, ee. 929, 981. STRAIE, p.t. struck, Gs. 1018, 1164. STRAYNE, to restrain, curb, ex. 176. STRAKANDE, p. pr. blowing, GK. 1364, 1923. A hunting term. See MS. Cott. Vesp. B. xii. f, 102Þ, STRAUGEHT, straight? 66. 460. STREYTE, STR13T, p. p. stretched, erect, aa. xli. 13, xlii. 1. STRENYEIT, p.p. constrained, ea. 276. STRENKEL, pr. ¢. scatter, aa. xlvi. 5. STRENTH, to strengthen, ec. 199. STRE3T, close, tight, ex. 152. STRY, STRYE, to destroy, ex. 2194. AA. xxi. 6, MS. D. Erroneously interpreted by Jamieson fo overcome. Srricut, straight? 66.199. STRYKES, pr. t. rides, Aa. xl. 4. STRYTHE, STRYTHTHE, Position of the legs when firmly placed, stride, ck. 846, 2305. StrorHE, adj. (?) 6K.1710. Possiblyrelatedto the Middle High Dutch strut, copse, thicket. STUBBE, stock of a tree, ex, 2293. Stung, place? ee. 718. STvy, strength? ac. 495. STUFFIT, p. p. tired, exhausted? ee. 830. STUMMERAND, stumbling, ee. 624. Sturne, stout, bold, 6x. 143. Used substantively, 214. aa.xli. 12. See STERNE, Srurrss, stirrups, GE. 171. SUAGE, pr. t. assuage, relax, GG. 828. SUaNnDE, following, ex. 1467. SUCCEVUDRY, presumption, proud language, ec. 278. See SURQUIDRE. Sugs, pr. ¢. follows, ex. 510. followed, 501, 1705. SUGETTE, subject, aa. xxiv. 7. SvIRE, neck, em. 129. See SWYRE. SUMNED, p. p. summoned, ex. 1052. SUNDRED, p. p. severed, disjoined, GK. 659. SUPPOSE, although, Gs. 94, 824. Surret, fault, ex. 2433. + Sureer, apparently an error for suget, subject, aa. xxiv. 7, MS. D. Jamieson considered it at first an heraldic term, and afterwards, to mean a debauched woman, in allusion to Guenever!!! SURQUIDRE, pride, GK. 2457. SUTELL, skilful, 66. 697. SUWENE, pr.t. follow, aa. vi. 2, MS. D. See Sew. SveD, p. ¢. Swane, p.?¢. swung, smote, 6G. 562. See Swine. SwaANes, loins? ex. 138, 2034. aa. xlviii. 6, MS. D. Swap, blow, Aa. xlii. 7. Swap, imp. exchange, Gk. 1108. Swap- PED, SWAPT, p. ¢. struck, aa. xl. 7, 11, xlvii. 6, MS. D. SWARE, square, GK. 138. Sware, neck? 66. 1053. SWAREz, pr.¢. answers, GK. 1766. ED, p.t. answered, 1793, 2011. SwATHEL, strong man, Aa. xiii. 7. SWEYED, p. ¢. moved, pressed, Gx. 1429. SWENGES, pr. ft. starts, Gk. 1756. SWENGEN, pr.t. proceed, move quickly, 1615. SwENGED, p. ¢. rushed, 1439. See MS. Cott. Nero A. x., ff. 58>, 66. SWERE, Þ. t. swore, GK. 1825. SWAR- GLOSSARY, SWETE, 3, suit, GK. 2518, Swetz, adj. used substantively, knight or lady being understood, ex, 1108, 1222. SWETE, p.¢. sweated, GK. 180. SWETHLED, p. p. folded, ex. 2034. SWEUENES, dreams, GK. 1756. SwE3, pr. t. follows, ex. 1562. SWEZE, p. ?. stooped, ex. 1796. SWYEREZ, squires, Gk. 824. Swykes, pr. ¢. acts treacherously, aa. xlii. 7. Jamieson explains it falsely, fo cause to stumble. SwILKE, SWYLE, SWYLEE, such, Aa. v. 13, XxXiii, 13, xxvi. 9. SWILLED, p.¢. washed? axc. 276. Swrne, to strike, ec. 828. Swyweez, pr. ¢. rushes, Gk. 1562. SWENGES. See Sew. See SwINKE, to labor, Tc, 103. Swyre, neck, throat, ex. 138, 186, 957. aa. xl.7, MS. D. | Switn, SWITHE, SWYTHE, quickly, ex.8, 815, 1424, 2259. ae. 380. Te. 312; greatly, earnestly, ax. 1860, 1866, 1897. SwYTHELY, quickly, or much, 6x. 1479. SwoGHE, quiet, ck. 243, Swoeues, pr.t. flow with noise? Aa. v. 3. SWOUNDING, swooning, er.K. 269. T. Ta, one, ae. 904. TaBERNACLES, ornamental work in architecture, ac. 610. TABLET, table-cloth? aa. xxxi. 11, MS. D. TABLEZ, corbels? ex. 789. TacHEz, pr. t. fastens, Gk. 2176, Tacnzp, TacHCHED, p.p. attached, fixed, 219, 2512. Taps, toad, aa.ix. 10, MS. D. Taauts, p.f. took, Aa. li. 6. Taxis, imp. take thou, Aa. xiv. 1. TaxkLES, garments? Gk. 1129. TALE, speech, discourse, GK. 1236. TALENTTYF, desirous, GK. 350. TALKKANDE, talking, ex. 108. Tange, one, 66.1131. See Price's Note on Warton, 11. p. 496. GLOSSARY. Tanz, to take, ac. 203. Tas, Ta, Tan, pr. t. 913, 977, 1920, 2305. Ta, Tas, imp. 413, 1390, 1811. Tan, Tang, p. p. 490, 1210, 2488. &6. 910. c. 173. Tape, Tapps, stroke, rap, ex. 406, 2357. TaPit, carpet, 6x, 568; table? 884. TaPITES, TAPYTEZ, pl. tapestry, 77, 858. Tars, is stated by Du Cange to mean Tharsia, a country adjoining to Cathay, but not to be confounded with Tartary. See his Glossary, v. Tartarinus. In ex. 77, 858, it is named as the place where tapestries were manufactured, and in 571 a rich silk must be understood. The phrase is met with in Chaucer, and in the alliterative Morte Arthure, f. 87. Taszs, clasp, fibula, aa. xxviii. 4. MS. D, reads Tusses, in the plural, which Jamieson erroneously interprets girdles. TarueE, pr. t. takest, Gx. 2357. TatTuis, fragments, G6. 913. Taveure, p. ¢. gave, Aa. xlvii. 7. Tau3t, p. p. behaved, mannered, Gc. 328. TaysED, p. p. driven, harassed, ex. 1169. Tarr, fair, plump? ex. 1377. See MS. Cott. Nero A. x. f. 69. Tazr, TazrTs, p. t. taught, Gx. 1485, 2379. TeccHELES, blameless, Gx. 917. Tzecn, disposition, quality, ex. Tzcnxs, pl. 2436. TzpDpEr-sTAKES, stakes driven into the ground to which horses or cattle are tethered, c. 185. Still used in the North. Tz1r, Ter, TERE, tedious, irksome, AA, x. 4. 66. 213, 898, 1341. See Tor. TEIRFULL, tedious, fatiguing, Ge. 33, 42, 760. TzLDE, mansion, habitation, ex. 1775. Teves, pl. 11. Teper, p. ¢. set up, GK. 1648. TELDED, TELDEDE, p. p. set up, built, 795, 884 ; covered, AA. XXx. 9. Temes, stories, themes? Gs. 1541. Tzmvr, p. t. emptied, 66. 756. TEND, tithe, tenth, ec. 760. TENE, n. sorrow, mischief, &K. 22. AA. xxii. 2488. 9; trouble, ex. 1008; anger, aa. xl. 5, xlvii. 7. TENE, adj. difficult of passage, perilous, fatiguing, ex. 1707, 2075. Ge. 33. TENE, to grieve, &K. 2002. TzNnez, pr. t. troubles, matters, 547. TENED, p. t. grieved, 2501; p.p. molested, 1169. TENEFUL, grievous, AA. xlvii.7, MS. D. TENELYNG, trouble? Gx. 1514. TENT, n. intent, care, attention, ex. 624. AA. Xill. 9, MS. D. ee. 149. Tent, to pay attention, ac. 342. P. t. took care of, Gk. 1018. TENTETH, pr. ¢. contenteth, c. 129. Tevcn, Tewcu, tough, ee. 704, 1069, In the latter instance it is used in a phrase by no means unusual, meaning to make difficulties. See Tyrwhitt’s Gloss. in v. Tough. TEYND, (?) ec. 1083. Tua, the, ex. 1069. Trar, Tuay, those, es. 218, 365, 737. THAIRTILL, thereto, ee. 1296. Tran, when, ec. 1186. THANE, perhaps acc. case of the, aa. xxvi. 3. Tran, THARE, pr. t. need, Gx. 2354. aa. xiv. 1, MS. D. Tuat, used for what, ex. 1406; joined with a noun in the plural, those, 66. 339, 1153. Gc. 221, 426. Taz, though, cx. 350,438,467. See Tnoz. Tuepe, THEID, country, land, kingdom, ex. 1499. 66. 174, 345, 435. THEDER, thither, Gx. 935. Tues, to thrive, er.K. 73. TueEn, than, Gx. 24, 236, 655. Tuer, THERE, where, Gk. 353, 428, 874. THER-FORNE, therefore, GK. 1107. THERTYKE, thereto, 1110, 1369. TuEewes, THEWEZ, manners, GK. 912, 916. Tune, THyNE, thence, ea. 229, 1313. THINKKEZ, THYNK, THYNKE, THYNKES, THYNKKREZ, pr.t. seems, GK. 1111, 1241, 1481, 1793, 2109. AA. xxv. 10. Tai, these, AA. vill. 6, xxviii. 9. ee. 5715 et sepius. TENTED, Tuts, Taise, Tavyss, these, cx. 42, 114, 654, 1514, aa.lv.7. 66.1194. Tuo, perhaps a mistake for Tux, cr. 39, 1419. Tao, those, &x. 68, 466. aa. xx, 3. c. 382. Tros, then, T6. 246. c. 398. Troy, though, ex. 624. Taocar, though, Ge. 210, 501, 575. THOLED, p. t. suffered, Gx. 1859, 2419. THONKE, n. thank, cx. 1984. THONK, THONKKEZ, pl. 1031, 1380. Tuors, there, cK. 667. +Taows, then, er.x. 370. Tro3, though, &x. 69. See THa3. Tarozr, p. t. seemed, GK. 49, 803, 819, 870. Tura, THRAw, bold, ac. 60. T6. 34. See Taro. TuHRANG, battle, melee, ea. 345, 709. TaHRANG, p.t. crowded, pressed, ec. 60. Turast, p. ft. thrust, ex. 1443. Turat, p. ¢. threatened, ex. 1713; urged? 1980. THRAWEN, p.p. bound, twisted, ex. 194. THRAWEN, adj. brawny? Gk. 579. TaREPE, chiding, ex. 1859, 2397. THREPEZ, pr. t. chides, reproves, Gk. 504. THRETED, p. ¢. threatened, ex. 1725. THRICH, 7. push, rush, 6x. 1713. Turi, slave, ge. 435. THRIVAND, THRYUANDE, hearty, ex. 1980; successful, 66. 345. THRIVANDLY, THRYUANDELY, heartily, ex. 1080, 1380; prosperously, eG. 435. Turo, THROE, earnest, eager, Gk.645, 1021, 1713, 1751, 1868, 1946 ; bold, confident, 2300. er.x.470. c. 151. See Tura. THROLY, earnestly, Gk. 939. THRONGE, p.t. thrust, crowded, ex. 1021. TuroweE, time, while, ax. 1680, 2219. THROWEN, p. p. plump? ex. 1740. See THRAWEN. THRUBCHANDLER, AKC, 120, 169. TuryeEs, thrice, ek. 1936. THRYNGEZ, pr. t, crowdest, Gk, 2397. THRYNNE, three, ex, 1868. TRUBCHANDLER, (?) GLOSSARY. THRYUEN, p. p. well-favored, ex. 1740. TuHRY3T, p. t. threw, Gk. 1443; p. p. given, 1946. THULGED, p. ¢. endured, ex. 1859. THURLED, p. t. pierced, Gx. 1356. TuuR3, THUR3E, through, above, 4k. 91, 243, 645, et pass. Tavzr, p. ¢. thought, ex. 843, 848. TawaRLE, tight, hard, ex. 194, Wharlknot is still used in the same sense in Lancashire. Tawoxe, thong, &x. 194, Tuwoness, pl. 579. Tuy, therefore, Gx. 2247. TyBzs, the river Tiber in Italy, aa. xxii. 9, MS. D. The reading of the Lincoln MS. proves how far wide of the truth Jamieson was, in conjecturing the word to mean warrior. Type, to betide, ca. 1083. Typzz, pr. ¢. 1396. TYFFEN, p.¢t. array, put in order, 6x. 1129. Tieut, Tye@ure, Tyr, p. p. fastened, tied, GR. 568, 858. aa. xxviii. 4; accoutred, ac.197 ; made, built, 526; prepared, 744 ; undertaken? 898. Tir, TILLE, TYLLE, to, ex. 673, 1979. aa; xxviii. 9. G6. 1163. ec. 506. Typ, tent, mansion, ac. 356. See TeLpE. TymBER, TimBiIRE, to cause, build up, aa. xxii. 9, See Ritson’s Gloss. Metr. Rom. Inv. Tynt, p. p. lost, ee. 993. Tyeovn, type, pattern, 6x. 1540. Tir, Tirs, Tizr, Ter, Term, promptly, speedily, cx. 31, 299, 1596. aa. xiii. 9, MS. D. ee. 756. 6c. 357. c. 393, See ASTYT. TYTELET, commencement, chief, ex. 1515. TiTrLEREs, hounds, ex. 1726. Tyxt, text, ek. 1515, 1541. Ty3T, p. ¢ undertake? ex. 2483. Ti6cur. To, too, 6x. 1827. 7.60; till, aa. xxxix. 5. 66. 306, 754. To-BRAKE, p, ¢, brake in pieces, ec. 398. See GLOSSARY, To-py@ut, to occasion, cause, 7. 112. See Dyr. To-FYLCHED, p. ¢. seized, pulled down, ex. 1172. To-FLEN, to flee, ac. 210. To-HEWE, to cut in pieces, ex. 1853. ToxE, p. 2. gave, ac. 294. ToLz, weapon, ex. 413, 2260. ToLKE, man, 6x. 1775, 1811, 1966. See TuLeE, Toms, leisure, aa. xxv. 2, MS. D. To-morn, To-MoRNE, to morrow, GK. 548, 756, 1097. Tone, p. p. betaken, committed, ex. 2159. ToppyneG, mane? 6x, 191. Tor, Tore, tedious, difficult, ex. 165, 719. aa. xv. 8, See TzIR. To-RACED, p. p. run down, GK. 1168. Torer, p. p. turreted, ex. 960. TorFEIR, hardship, aa. 876. ToRNAYEEZ, pr.t. turns, wheels, ex. 1767. ToRNAYLE, task? ex. 1540. Perhaps we should read Torvayrug, labor, from Isl. torvelldr. Tornris, towers, 66.42 ; high rocks, 42. In this last sense it is still used in the North, ~ but Jamieson blunders at it, more suo. Tortors, turtles, cx. 612. To-sTIFFILIT, p. p. overthrown, Gs, 625. See Brockett, v. stavelling. To-TACHCHED, p. p. fastened, tied, Gk. 579. See TacuEz. Torzs, pr. ¢. peeps, GE. 1476. To-TURNIT, p. f. turned? &6. 704. + Tow, two, T6. 35. TowcHEz, covenants? GK. 1677. TowEn, p. p. fatigued, cx. 1093. Tozr, promptly? cx. 1869.- Trace, path, business, 7. 442. TrayFo es, knots, devices, aa. xl. 3. TRAYFOLEDE, p. p. ornamented with knots, AA. xl. 3. The MS. D. reads ¢rifeled. From the Fr. treffilier, a chain-maker. TRrRAYLEZ, pr. ¢. hunt by the track or scent, ex. 1700. Traist, adj. trusty, @@. 756, 913. Tratst, adv. trustily, faithfully, ee. 292, 415, 752. TRA1ST, p. ¢. pledge faith, 66.1122. Trayst, p-p. assured, GK. 1211. TRAISTFULLY, faithfully, ee. 197. TRAISTLY, trustily, securely, ca. 704, 744. | TRAYTERES, (?) Gk. 1700. TRAMMES, stratagems, Gx. 3. TRANES, devices, knots, aa. xl. 3, MS. D. TrANTES, pr. t. employs artifices or tricks, Gx. 1707. See Towneley Mysteries, v. Trant, which is left unexplained in the Glossary. Tras, TRass, track of game, aa. v. LL, xlvil. 12, MS. D. Trasep, Trasit, p. p. twined, ex. 1739; confounded? Ga. 675. TRAVAYL, fatigue, labor, ex. 2241. VALIS, pl. GG. 898. TRAUAYLED, TRAUALIT, TRAUELDE, 7p. p. travelled, ex. 1093; fatigued, aa. li. 6. GG. 34, , TRAUNT, trick, &x. 1700. See TRANTES. TRAUTHE,TRAWETH,TRAWTHE, troth, faith, fidelity, Gx. 403, 626, 1050, 1545, 1638. Traws, to believe, cx. 70, 94. TRAWwE, pr. t. 1396. Traws, imp. trust, 2112. See TRows. TREJETED, p. p. marked, adorned, ex. 960. TRENTALLES, service of thirty masses, aa. xvii. 10. Tressour, head-dress, ex. 1739. Trest, firmly, trustily, ec. 526. TRESTES, TRESTEZ, trestles, supports of a table, ck. 884, 1648. TRETE, row, array, AA. xxviii. 3. TRETID, p. t. entreated, ae. 1066. Trzvx, truce, 6&6. 572. TrEw, truce, 66. 1122. TREWLOUVES, TREWLUFFES, TRULOFEZ, true-love knots, ex. 612. Aa. xxviii. 3, x1. 3. TricuERis, treachery, GK. 4. TRYED, p. p. fine, costly, good, Gx. 77, 219. TRIFELED, see TRAYFOLEDE, Triste, appointed station in hunting, aa. Tra- 3H iti. 11, Tristis, pl. AA. iii. 8,'9. See Malory’s Morte d’ Arthur, vol. ii. p. 355. TrysteR, station in hunting, ex. 1712. TRISTORS, TRISTRES, TRYSTERES, pl. GK. 1146,1170. aa. iii. 8, 9, MS. D. TrystyLy, faithfully, ex. 2348. +Tryve for THRYUE, Gc. 315. TrocHET, (?) aterm of architecture, ax. 795. TROFELYTE, p. p. ornamented with knots, aa. xxviii. 3, See TRAYFOLEDE. Trows, to believe, ex. 2238. TRows, pr.t. 813. TROWE, imp. ec. 129. See TRAWE. True, (?) Gk. 1210. TruMPES, TRUMPEZ, trumpets, ex. 116, 1016. TrussEN, pr. t. pack up, ek. 1129. TrweE, true, ck. 1091, 1514, 1845. TRWLUF, TRWELUF, true love, Gk. 1527, 1540. Tuexit, p. p. toiled, fatigued, aa. 34. Tue, (?) ax. 568. See the next word. Tuxy, seems to be equivalent, ex. 858, to Toulouse, 77 ; which place seems then to have been famed for its tapestries. Tux, man, knight, ex. 3, 638, 2133. ToLxzs, pl.41. See ToLks. “Turatis, turrets, 66. 42. +Turnyce for TURNYNGE, tournaying, AA. xl. 5. Turssit, p. t. trussed, packed, ee. 224. Tuscuez, tusks, ¢K. 1573, 1579. TwryNE, TWYNNE, two, twain, ex. 425, 962, 1339. Twves, twice, Gk. 1522. Twyn, TWYNNE, to sever, part, GK, 2512, G6. 1240. TwYNNEN, p. p. twined, Gx. 191. YU, V. Ven, VeuE, each, 6x. 101, 131, 628, 995. Ver a, each, cx. 742, 997, 1262. Venon, Vcnong, each one, GE, 98, 657, 1113. +Uuen, when, ec. 439, 460. GLOSSARY. +Unzs, Unsere, where, 6c. 429, 509. + Uny, why, ec. 429. VBE, around, about, GE. 2034. VMBE-CLIPPED, VMBE-CLYPPED, Þ. f. encircled, embraced, ax. 616. AA. x. 2, MS. D. VMBE-FOLDES, pr. ¢. encircles, falls about, Gk. 181. VMBE-KESTEN, p. &. 1434, VMBE-LAPPEZ, pr. t. enfolds, ex. 628. UMBE-TE3E, p. ft. inclosed, Gx. 770. VMBE-TORNE, about, around? ex. 184. VMBE-WEVED, P. t. inclosed, Gk. 581. VMBYCLEDE, p. p. surrounded, aa. x. 2. VMSTRODE, p. f. bestrode, er.K. 81. VMWYLLES, want of will, refusal, aa. xxxiii. 8, MS. D. Perhaps agayne in this line is an error for at. See VN-THANKES. VNABASIT, p. p. undaunted, ca. 496. VN-BENE, rugged, impassable, ex. 710. See BENE. VNBLYTHE, mournful, ex. 746. VNCELY, mischievous, ex. 1562. VN-CLERE, cloudy, dark, AA. x. 2. VNcovurn, strange, marvellous, Gk. 93, 1808. VNDER, VNDRE, VNDRONE, VNDRONNE, VNDURE-NONE, nine o’clock in the forenoon, AA. vi. 7, xvii. 7. ec. 119. VN-DY3T, p. p. undressed, @c. 453. Vunpo, to cut up game; a hunting term, GK. 1327. VNETHE, VNNETH, VNNETHES, scarcely, GK. 134. aA.li.7. cr.K.467. VNFANE, adj. sorrowful, 66. 795. VN-FAYNE, adv. unwillingly, aa. vii. 1. VNFILD, p. p. not blown? eG. 352. VNFRENDE, enemy, GG. 1239. VNnrae, misfortune, Gk. 438, 2511. VNHARDELED, p. fe. dispersed, GK. 1697. From the Fr. hardelle, troupe. See the Maister of the Game, f. 100Þ, MS, Cott. Vesp. B. xii. VNHENDELY, uncourteously, AA. xv. 5. 589, 1830, surrounded, GK. GLOSSARY. VNiace, to cut up; a hunting term, ax. 1606. VNLaiss1s, pr. ¢. unfasten, Gs. 369. VNLA1s$T, p. p. unclothed, 294. VN-LAMYT, p. p. uninjured, ea. 442, VNLELE, disloyal, eg. 1107. VNLEUTE, disloyalty, ex. 2499. VN-LOUKED, p.¢. unlocked, ex. 1201, VNLUuUssuM, uncourteous, 6G. 95. VN-METE, immense, GK. 208. VNquaRrT, uneasiness, ca. 675. It is applied to horses, therefore can scarcely be interpreted sadness, with Jamieson. VwNRYDE, cruel, severe, GG. 630. VN-RYDELY, ruggedly, ex. 1432. VwruseE, trouble, disquiet, ec. 499. VNSAUGHT, p. p. troubled, at strife, ec. 456. VN-SLAYN, p. p. not slain, ex. 1858. VN-SLY3E, careless, GK. 1209. VNSOUND, n. trouble, sorrow, ee. 590. Vwsounp, adj. sorrowful, 66. 638. VNSOUNDYLY, mischievously? ex. 1438. See MS. Cott. Nero A. x. f. 59>, VN-SPARELY, unsparingly, gk. 979. VNSPURD, Þ. p. unasked, cx. 918. VNSTONAIT, p. p. not confounded, ae. 642. VN-THANEES, displeasure, adverse of will, AA. Xxxiii. 8, VN-THRYUANDE, uncourteous, Gk. 1499. VNTILLE, unto, AA. liv. 13. VNTY3TEL, merrily? ex.1114. VN-TRAWTHE, unfaithfulness, ek. 2383. VP-BRAYDE, p. p. drawn up, Gt. 781. Vpon, at, ex. 9, 301, 1934. Vrysoun, ex. 608. Since I wrote the note on this term, p. 317, I have met with two original documents, which confirm my conjecture as to the correctness of the term hourson, and its signification. The first is a receipt from Guillaume de Leiry, embroiderer and armourer, for forty-five frans d’or, paid by Charles of Navarre, “pour la fagon d'une cote d’armes, et un hourson tout de velinau vermeil et asur, qu’ila fait de broderie pour le dit seignur, et & ses armes,” dated 8 Oct. 1378; and the second is a.warrant from Louis, duke of Orleans, to pay to Colin Pilleur, armourer, the sum of twenty frans d'or, for “un camail d'acier qu'il a baille et délivré pour notre bassinet, et pour avoir fait garnir notre dit bassinet pardedens de satin, de hourson, et autres estoffes pour garnir notre hernoiz de jambes pardedens de satin,” dated 9 July, 1392. The dates of these documents, it will be observed, tend strongly to establish the period at which the English romance was composed. +U*, with, ec. 441. VTTER, out, outward, ex. 1565. VayYLes, veils, Gx. 958. VAILYEAND, strong, &6. 243; valiant, 1286. VAILYEING, of worth, worthy, ee. 328. +VaiLL, to choose, 66.211, See Wait. Vayres, (?) ek. 1015. + VaPPINS, weapons, GG. 820. +VEDIS, weeds, armour, 66. 563, 855. + VEIR, war, 66. 549. VENERY, science of hunting, ec. 85. er.x. 495. VENGEAND, avenging, GG. 759. VENTAILE, VENTAILL, VENTALLE, moveable piece over the mouth, in front of the helmet, aa. xxxii. 5, xlv. 11. 66. 867. See AVENTAILE. VENTEROUS, venturesome, Gr.K. 38, 100. VER, man, knight, 6x. 866. VERAMENT, truly, 6Gr.K. 32, 83, 437. VERDURE, green, GK. 161. VeRNaGE, kind of white wine, AA. xxxvi. 2. See Tyrwhitt's Gloss. VERRAY, true, ac. 161, 957. VERRYS, glasses, AA.XXXVI. 2. VESIAND, viewing, GG. 243. VEWTERS, men who tracked the deer by the Fewte or odor, cx. 1146. Uracs, journey, expedition, ex. 535. +Vieut, brave, ee. 325. VyLany, VYLANYE, fault, ox. 345, 634. Vist, p. t. saw, 66. 494. Vorps, to quit, cx. 346. Voypnz, pr. ¢. casts, 1342. VOYDED, p. z. got rid of, 1518; p. p. void, free, 634. 3nu2 W. Wa, Waa, n. mischief, sorrow, AA. v. 4. ag. 58, Wa, adj. sorrowful, ee. 1185. Wank, to pass, penetrate, ca. 568. Wace, surety? Gx. 533. WAYEMETTEDE, p. t. lamented, AA, ix. 3. See WaymenT. Warr, to wave, be agitated, ec. 440. Wayseg, weak, GK. 282. Wait, choice, ee. 982. Wait, Wats, to seek, Gk. 398; choose or possess, 1238. aa. xxvii. 3. Ge. 1096; select, 66. 361, 784. Wait, p.t. chose, 7,549. WaLED, Waltit, p. p. chosen, GK. 1276. ee. 587. Walt., abundance? eG. 223, 1339. See Wate. WAYMENT, p. ¢. lamented, aa.ix.3, MS. D. Jamieson erroneously takes the word for a noun. See Roquefort, v. Weimentaunts, Waymynces, lamentations, aa. vii. 9, MS. D. +Wayne for VAYNE, ac. 128. Waynep, p. ¢. and p. p. sent? ex. 264, 984, 1032, 2456, 2459. See other instances of this word in MS. Cott. Nero A. x. ff. 79>, 80>, 89>, Waynes, pr. ¢t. strikes, AA. xlii. 2, xlvili. 3. Waynez, pr. t. raises, Gk. 1743. WayNED, p.t. raised, AA. xxxii. 5, MS. D. Waytez, Wayrttis, pr. ¢. watches, looks, Gk. 1186, 2289. aa.xlviii.3. WarrzeD, Þ. t. looked, ex. 2163. WaytuH, WATHE, game, venison, Gk. 1381, hunting, aa. xxxiv. 5. WayuEp, p. t. stroked, moved, ex. 306. Wake, p. ¢. kept awake, sat up at night, GK. 1094. Wakkgest, weakest, ax. 354. Wakxnep, p. 7. awakened, ex. 119; lighted, 1650. Wa tp, ». plain, GK. 587. Wa xp, to wield, ea. 7 ; enjoy, possess, 450. Watt, p. t. 6x. 231, 485. GLOSSARY. Wate, WALLE, adj. choice, good, excellent, ax. 1010, 1403, 1712, 1759. WALKEZ, pr. t. spreads, Gx. 1521. WALLANDE, boiling, fervent, ex. 1762. WaLovus, valour, ex. 1518. Watt, p. ¢. threw, cast, Gx. 1336. WALTERED, p. f, rolled, ex. 684, See WELTERAND. Wan, p. t. came, GK. 2231 ; won, gained, ec. 70. Wanve, bough, tree? 6x. 1161. WANDRETH, sorrow, AA. xvii. 8. GG. 700, 1199. Wane, n. mansion, habitation, hall, aa. xiii. 3, xxv. 4. 66. 211, 237, 494, 781, 1339. Wane, adj. wanting, deficient, ex. 493. Wanrr, p. ¢. diminished, ee. 1208. Want, pr. t. fail, 6r.x. 203. Wap, blow, ex. 2249. Wappen, p. ¢. flew with violence, as an arrow, GK. 1161; rushed, as the wind, 2004. Waeeir, p.p. thrown open quickly, G6. 127., War! exclamation of the hunters, ex. 1158. Mr. Guest explains it, erroneously, as I judge, by fear, Hist. E. R. ii. 169. See the Towneley Mysteries, pp. 36, 41. Thus also in the Maister of the Game, in the instructions for hunting the hare, the horsemen are directed ** for to kepe that none hownde folowe to sheepe ne to other beestis, and if thei do, to ascrie hem sore, and bilaisshe hem wel, seying lowde, Ware! Ware! ha, ha! Ware!” MS. Cott. Vesp. B. xii. f. 97>. War, worse, 66, 1033. War, Wars, aware, Gk. 764, 1586 ; wary, ac. 603. WARE, to use, employ, ex. 402, 1235. WaRET, p.p. acted, 2344. Wary, Warry, to curse, AA. xxxiii. 7. MS. D. ea. 1082. Warten, p. ?. aa. ix. 3, MS. D. Warys, to protect, defend, Ge. 1006. WARYST, p.p. GK. 1094. See WERE. GLOSSARY. War y, warily, ex. 1186, 1900. WakLIEst, strongest, Ge. 493. misunderstands the word. WARLOKER, more warily, ex. 677. Warns, to forbid, prevent, aa. 253. ©. 93. See WERNE. Warp, to cast, Gk. 2253, Warp, p. &. cast, uttered, GK. 224, 1423, 2025. Warrue, water-ford, ek. 715. See Grose’s Glossary, in v. Wascn, to consume? 6x. 2401. Wast, waist, GK. 144. Waste, wilderness, GK. 2098. WASTELL, fine bread, ec. 223. Warns, injury, danger, ex. 2355. WaruELy, severely, mortally, aa. xxiv. 4, liv. 3. Pinkerton misprints the word woyeley (for wothely) which gives occasion to Jamieson to trifle as usual. War3, was, GK. passim. Used for had, as in German, 1413. WAVUNDEN, p. p. wound, bound, ex. 215. Wax, p. 7. waxed, aa. xliii. 12. WE! Ah! ex. 2185. WE-Loo, alas! ex. 2208. WebpE, armour, clothing, part of the dress, GE. 831, 1310, 2358. WzeDpzs, WEDEz, Wepis, Wepys, pl. armour, garments, 151, 271, 861. AA. 1. 9, ii. 9. Ge. 759; foliage of the groves, Gx. 508. Weps, adj. mad, aa. xliii. 12. Wezprss, pl. bad weather, aa. xxvi. 3. Cf. Towneley Myst. p. 98. Wess, knights, aa. liv. 3, MS. D. See Wy. WEILD, WELDE, WELDEN, to possess, enjoy, 6K. 835, 837, 1064. AA. xxvii. 3, xxxiii, 8; rule, 66. 1188 ; sustain, 7. 163. WEILDIS, WELDEZ, pr. f. possesses, GK. 1528, 2454. ec. 781; rules, 174. WELD, pr. 2. rule, 151. WzrrLD, WEILDIT, P. f. possessed, had, ec. 37,941. WEIR, doubt, ec. 469, 569. Weir, Were, war, hostility, combat, ex. 271; 1628. AA. xxxix. 8. aa. 57, 162, 1137, 1198, 1260. Jamieson 42] WELAWYLLE, exceeding wild, rugged, dangerous, Gk. 2084. WELA WYNNE, well joyous, @k. 518. The adv. welawynnely occurs in the same MS. Nero A. x. f. 68Þ. WELE, wealth, riches, ex. 7, 60, 1270, 1394. ae. 73; joy, Gx. 485, 1371, 1767, 2490; good fortune, 997, 2134. WELKYN, air, sky, GK. 525, 1696. WELLE, grassy plain, sward, AA. iii. 2. WELLE, to boil, aa. xxv. 4. WELLING, boiling, T6. 239. + WELLony, villainy, ec. 194. WEeLNE3, WELNE3E, almost, Gk. 7, 867. WELTERAND, rolling, ea. 469. WELTERES, pr. ¢. rolls, ee. 290. See WaLTERED. WEMELES, unhurt, 66. 99. Jamieson is mistaken in rendering it blameless. Wen, Wenz, doubt, ee. 35, 98, 282. Wen», WENDE, to go, Gk. 559, 1028, 1053. aa. 57, 99. ec. 515. c.374. WeENDIS, pr. t. 66. 287. Wenvis, imp. 114. WENDE, p. t. ax. 900, 1161. ©, 332. Went, WENTE, p. p. gone, GK. 1712. AA. 1. 9, xxxiv. 5, MS. D. ea. 1132. Wenpez, pr. t. turns, GK. 2152. WEns, pr. ft. ween, think, ex. 270, 1226. Wenvys, AA. xliv. 2, WznD, WENnDE, Went, p. t. 6x. 669, 1711. aa.l.2. cs. 1260. WENER, fairer, 6x. 945. See the Gloss. to Molbech's edit. of the old Danish translation of the first eight books of the Old Testament, 8vo. 1828, v. Wen. WENGED, p. ¢. avenged, ax. 1518, WEPAND, weeping, GG. 973. Wer, worse, G6. 1015, See War. WERBELANDE, whistling? ex. 2004. WERD, fate, ee. 1082. See Wyrpe. WERDEZ, pr. f. are, GK. 1542, Wexrs, had, cx. 244. Were, p.t. wore, Gk. 1928. Were, to defend, guard, ex. 2015, 2041. ae. 58, 1188. WERE, to make war, ae. 287. Wenry, pr. t, worry, AA. V. 4. Wenrvir, p. ¢. cursed, AA. ix. 3, See Wary. Wenn, to forbid, ec. 138, 477. Werrnes, pr. t. denies, GK. 1824. WERNED, p. p. 1494. See Warne. WEnRNYNGE, denial, ex. 2253. Were, war, GK.16. WERREZ, pl. 720. WERRYOURIS, warriors, Gc. 7. WEsaunp, wind-pipe, ex. 1336. WESCHE, p. t. washed, GK. 887. Wert, p.t. pierced? ae. 759. WETE, adj. (?) Aa, vii. 9. Were, WETENE, WETTE, to know, wit, AA. viii. 11, xvi. 2, xix. 3, MS. D. ec. 379. See Wierte, Wir. WETERLY, eagerly? fiercely? ex. 1706. Werine, knowledge, aa. xix. 4, MS. D. WEwCcH, woe, mischief, ea. 700. Weve, to give, 6K, 1975. WzeveD, p.t. 2359. Wex, p. ¢. waxed, GK. 319. See Wax. WE3ED, p. t. carried, GK. 1403. We3tTHt, wight, ec. 375. WHARRED, p. f. made a whirring noise, cx. 2203. Wrar, how? ex. 1163, 2203. WHAT so, whatsoever, GK. 384, 1550. WHEDER WARDE, whitherward, GK. 1053. WHENE, queen, GK. 74, 2492. WHETHEN, WHYTHENE, whence, GK. 871. AA. XXviii. 12. In the second instance the scribe of the MS. D. has incorrectly written whelene, on which Jamieson wastes a weak conjecture. WueETHER, either of two, Gx. 203. Wuiaat, active, 6c. 563. See Wieut. WHYRLANDE, rushing, Gk. 2222. WaryssyYnes, cushions, ex. 877. Wuos, whoso, ec. 256, 268. Wy, Wreue, Wy3, Wy3z, man, knight, ex. 131, 249, 384, 581, 1487. AA. xxix. 1, Xxxii. 2, 66. 57,287, Applied to God, GE. 2441. Wres, Wvis, Wvy3Es, Wy3Ez, pl. Gk. 1403, 1167. AA. xxvii9. 66.151. Wircn, what, cx. 918. Wicut, brave, active, 66, 1248. GLOSSARY. WIcHTELY, actively, 66, 579. Wire, to know, AA. xix, 3, 12. See Werz, Wir. Wrienr, Wicars, Wranr, Wrenrs, Wrezr, brave, strong, active, aa. xliv. 1, 1. 2, lii, 11. ae. 198, 656. ec. 53, 3. 287. TG. 20. c.432, See Wr. WIGHTELYE, WIGHTILYE, WYGHTELYE, actively, 3. 144, 146. er.x. 200. Wvreurenss, bravery, courage, ad. xxi. 4. Wreutis, gen.c. person’s, aa. ii. 9. Wrksis, corners of the mouth, ex. 1572. Wy pg, used substantively for beasts of the chace in general, ek. 1150, 2003; and in the singular number, 1167, 1586, 1900, the words deer, boar, fox, being respectively understood. Wyte, Wy ty, wily, ex. 1728. stantively, 1905. WIiLELE, warily, aa. xlv. 3. WILFULLY, willingly, aa. xlix. 1. WrLvyDs, wild, amorous, cx. 2367. WyYLNYNG, will, ex. 1546. Witsome, Wy sum, pleasant, fair, 6x. 689. Gc. 532, Wrrr, p. p. escaped, Gx. 1711, WIN away, to depart from, ec. 1046. Wrnp, wind, ce.770. Jamieson sadly misinterprets this line, owing to Pinkerton having printed and for ad, which latter in the edit. 1508 is a misprint for as. Wywpez, pr. ¢. returns, @k. 530. Wynne, n. joy, Gk. 15, 1765, 2420, MS. D. ec. 448. Wvrwne, adj. goodly, 6x. 1032, 2430, 2456. Wrwneg, to come, arrive at, ex. 402, 1537, 2215. WyNNEz, pr. ¢. proceeds, goes, 1569, 2044. Wrnne-tycg, cheerful, gx. 980. WyNT-HOLE, wind-hole ? ex. 1336, WryyPep, p.t. struck, ex. 2249. See Wap. Wrnpk, fate, ¢x.1752,2134,2418. WyRDEs, pl.1968. See Wan. WIRKAND, making, ee. 701. Wrsss, to teach, direct, 6x. 549. Wise, Wrsss, pr.t. 739. 66. 820, 1033. Used sub- GLOSSARY. WrsTE, WYSTEN, p. t. knew, Gk. 461, 1087, 1435. WrsrTy, (?) ex. 2189, Wirt, with, ex. 113. 1435. Wir, (?) as. 1137. Wir, Wer, to know, learn, ox. 131, 255, 1508, Wrrez, pr. t. looks on, &x. 2050. Wirz, Wrrn, by, es. 664, 1153, 1229, 2416. WITH THI, on condition that, aa. li. 10. Wrr1s, pr. t. goes, departs, AA. xvii. 7. WrTLEs, WITLESE, deprived of reason, ea. 573, 972, 1014. WrrTTERLY, certainly, ec. 312. Wr3crest, (?) ek. 1591, Wut, n. wight, person, GK. Wat, Wyzr, Wy3THt, brisk, active, brave, GK.119,1762. &c.15, 24,260. SeeWianr. Wr3resr, bravest, Gk. 261, Wv3Tty, quickly, ex. 688. WrLons, fair, beautiful, ex. 515, 581, 1977, 1988, 2432. WrLoNKEsT, fairest, &K. 2025. AA, i, 9, xxvii. 9, liv. 7, MS. D. ._ Jamieson explains it falsely by gaudily dressed and rich. WNMANGLIT, p. p. unmangled, ec. 720. Wop, Wopz, Wovup, mad with anger, ex. 2289. aa. xlii. 2. Ge. 573, 972, 1014. Wop-wrairn, 770. Wop, p. t. went, ax. 787. Wop-cRAFTEZ, pl. skill in the arts of the chace, Gx. 1605. Wop-tynp, foliage of the wood, forest, ea. 123. Wopwos, pl. wild men, monsters, ex. 721. Works, p. t. watched, sate up at night, ex. 1025. WorLDs, tohave powerover, aa.lii.3. MS.D. reads AT WOLDE, in which case it is a substantive. +WoLED, would, ex. 1508. WomsE, belly, ex. 144. Won, Wonz, power or will, ex. 1238. 66. 37. Wrr inne, within, Won, Wonks, dwelling, mansion, chamber, GK. 257, 736, 906, 2490, Wonzz, Wonus, pl. 685, 1051, 1386, 2400. ac. 520, 532. Often used for the singular. Won, Wong, to dwell, ex. 257, 814. WoNEzZ, WonYEs, pr. ¢. 399, 2098. Wonpe, Wons, p. ¢. 50, 701, 721. Wonyp, p.p. 2114. Wonvs, to avoid, shrink back, ex. 563. WonpE, pr. t. avoid, omit, 488. Wownper, n. marvel? ex. 16. WonvDztr, WonDere, WonDIr, Wrois, Wounver, WounvDIR, WunDIR, adv. wondrous, Gk. 2200. aa. 35, 86, 353, 930, 1002, 1104. ac. 34. Thesecond of these instances is printed wound, by mistake, in the edit. of 1508: on which see Jamieson’s nuge. WonverLy, Wonpir.y, wondrously, 6K. 787, 1025. aa. 162. + Wong, one, 6c. 89, 297. Wong, estimation? ex.1269; plenty, 5.495. Wonyne, Wonnrnce, dwelling, aa. xxv.4. WonNEN, p.t. conducted, brought, ex. 831. Wonen, WoNNEN, p. p. arrived, come, Gx. 461, 1365; brought, 2091. Wont, use, custom, 6x. 17; lack, want, 131. Wont, Wontez, pr. t. fail, fails, ex. 987, 1062. Wore, fame, reputation, ex. 1521. Wor pe, Nature, ex. 530. Wormez, dragons, serpents, ex. 720. Wore, worse, Gk. 1588, 1591. Wort, herb, ex. 518. Wonrtz, to be, happen, 6x. 238, 1202, 1214, 1302. 66.1096. WortHez, Worruis, pr.t.is, becomes, will or shall be, ex. 2035, 1106, 1387. ae. 332, 833, 1239. Wort, WoRTHE, subj. be, 6x.2127,2374. WorTHED, WoURTHIT, p.t. was, became, 485. ec. 973, 1054 ; would be, ex. 2096. WoRTHED, p. p. become, 678. WorrTas, worthy, ex. 559, Worrny is used substantively, 1276, 1508. WorTHELY, WorTHILY, WoRTHILYCH, WosrzELY, adj, worthy, honorable, ex. 343, AA. xxviii, 10, xxxv. 11, MS. D., Xxxviii. 6, xlviii. 3. Worray, adv. worthily, cx. 1477. Worruy ty, honorably, properly, &x.72,144. WoRTHILIESTE, worthiest, aa. xxix. 1. Wor, WosTs, pr. t. know, knowest, ex. 24. AA. XX. 1. Worue, harm, injury, mischief, ex. 222, 488, 1576. Woven, Wuen, harm, mischief, 6&6. 1067, 1199. See Wo3z. WovRDIs, pr. ¢. becomes, will become, ea. 822. See WorTH. Wout, countenance, 66. 1278. Wowcue sar, pr. ¢. vouchsafe, 6x. 1391. WowEs, walls, ex. 1180. Woxes, pr. t. grows, waxes, GE.518. Wox, p.t. waxed, GG. 795, 1185. See Wax, WEx. Wo3z, wrong, harm, ex. 1550. Wozs, wall, 6x. 858. Wo3kz, pl. 1650. WRaIGHLY, evilly, 66. 162. Jamieson interprets it strangely or awkwardly. Warairn, wrath, 66. 973. Waraaitu Ly, wrathly, 66. 298, 563, 1014. Cf. RairHLy. Wraxe, destruction, mischief, &x. 16. aa. xvii. 8. Waast, adj. loud, stern, ex. 1423. Wrasrt, (?) ex. 1663. See Towneley Mysteries, p. 178. Wrast, p. p. disposed, ex. 1482. WRATHED, p.p. ensnared? ex. 2420. WREEE, revenge, 7.424. WRE3ANDE, reviling, GK. 1706. See Grose, v. Wree. Wricutts, carpenters, 66. 469. Wro, obscure corner, GK. 2222. Wrortn, WROTHE, angry, violent, ex. 70, 319, 525, 1706. Wrors, p. ¢. moved round, ex. 1200. WRroTHELY, angrily, ex. 2289. WrortHELOKER, more angrily, ex. 2344. + Wroveut for Raveut, reached, ako. 202. Wro3t, Wro3TEN, p.t. occasioned, Gk.3, 22, WRUCKED, Pe p. thrown up, akc. 187. GLOSSARY. WRUSLED, p. p. clad, folded? 6x. 2191. Wren, see Woven, WunDIR, see WONDER. Y. Yard, staff, arc. 246. YaRs, adj. ready, T6. 101. ©. 114. YaRE, 3ARE, adv, quickly, soon, Gx. 2410. er.x.318 ; ere, previously, T6. 126, 137. YARNYNG, desire, Ge. 426. Yertys, gifts, ec. 643. YEID, p.t. went, eG. 228, 1116. YELDE, p. ¢. requite, ec. 527, 529. Yen, see EGHNE. Yu1r, yet, ec. 95. YHvuDE, YUDE, p. ft. went, ea. 304, 577. Ywop, India, er.x. 281. Yops, p.t. went, 5.87. Te. 77. YOoLDIN, p. p. yielded, ee. 1126. YRNE, iron, Gk. 2267. Yrnes, harness, armour, Gk. 729. YvuDe, see YHUDE. Y3E, eye, GK. 198. ac. 324. 82, 304, 684. Y3EN, pl. GE. 3. 3AYNED, p.p. hallooed, 6x, 1724. +3AMEDE, apparentlyan errorfor 3AMEREDE, p.t. cried, AA. vii. 9. 3AMERS, pr. t. cries, AA. vii. 9, MS. D. 3AMYRLY, lamentably, Aa. vii. 8. 3ARANDE, 3ARRANDE, loud, snarling, ex. 1595, 1724. 3ARE, see YARE. 3JAREKEZ, pr.t. makes ready, disposes, ex. 2410. 3ARKED, p. p. made ready, 820. 3AULAND, yelling, aa. vii. 8, MS. D. 3JAULE, 3AULES, pr. ?. howl, yells, ex. 1453. AA. Vii. 9, MS. D. 3E, yea, GK.813, 1091, 1497; still, ever, 1729. 3EDE, 3EDEN, p.?. went, GK. 817, 1122, 1400, 1684. 3EDERLY, promptly, soon, Gk. 453, 1215, 1485, 2325. GLOSSARY. 3EFE, 3EYFE, if, ac. 198, 388. 3ELDE, 3ELDEZ, pr. ¢. yield, requite, yields, pays, Gk. 498, 1038, 1215, 1263. 3ELDE, 3ELDEN, p. ft. yielded, gave, 67, 1595, 1981. 3ELLE, pr. é. yell, ak. 1453. 3ELPYNG, pomp, ostentation, ex. 492. 3EP, 3EPE, active, alert, ex. 60, 105, 284, 1510; fair? 951, 3EPLY, promptly, ex. 1981, 2244. 3ER, year, GK. 60, ef alib. 3ERN, 3ERNE, quickly, GK. 498; earnestly, eagerly, 1478, 1526. aa. xlviii. 3. 3ERNES, 3IRNEZ, pr. f. passes? GK. 498, 529. 3ET, 3ETTE, yet, Gx. 776, 1122. 3E3E, pr. t. ask, GK. 1215. 3E3ED, p.t. asked, 67. 31F, if, ex. 1494, 1496. 3IRNEZ, see 3ERNES. 30D, p.t. went, Gx. 1146. 30L, Christmas, ax. 284, 500. 30LDEN, p.t. yielded, ex. 453, 820. See 3ELDE. 30LLANDE, howling, yelling, aa. vii. 8. 30138, yellow, tawny, Gx. 951. 30MERAND, moaning, whining, aa. vii. 8, MS. D. 30MERLY, lamentably, piteously, 6x. 1453. 30NGE, younger One, GK. 951. 30NGE-3ER, youth, ex. 492. 30NKE, young person, GE, 1526. 30rE, long time, ex. 2114. +30wE, your, Gk. 1092. CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS. . 12, 1. 251, for for-rad read for rad. . 12, 1. 256, insert a comma after Nay. « 15, 1. 343, dele the comma after worpilych, and insert it after ze. « 15, 1. 353, for the semicolon substitute a Full stop, and 1.357, for the comma place a semicolon. - 17, 1. 395, for p® read p*. 17, 1. 417, insert a comma at the end of the line, and in the next line after hede. . 21, 1. 535, for amo® read anio?. 22, 1. 561, for the comma place a full stop. 22, 1. 563, a note of interrogation would be better after wonde. 23, 1. 591. for ou? (sie in MS.) read oup?®- 27, 1. 700, insert a comma after Holy-hede, and dele it after bonk. 29, 1. 763, insert commas after self and segge. 32, I. 850, for chefly read chefly. 33, 1. 859, insert commas after fete and flet. 33, 1. 862, for hem in the MS. perhaps we should read hym. . 34, 1. 882, for be-sete read he fete. . 34, 1. 893, for aysawes read ay sawes, and for slezez (sie MS.) read sleze. . 38, 1. 1018, for pauéture read pauéture. . 44, 1. 1174, dele the comma after abloy. next line a comma instead of the semicolon, after dedez, and in the third a semicolon for the comma, after nysen. ia-a- Ma Moo] DD 428 CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS. of the press for grece. Cf. I. 425, 2313. I am indebted for this suggestion to the Rev. R. Garnett. no3t. the Round Table the name of Hector des Mares, (as printed in Malory,) the natural son of king Ban, is always written Hestor. . 82, 1. 2220, for a wharf read a-wharf. 84, 1. 2293, for fton read ston. 85, 1. 2308, for refcowe read rescowe. 85, 1. 2321, dele the comma after worlde. 86, 1. 2335, for dernely read deruely. . 86, 1. 2344, dele the comma after haf. 88, 1. 2392, for of read of. . 89, 1. 2420, substitute a semicolon for the comma after wyles. . 90, Il. 2446, 2452, perhaps Morgne should be printed Morgue, as in the French romances. from this place, and the stanzas are therefore always referred to in the Glossary. The total number of lines in the poem is 716. noon on wwwm CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS. 429 \ . 115, xxxiii. 1, 2, transpose the points at the conclusion of these two lines. . 123, xlviii. 1, for clenly MS. D. reads kenely. . 127, lv. 6, Yglande, sie MS. for Ynglande. . 131. This Romance is reprinted from the re-impression made at Edinburgh, 4to, 1827, but it was not observed, till too late, that most of the mere errors of the press in the old edition of 1508 were there corrected. The emendations therefore now made are such as escaped the notice of the recent editor, or were neglected by him. P. P. =" Ma Wa") . 143, 1. 300, for mynde (sie edit.) we should read myude. . 161, 1. 779, for fen speir the editor of 1827 conjectures sen ye speir, but I think my own emendation more correct. 1827. é 430 CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS. from the printed Morte d' Arthur, (vol. ii. p. 392, ed. Southey,) and, consequently, prove the poem to be later than the year 1485. The correct reading is Gromer Gromerson, or Gromorssum, as appears from vol. i. p. 231. the romance in the Lambeth MS. 305, f.'73. © A tretys of one Gyngelayne, othirwise namyd by Kyng Arthure Ly beus disconeus, that was bastard son to Sir Gaweyne.” NOTES. and end, is preserved in a MS. in Trinity College, Dublin, marked D. 4.12. It is written in a late hand of the fifteenth century, and commences towards the end of the third passus, and ends in the middle of the twelfth. It occupies forty quarto leaves. sentence. Welsh Bards, 4to, Lond. 1794, p. 108, contains a notice of this Christmas play, as performed in Oxfordshire. British Remains, 8vo, 1777, Gwalchmai ab Gwyar is said to bear “ Quarterly, ermines and ermine, a fess argent,” p. 49. Chronicle of John of Glastonbury, printed by Hearne, vol. i. p. 77, 8vo, 1726. distinguished from Carlyon. f. exciii®, edit. 1513. CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS. 431 ap. Gale, cap. 63. He is stated to have caused a consecrated cross to be made, by which he conquered the Pagans, and of which portions were preserved at Wedale in Lothian. Also in the Roman d’ Alexandre, composed by Alexandre de Paris in the twelfth century, he makes Arthur march to the extremity of the East, and erect two golden statues, which were subsequently discovered by Alexander. See De la Rue, Essais sur les Bardes, vol. i. p- 35. of Edward the Fourth. GLOSSARY. under DERNLY. N.B. The last poem in the Appendix, No. VIII. was discovered too late to be cited in the Glossary, but there are but few words of any obscurity, and most of these appear to be corrupt forms occasioned by the carelessness of the scribe, as in the case of lute, 1. 238, and scott, 1. 477. THE END. PRINTED BY RICHARD AND JOHN E. TAYLOR, RED LION COURT, FLEET STREET. = CID nee Seeec SENS Laas hese eet eet fore bt Shee gh Beir 3h - A eta 8 = EC aay. 2 eee eo SEeeenraa g te es 2 rere TREE Fes Deter ; eyed Petes ites . : , : j ints Se j reine piers ER eS owe Rr AR, 4 cee E es ke : ; dado as ie me p Ue ashe oh 2d Bis Signe 9 og. : 5 pane pes - niet ese wanes or IPED oe Basalt ot pal ee ce SH Tb