ivepside Liteniture Séries ' vwMÊ.uuuttmi*iUiiweHimtmiÊuvm*. mmmÊiÊÊÊmÊmÊifmmttrtm o = ^[>- 2 r— LO o__- Œ ^O) O — ^l>- 1 ^^s 1>- .^—^ * > ^^^^ O en _ III ^ Z^^ CD J" — r>~- ^^^ ^"^ co LE MORTE ARTHUR V*«WV««««MNM4MMMMNIiinMNNHW««a««< À Houghton MîfHîn Co. îElje Hitcrs^iDe Litcrature ê>cric0 LE MORTE ARTHUR A MIDDLE ENGLISH MEÏRICxVL ROMANCE EDITED BY SAMUEL B. HEMINGWAY, Ph.D. Insiructor in English in Yale Collège .'^ (o ^y BOSTON NEW YORK CHICAGO HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY COPYRIGHT, I912, BY HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMrANY ALL RIGHTS RlibEKVED N3 INTRODUCTORY SKETCH I. THE POEM Le Morte Arthur is a fourteenth-century English metrical romance, in eight-line stanzas, dealing with the love of Lancelot and Guinevere, the wars resulting therefrom, Arthur's death after tlie great battle in the west, and the deaths of Lancelot and Guinevere. The romance is found in one manuscript only, — Harleian 2252, Brit. Mus., — and is often referred to as the Harleian Morte Arthur or the stanzaic Morte Arthur. The dialect is Midland (probably East Midland), somewhat modified by the Northern dialect of the scribe who copied 11. 1-1901, and the Southern dialect of the scribe who finished the copy. The poem has recently been ably edited by Professor J. Douglass Bruce for the Early English Text Society (Extra Séries, Lxxviii), and to his édition ail serions students of the poem should turn. The présent édition is designed for the more elementary student and for class-room use. The Notes and Glossary are therefore simpler and fuller, and are designed to meet the needs of the beginner. Tliis édition does not include detailed discussions of the varions problems connected with the poem. The results of lîruce's investigations ai-e recorded hère, and for détails the student is referred to his work. As Bruce's text is practically a reprint of the manuscript, I hâve followed it, making few emendations, and hâve not thought it wise to burden tiie pages with textual notes. Tlie chief problems connected with the poem are in regard to its source and its relation to Books XX and iv JNTRODUCTORY SKETCH XXI of Malory's Morte Darthur. The tvvo possibilities as to its relation to Malory are : (1) that our romance is the source of Malory's last two books ; (2) tliat our romance and Books xx and xxi of Malory are taken from tbe same source. Dr. Sommer, in bis monumental édition of Malory, remains undecided between thèse two possibilities, but Bruce (in Anglia, xxiii, 67 ff.) bas shown the latter to be tbe more probable. The source of thèse two versions seems to bave been a (now lost) modification of the Old French 3Iort Artu, as the last part of the tbirteenth-century prose romance, generally referred to as the " Vulgate Lancelot," is called. In the Notes I bave quoted some of the more striking parallels from botb the Jllort Artu and Malorv, but for a fuU discussion the student is referred to Bruce's article in Anglia and to his édition of the Old French Mort Artu (Halle, 1910). Although it bas been proved conclusively that Malory was not wliolly dépendent upon our poem, nevertheless the many verbal siinilarities prove almost as conclusively that be was familiar with it and often borrowed its phraseology. Le Morte Arthur is particularly well adapted to serve as an introduction to a much neglected field of English literature. Its appeal to the modem reader is far greater than that of the ordinary mediœval romance, because of botb its matter and its form. A coMiparison of this poem with its contemporary, the alliterative Mo7't Artlaire, demonstrates tbe superioiity of our poem in thèse respects. First, as regards subject-matter, the main ])lot and many of the c\nsodes of our romance bave i)roved their fitness by Hurviving and remaining ])opular in différent forms for six or seven centuries. The subject-matter of the INTRODUCTORY SKETCH \ alliterative 3fort Arthure, on the other hand, is remote and strange to us. It consists of a séries of wars and battles and adventures with unknown kings, kniglits, and giants. We hâve neither knowledge of nor associations with the chief actors ; there is no central, unifying thème ; the many épisodes are disconnected and unrelated, and the modem i-eader soon becomes frankly bewiklered and bored. But our poem is of greater interest to-day not only because the characters and incidents are more human and familiar, but because the central thème, the love of Lancelot and Guinevere, gives form and unity to the entire poem, Consciously or unconsciously the poet lias subordinated ail else to this one motive ; the poem lias a beginning, a middle, and an end ; restraiut is used in descriptions of battles and tournaments ; long digressions and circumlocutions, so dear to the mediaeval romancer, are singularly few, and there is a vigor and directness which is more characteristic of the ballad than of the romance. The poem is, of course, rough and crude in many détails, but it is full of simple and sincère émotion ; it is (coniparatively speaking) well constructed ; it bas the saving gi-aces of brevity and interest, and many of the descriptive passages — as for instance Guinevere's return to " karllyl," and the great and sombre scène on the coast of Cornwall just before Arthur's death — rival Malory's in picturesqueness and vividness. II. THE LANCELOT LEGEND ^ The popularity of the romances of Sir Lancelot in fourteenth-century Europe is attested by the two great ^ Stiulents are referred to Miss Jossie L. Wcston's The Legcnd of Lancelot du Lac (Loudoii, 1901). vi INTRODUCTORY SKETCH poets of the century, one speaking fiom Italy in tlie opening years of the century, the other froni England toward its close. In the fifth book of the Inferno, Francesca tells Dante that it was of Lancelot and of how love constrained hiin that she and lier lover were reading when their own love first blazed forth. In quite a différent tone Chancer, in the Nonne Preestes Taie (391 ff.), commenting on the taie of the cock and the fox, writes : — This storie is al-so trewe, I undertake, As is the book of Launcelot du Lake, That womraen holde in fui gret révérence. And since the days of Chaucer the taie has lost none of its popularity ; rather has it tended to usurp, in popular favor, the place held throughout the Middle Ages by the far greater and more human taie of Tristram and Iseult. Because of its widespread modem popularity we are apt to regard the taie of Lancelot and Guinevere as an essential and intégral part of the Arthurian tradition. As a matter of fact, however, it is not until after many of the Arthurian stories hâve taken definite shape, and many of Arthur's knights hâve become distinct personalities, that we corne upon the first mention of Lancelot. The earliest référence to him, in extant literature, is in the twelfth century, in Chrestien de Troyes' Erec, and hère he is merely mentioned as the third of Arthur's knights. In Chrestien's next romance, Cligés, Lancelot has a more conspicuous place, but there is no mention of his love for Guinevere. This omission shows that Chrestien was either still ignorant of the Lancelot-Guinevere story or not particularly impressed by it, for, though he ia silent on this affair, he frcquently compares Sir INTRODUCTORY SKETCH vii Cligés' love for his mistress with ïristram's for Iseult. However, in the romance that folio ws, Le Chevalier de la Cliarrette^ Chrestien présents Lancelot as the lover of Guinevere, and implies that the story is well known to his readers ; then, later, in Le Chevalier au Lion and Percevais he again ignores Lancelot entirely. It is évident from Chrestien's treatment of him that in the twelfth century Lancelot was not a very conspicuous figure in Arthurian literature, and that his connection with the Queen was but a single, unimportant détail in his life, not the central thème of Arthurian romance. But although Chrestien's références to Lancelot are the earliest that hâve survived, we hâve what are apparently fragments of earlier Lancelot legends preserved in the thirteenth-century romance of Lanzelet by Ulrich von Zatzikhoven, This romance is little more than a compilation of varions short stories about Lancelot. It is inconsistent, contradictory, and conf used to the highest degree ; many of the adventures of other heroes are ascribed to Lancelot ; sometimes he appears as the queen's lover, oftener not ; sometimes unmarried and with a single illegitimate son, at other times married to three or four différent women and with a numerous progeny. The one part of the story which is consistent, in its main outline at least, is the story of the birth and training of Lancelot. He is always Lancelot du Lac, a king's son, carried away when a baby by the fairy Lady of the Lake, and living with lier in a mysterious country in the middle of the lake, until he is old enough to ride ont and avenge her wrongs. At the âge of fifteen ho starts on his quest of adventure, and finally arrives at Arthur's court. From this point on, ail is confused and contra- viii INTRODUCTORY SKETCH dictory, but froin the very confusion we get a hint of tbe probable origin of tbe Lancelot legend. Lancelot is evidently not tbe création of any single mediœval romancer or cbrouicler, and because Cbrestieu's story of bis intrigue with Gainevere is tbe earliest extant, it by no means follows tliat Chrestien iuvented tbat stoi-y. Lancelot is ratlier the création of the people and the âge, the typical bero of folk-lore, one of those of wbom — The olde gentil Britons in hir dayes Of divers aventures maden layes Kymeyed in hir firste Briton tonge ; Wliich hiyes with hir instruments they songe, Or elles redden hem for hir plesaunce. This hypothesis explains tbe confusion in such a romance as Ulrich's. Each singer composed, independently, bis own lays of Lancelot. Those lays survived whicb took the popular ear because of their tunef ul music or the beauty of their verse. The lay whicb told of bis birth and training was evidently early and widespread, and bis appellation, Lancelot du Lac, perbaps helped this lay, whicb explains the appellation, to persist. But how can we explain Chrestien's treatment of the love story, his habit of sometimes referring to it as well known and at other times ignorins: it? In a few early Arthurian taies Guinevere had been presented as a faithless wife, and it occurred to some inventive singer to identify Lancelot as the lover. At first, ])erhaps, his lay attracted little attention ; it was but one more taie of I^ancelot, and probably had little intrinsic beauty to recommend it. Once given tins thème, however, lays dealing with the love of Lancelot for the Quecn would multiply, until perbaps in INTRODUCTORY SKETCH ix Chrestien's clays thèse lays woulJ be vvell kiiown, tliough no more popular or prouiiuent tluiu luany other taies of Lancelot. And tlien finally we must assume tliat some real poet sang of Lancelot's love, and liis lay vvas of such surpassing- beauty tliat it outshone ail the others, until soon, in men's minds, tlie one great fact about Lancelot was liis guilty love for Guinevere. And gradually in the thirteenth century, in some such way, this great love story, which in Chrestien's day was a trivial détail, became not only the main thème of the Lancelot storv, but the central fact in Arthurian romance. It was in the early years of the thirteenth century that the euormous compilation, the prose Vulgate version of the Arthurian romances, first appeared. This version did for Arthurian legend in the thirteenth century what Malory did in the fifteenth ; it is, in the words of Dr. Sommer, whose édition of this tremendous work is now being published by the Carnegie Institution, " the ultimate stage in a process of welding heterogeneous éléments into a not very harmonious whole." This great compilation is divided into six parts, of which the fourth, the book of Lancelot, is considerably longer than the other five together. The six parts are : (1) Le Grand Saint Graal ; (2) Robert de Borron's 3Ierlln ; (3) Le Livre cVArtus^ a continuation of (2), and with (2) known as L'JEstoire de Merlin; (4) Le Livre de Lancelot del Lac^ Parts t, II, and III; (5) La Quest de Saint Graal ; and (G) La Mort Arttis or Mort Artv, the source of our fourteenth-century English romance (see p. iv), in which, at last, form and new power are given to the story of Lancelot. LE MORTE ARTHUR Iordingis tbat ar leff And dere, J lystenyth and I shall you tell By olde dayes what aunturs were Araonge oure eidris pat by-felle : In Arthur dayes, that noble kinge, 5 By-felle Aunturs i'erly fêle, And I shall telle of there endinîre That mykell wiste of wo and wele. The knightis of the table Round, The san gravie whan they had sought, 10 Aunturs that they by-fore them found Fynisshid and to ende brought ; Their enemyes they bette & bound, For gold on lyff they lefte them noght. Foure yere they lyved sound, 15 Whan they had thèse werkis wroght, Tille on a tyme pat it by-felle The kinge in bed lay by the quene, Off Aunturs they by-ganne to telle, Many that in pat land had bene : 20 Sir, yif that it were youre wille, Of a wondir thinge I wold you mené, IIow your courte by-gynnyth to spill Off duoghty knightis ail by-dene; LE MORTE ARTHUR Syr, your lionour by-gynnys to falle, 25 That woiint was wide in world to sprede, Oiï launcelott and of other ail Tbat euyr so doughty were in dede." " Dame, there-to thy counsell I calle : Wliat were best for suche a nede ? " 30 " yiff ye your hououre hold shalle, A tuniement were best to bede, For-why tbat Auutre shall by-gynne And by spoke of on euery syde, That kniglitis shall there worship wynne 35 To dede of Armys for to Ryde. Sir, lettis thus youre courte no blynne But lyve in honour and in pride." " Certys, dame," the kinge said thenne, "Thys ne shall no lengcr abyde." 40 A turnement the king lett bede, At Wynchester shuld it be, Yonge Galehod was good in nede, The Cliefteyne of the Crye was he, With knightis pat were stilï on stede, 45 That ladyes and maydens might se Who that beste were of dede Thrughe doughtynesse to hâve the gre. Knightis Arme them by-dene To the turnemente to Ride, 50 With sheldis brode and helniys shene To wynne grete honoure and pride. launcelot lefte withe the quene And scke he lay that ylke tyde ; for loue l'at was theym by-twene 55 he made inchessoun for to abyde. ARTHUR PROCLAIMS A TOURNAMENT 3 The kynge satte vppon liis stede And fortlie is went vppon his way; Sir Agraveyne for suche a nede At home by-lefte, for soth to sa}^ 60 For men told in mauy a tliede That launcelot by the quene lay ; For to take tliem with the dede he Awaytes both nyght and day. launcelott forth wendys he, 65 Unto the chambyr to the quene, And sette hym dovvne vpon his kne And salues there that lady shene. "launcelott, what dostow hère with me? The kinge is went and ]>e courte by-dene ; 70 I drede we shall discouerid be, Off the loue is vs by-twene ; Sir agravayne at home is he, nyght & day he waytes vs two." " Nay," he sayd, " my lady fre, 75 I ne thinke not it shall be so ; I come to take my levé of the, Oute of courte or that I go." "ya swithe pat thou Armyd be. For thy dwellynge me is full woo." 80 launcelott to his chambyr yede, Thore Riche atyre lay hym by-fore, Armyd hyni in nob^e wede, Off that Armure gdntylly was shore ; Swerd and sheld were good at nede S5 In many batayles ])at he had bore, And horsyd hym on a grey stede kyng Arthur had hym yeve by-fore ; LE MORTE ARTHUR balcl3'S lie noue liiglie way, The knight pat was liardy and fre, 90 Bot hastis bothe night and day Faste tovvard tliat Jtiehe Cite, — Wynchester it higlit, for sotlie to say, — There the turnament shuld be ; kinge Arthur in a eastell lay, 95 Full myehe there was of gam and gle. For-why men wold launcelott by-hold, And he ne wold not hyrn-self shewe, "VVyth bis shuldres gonue he fold And downe he haugid bis bede full low, 100 As be ne might bys lymmys weld; Kepit be no bugle blowe ; Wele be semyd As he were old, For-thy ne eouth hym no nian knowe. The kinge stode on a toure on bigbte, 105 Sir Evwayne clepis he pat tyde ; "Syr evwayne, knowistow any wight Tbis knight pat Rides bere by-syde?" Sir Evwayne spekis wordis Eidit. That Ay is bend is not to hyde, no " Sir, it is som old knighte Is corne to se pe yonge knigbtis Ride." Tbey bj^-beld hym bothe Anone A stounde for the stedis sake ; bis hors stomelyd at a stone 115 That aile bis body there-witb gan shake ; The knight pan brauudisshid yche a bone, As be tho bridelle vp gan take ; Tbere-l»y wiste tbey botlie Anone That it was launcelott du lake. 120 LANCE LOT ARRIVES IN DISGUISE 5 kynge Arthur than spekis lie To sir evwayne there wordis Rigbt : " Welle may launcelot holden he Off aile pe world the beste kniglit Ofï biaute and of bounte, 125 And sitbe is none so nioclie of mygbt, At every dede beste is he, And sithe he nold it wist no wight, Sir Evwayn, will we done hym byde ; he wenys pat we know hym noght." 130 " Sir, it is better lette hym liide And lette hym do as he hath thoght ; he wolle be hère nere by-syde, Sithe he pus ferre hedyr hath sought ; We shalle hym know by his dede 135 And by the hors pat he hath brought." An Erle wounyd there be-syde, The lord of Ascolot was hight ; launcelot gonne thedyr Kide And sayd he wolle there dvvell ail night. 140 They resseyvid hym with grete pryde ; A Riche soper there was dight ; his narae ganne he hele and hyde And sayd he was a strauge knight. Thanne had the erle sonnys two 145 That were knightis makid newe; In pat tyme was the maner so, Whan yonge knightis sliuld sheldis show, Tille ])e friste yere were agoo, To bere Armys of one hewe, 150 Kede or white, yelew or bloo ; There-by men yonge knightis kncw. LE MORTE ARTHUR As tliey satte at there sopere, lamicelot to the erle spake tliare : "Sir, ys hère Any Bachelere 155 That to the turnament wolle fare ? " " I haiie two sounys that me is dere, And novv that oonne îs seke full sare ; So in Company e f>at he were myne other sonue I wold wera thare." 160 " Sir, and thy sonne wille thedir Right, The lenger I wolle hym abyde, And helpe hym there with ail my myght That hym none harme shall be-tyde.". "Sir, the semys a noble knight, 165 Courteyse and hend, is not to hyde ; At morow shall ye dyne and dight, Togedir I rede welle pat ye Kide." "Syr, of one thinge I wolle you mynne And be-seche you for to spede, 170 yif hère were Any Armure Inné, That I might borow it to this dede." "Sir, my sonne lieth seke here-in ; Take his Arnmre and his stede ; For my sonnys men shall you kenne, 175 Ofï Ilede sliall be your bothis wede." Therle had a doughtcr ]?at was hym dere, Mykell launcelott she beheld ; hyr Kode was rede as blossom on brere Or floure ])at springith in the feld ; 180 Ghid slie was to sitte hym nere, The noble kniglit vndir sheld ; Wcpiiige was hyrmoste cliere, So mykell on liym hyr herte gan held. LANCELOT AND THE, MAID OF ASCOLOT 7 Vp than Rose f>at mayden stille 185 And to hyr cliamber wente she tho ; Downe vppon hir bedde she felle, That nighe hyr herte brast in two. launcelot wiste what was hyr wyll, Welle he kuew by other mo ; 190 hyr brother klepitte he hym tylle And to hyr chamber gonne they go ; he satte hym downe for the maydens sake vpon hyr bedde there she lay, Conrtessely to hyr he spake, 195 For to comforte pat fayre may ; In hyr Armys she gan hym take And thèse wordis ganne she say : " Sir, bot yif that ye it make, Saff my lyff no lèche may." 200 "lady," he sayd, "thou moste lette, For me ne giff the no-thynge Ille ; In Another stede myne hert is sette, It is not at myne owne wille ; In erthe is no thinge that shall me lette 205 To be thy knight lowde and stille ; A-nother tyme we may be mette Whan thou may better speke thy fille." " Sithe I of the ne may haue more, As thou arte hardy knight and fre, 210 In the turnement fat thou wold bere Sum signe of myne pat men might se." " lady, thy sleve thon slialte of-shere, I wolle it take for the love of the ; So did I neuyr no ladyes ère 215 Bot one that most hathe lovid me." 8 LE MORTE- ARTHUR On the niorow wban it was day They dyned aud niade tbem yare, And pan tliey went fortbe on tbere way To-gedyr as they bretlierne were. 220 They mette a sqnyer by the way That frome the tnrnament gan fare, And askyd yif he couthe tbem say "Wbiche party was the bygger thare. " Sir Galebod hathe folke pe more, 225 For sothe, lordingis, as I you telle, But Arthur is the bigger tbere ; he bath knightis stiff and f elle ; They Ar bold and brème as bare, Evwayne and boert and Ij'onelle." 230 Therlys sonne to bym spake thare: " Sir, with tbem I rede we dwelle." launcelotte spake, as I you rede : " Sithe they ar men of grete valour, how might we amonge tbem spede 235 There aile are stiffe & stronge in stowre? helpe we tbem pat bath most nede ; Ageyne the beste we sball welle dore ; And we might there do Any dede, It wold vs torne to more honour." 240 launcelot spekis in that tyde As knight pat was bardy and f re : " To-night with-oute I rede we byde ; The presse is grete in the Cite." " Sir, I haue An Aunte hère beside, 245 A lady of swith grete biaute ; Were it your wille thedir to Kide, Glad of vs than wold she be." ( .. LANCELOT OVERTHROWS SIR EVWAYNE 9 Tho to the castelle gonne they fare, To the lady f ayre and bright ; 250 Blithe was the lady thai'e That they wold dwelle with hyr pat night ; hastely was there soper yare Off mete and driuke rychely dight. Onne the morow gonne they dyne & fare, 255 Both launcelott and J)at other knight. Whan they corne in-to pe fekl, Myche there was of game & play ; A while they hovid & by-held how Arthurs knightis Rode that day. 260 Galehodis party by-gan to held, On fote his knightis ar lad away ; launcelott stiiï was vndyr sheld, Thinkis to helpe, yif that he raay. Be-syde hyra corne f>an sir Evwayne, 265 ^ * Brème as Any wilde bore ; launcelott springis hyra ageyne, In Rede arniys pat he bare ; A dynte he yaff with mekill mayne, Sir Evwayne was vn-horsid thare, 270 That aile nien wente he had bene slayne, So was he woundyd wondyr sare. Sir boerte thonghte no-thinge good, Whan Sir Evwayne vn-horsid was ; Forthe he springis as he were wode 275 To lanncelot, with-outen lees ; launcelot hytte hyni on the hode, The nexte way to ground he chose ; Was none so stifï agayne hyni stode, Fulle thynne he made the thikkest prees. 280 10 LE MORTE ARTHUR Sir lyonelle be-ganne to tene, And hastely lie made hym bowne ; To launcelott witb berte kene be rode witb belme and swerde browne ; launcelott bitte bym, as I wene, 285 Tbrougbe the behne in-to J?e Crowne, Tbat euyr after it was sens ; Bothe hors and man tbere yede adowne. The knightis gadrid togedir tbare And gan witb Craf te tbere counselle take ; 290 Suche a knigbt was neuyr are But it were launcelot du lake ; Bot, for tbe sleve on bis Creste was tliar, For launcelot wold tbey hym nogbt take, For he bare nevir none suche by-fore 295 But it were for tbe quenys sake. " Off Ascolot be neuyr was Tbat thus welle beris bym to-day," Ector sayd, with-outen lees ; What he was he wold assay. 300 A noble stede Ector hym chese And f orthe rydis glad and gay ; launcelot he mette a-mydde J'e prese, By-twene them was no cbildis play. Ector smote witb berte good 305 To launcelot tbat ilke tyde ; Throughe belme in-to bis hede it yode Tbat nighe loste he ail bis pride ; launcelot bytte on tbe liood Tbat bis hors felle and he be-syde. 310 launcelot blyndis in bis blode, Oute of tbe feld f ull faste gan Ride ; LANCELOT IS WOUNDED BY SIR ECTOR 11 Oute of tlie feld they Reden thoo To a forest highe and bore. Whan they corne by them one two, 315 Ofï bis helme be takis tbore. " Sir," be sayd, " me is full woo, I drede tbat ye be burte full sore." " Nay," be sayd, " it is not so, But fayne at Rest I wold we were." 320 " Sir, myne Auute is bere be-syde, There we botbe were ail nigbte ; Were it youre wille tbedir to Ride, She wolle us belpe witb ail byr migbt. And send for lecbis tbis ylke tyde, 325 youre woundis for to bêle and digbt ; And I my-self wille witb you abyde And be youre servante and youre knigbt. To the castelle tliey toke tbe way, To tbe lady fayre and bend ; 330 Sbe sent for lecbis, as I you say, Tbat wonnyd botbe ferre and bend, But by tbe morow tbat it was day In bed be migbt bym-self not wend ; So sore woundyd tbere be lay 335 Tbat well nigbe bad be sougbt bis end. Tbo kinge artbur witb mykell pride Callid bis knigbtis ail byin by And sayd a mountb be wold tbere bydo And in wyncbester lye ; 340 heraudis be dyd go and Ride Anotber turnamente for to Crye ; " Tbis knigbt wolle be bere nere be-syde, for be is woundyd bitterlye." 12 LE MORTE ARTHUR Whan the lettres made were 345 The heraiulis forth witli tbera yede, Througlie yngland for to fare, Anotlier turnameiit for to bede ; Bade them buske aud make thern yare Aile that stiff were on stede. 350 Thus thèse lettris sent were ïo tho that doughty were of dede, Tille on a tyme l>at it be-felle An heraude comys by the way And at the castelle a night gan dwelle 355 There as launcelot woundyd lay, And of the turnamente gon telle That shuld corne on the sonday. launcelot sighes wondyr stille And sayd : " allas and well-a-way ! 360 Whan knîghtis wynne worship and pride, Som Aunti'e shall hold me a-way, As a coward for to a-byde. This turnamente, for sothe to say, for me is made this ylke tyde ; 365 Thoughe I shuld dye this ylke day, Certis I shalle thedyr Ride." The lèche Aunswerd also sone And sayd : " syr, what haue ye thought? Aile the Crafte that I haue done 370 I wene it wille you helpe Right noght. There is no man vndir the mone, By hym ]?at ail this world hath wroght, Might saue youre lyff to that tyme come That ye vpon your stede were brought ! " 375 ARTHUR PROCLAIMS A TOURNAMENT 13 " Certis, thougli I dye this day, In my bedde I wolle not lye ; Yit had I levir do what I may Than hère to dye thus eovvardelye." The lèche anone thau went his way 380 And wold no leuger dwelle hym by ; his woundis scryved and stille he lay And in his bedde he swownyd thrye. The lady wept as she were wode, Whan she sawe he dede wold be, 385 Therlis sonne with sory mode The lèche agayne clepis he And sayd: "thou shalt haue yiftis good, For-why J>at thou wilte dwelle with me." Craftely than staunchid he his blode 390 And of good comforte bad hym be. The heraude than wente on his way At morow whan the day was light Also swithe as euyr he may To Wynchester that ylke night; 395 he salued the kinge, for soth to say — By hym satte syr Evwayne the knight — And sithe he told upon his playe What he had herd and sene with sight : " Off aile Jjat I haue sene with sight 400 Wondir thought me nevir more Thanne me dyd of a folyd knight That in his bed lay.woundid sore ; he niyght not heve his hede vp-Right For aile the world haue wonno thare ; 405 For Angwisshe pat he ne llide myght Aile his woundis scryved were." 14 LE MORTE ARTHUR Sir Evwayne tlian spekis wordis fré And to the kynge sayd he there : " Certis, no cowarde knight is he ; 410 Allas ! that he nere hole and fera ! Welle I wote f>at it is he That we aile of vnhorsyd were. the turnament is beste lette be, For sothe that knight may not corne there." There turnement was than no more 416 But this departith aile the prese. knightis toke there levé to fare, Ichone his owne way hym chese. To kamelot the kj^nge went there, 420 There as quene gaynore was ; he wente haue found launcelot thare j A- way he was, with-outen lèse. Launcelot sore woundyd lay ; knightis sought hym full wyde. 425 Therle sonne night and day Was alle-way hym be-syde ; Therle hym-self whan he ryde may Brought hym home with mykell pride And made hym bothe game & play 430 Tille he might bothe go and Kyde. Boerte and lyonelle than sware, and at the kinge there levé toke there, Ageyne they wold come nevir mare Till they wiste where launcelot were. 435 Ector went with them thare To sèche his brodyr pat hym was dere. many a land they ganne through fare And sought hym bothe ferre and nere, THE KNIGHTS DISC 0 VER LANCELOT 15 Tille on a tyme pat it by-felle 440 That they corne by that ylke way, And at the castelle at mete gan dwell, There as launcelott wountlyd lay ; launcelot they saw, as I you telle Walke on the wallis hym to play ; 445 On knees for loye ail they felle, So blithe men they were that day. Whan launcelott saw tho ylke thre That he in worlde louyd beste, A merier metinge might no man se, 450 And sithe he ledde them to Reste. Therle hym-self, glad was he That he had gotten siche a geste ; So was the mayden feyre and fre That aile hyr loue on hym had keste. 455 Whan they were to soper dight, Bordis were sette and clothis spradde, Therlis doughter and the knight To-gedir was sette, as he theni badde, Therlys sonnys f>at bothe were wîght 460 to serue them were nevir sadde, And therle hym-selfe with aile his myght To make them bothe blyth and glad. Bot Boert, enyr in mynd he thoghte That launcelot had bene woundyd sore. 465 " Sir, were it your willeto hele it noght Bot telle where ye thus hnrte were? " " By hym f)at aile this world hatli wrought," launcelot hym-self swore, " The dynte shall be full dero bought, 470 yif euyr we may mete vs more ! " IG LE MORTE ARTHUR Ector ne liketl tliat no wight, The wordis tliat he herd there ; For sorow lie loste both strengtli & miglit ; The colours changid in his leyre. 475 Boerte than sayd thèse wordis Right : " Ector, thou may make yvelle chère ; For sothe it is no coward knight That thou arte of I-manased hore." " Ector," be sayd, " where thou it were 480 That woundid me thus wondir sore ? " Ector aunswerd with symple chère : " lord, I ne wiste pat ye it wore ; A dynte of you I had there, felyd I nevir none so sore." 485 Sir lyonelle by god pan swore That " myne wolle sene be euyr more." Sir Boerte than answerd as tyte As knight pat wise was vndir wede : " I hope pat none of vs was quitc, 490 I had oon pat to ground I yede. Sir, your brodyr shall ye not wite, now knowes either others dede ; now know ye how Ector can sm3'te To helpe you whan ye haue nede." 495 launcelot loughe with herte fre ' That Ector niade so mekill Sitte : " Brother, no thinge drede thou the. For I slialle be bothe hole and quite. Though thou haue sore woundid me, 500 There-of I shall the nevir wite ; Bot euyr the better loue I the, Such a dynte that thou can smyte." THE KNIGHTS RETURN TO COURT 17 Than vppon the thrid day Tbey toke there levé for to fare, 505 To the courte they wille away, For he wille dwelle a while thare. " Grete welle my lorde, I you pray, And telle niy lady how I fare, And say I wylle corne whan I may, 510 And byddith hyr longe no-thinge sare." They toke there levé, with-outen lees, And wightely wente vppon there way ; To the courte the way they chese, There as the quene Genure lay. 515 The kinge to the foreste is With knightis hym for to play ; Good space they had with-outen prese There erand to the quene to say. They knelyd downe by-fore the quene, 520 The knightis pat were wise of 1ère, And sayd they had launcelot sene And thre dayes with hym were, And how pat ho had woundyd bene, And seke he had lye full sore. 525 " Or ought longe yc sliall hym sene ; he bad you longe no thynge sore." The quene loughe with herte fre Whan she wiste he was on lyff. " O, worthy god, what wele is me ! 530 Why ne wiste my lord it also swithe ! " To the foreste rode thèse knightis thre, To the kinge it to kitho ; Ihesu criste pan thankis he. For was he nevir of word so blithe. 535 18 LE MORTE ARTHUR he klepyd Sir Gawayne liym nere And sayd : " certis, that was he That tbe rede armys bere ; Bot, now he lyffis, welle is me." Gawayne answerd with myld chère, 540 As he that Ay was hend and f re : " Was neuyr tithandis me so dere, Bot sore me longis launcelot to se." At the kinge and at the quene Sir Gawayne toke his levé that tyde, 545 And sithe at aile the courte by-dene, And buskis hym with mekyll pryde Tille Ascalot, with-outen wene, Also faste as he might Ryde ; Tille that he haue launcelot sene 550 Night ne day ne wolle he byde. By that was launcelot hole and fere, Buskis hym and makis ail yare, his leue hathe he take there. The mayden wepte for sorow & Gare : 555 *' Sir, yif that youre willis were, Sithe I of the ne may haue mare, Som thinge ye wolde be-leue me hère To loke on whan me longith sare." launcelot spake with herte fre, 560 For to comforte that lady hende : " Myne Armure shall I leue with the And in thy brothers wille I wend ; loke thou ne longe not after me For hère I may no lenger lend. 565 longe tyme ne shalle it noght be That I ne shalle eyther come or send." GAWAYNE ARRIVES AT ASCALOT 19 launcelot i3 Redy for to Ride And on bis way he went forth Right ; Sir Gaweyn come aftir on a tyde 570 And askis af ter suehe a knighte ; They reseyved liyra with grete pride, A Riche soper there was dight, And sayd, in herte is noght to liyde, A-way he was for fourtenyght. 575 Sir Gaweyne gon that mayden take, And satte hym by that swete wight, And spake of launcelot de lake ; In aile tbe world nas snche a kniglit. The mayden there of launcelot spake, 580 Said ail hyr loue was on hym light, " For bis leinan he hathe me take, his Armure I you shewe mighte." " Now, damysselle," he sayd Anone, " And I Am glad pat it is so ; 685 Suehe a lemman as thou haste oon In ail this world ne be no mo ; There is no lady of flessbe ne bone In this world so thryve or thro, Thoughe hyr herte were stèle or stone, 590 That might hyr loue hald hym fro. But, damysselle, I be-seche the his sheld that ye wold me shewe ; launcelottis yif that it be, Be the coloures I it îcnew." 695 The mayden was bothe hend & fre. And ledde hym to a chambyr newe ; launcelottis sheld she lette hym se, And ail his Armure forth she drewe. 20 LE MORTE ARTHUR hendely than syr Gawayne, 600 To the mayden there he spake : " lady," he sayd, "withouten layne, Tliis is launcelottis sheld de lake, Damesselle," he sayd, " I Am full fa^me That he the wold to lemman take, 605 And I with aile my myght and mayne Wille be thy knight for his sake." Gawayne thus spake with that swete wight AVhat his wille was for to say Tille he was to bed I-dighte ; 610 Aboute hym was gamme and play. he toke his leue at erle and knigfht On the morow whan it was day, And sithen at the mayden brighte, And forthe he wente vppon his way. 615 he nyste where pat he mighte ne where that launcelot wold lend, For whan he was oute of si dit, he was fulle yvelle for to fynd. he takis hym the way Right, 620 And to the courte gon he wend ; Glad of hym was kyng and knight, For he was bothe corteyse and hend. Than it by-felle vppon a tyde, ^ The kinge stode by the quene & spake, 625 Sir gaweyne standis hym be-syde, Ichone tille other there mone gan make how longe they might with balo abyde The comynge of launcelot du lake ; In the courte was litelle pryde, 630 So sore they sighyd for his sake. GAWAYNE REPORTS TO THE QUEEN 21 " Certis, yif launcelot were on lyff, So longe fro courte lie nold not be." Sir gawayne answerd also swithe : " There-of no wondir thinkith me ; 635 The feyrest lady that is on lyff Tille his lemman chosen hath he ; Is noon of vs but wold be blithe Suche a seraely for to see." The kinge Arthur was full blythe 640 Off that tithingis for to 1ère, And askid syr Gawayne also swythe What mayden that it were. *' Therlis doughter," he sayd as swithe, " Off Ascolot, as ye may hère, 645 There I was made glad & blithe. his sheld the mayde shewid me there," The quene than said wordis no mo, Bot to hyr chambir sone she yede, And downe vppon hyr bed felle so 650 That nighe of witte she wold wede. Allas ! " she sayd, " and well-a-wo ! That euyr I Aught lyff in lede ; The beste body is loste me fro That euyr in stoure by-strode stede." 655 ladyes that aboute hyr stode, That wiste of hyr previte, Bad hyr be of comfort'e gode, lette no man suche semblant se. A bed they made with sory mode, 660 There-in they brought that lady fre ; Euyr she wepte as she were wode, Off' liyr they had full grete pite. «( 22 LE MORTE ARTHUR So sore seke the quene lay, Olï sorow might she nevir lette, 665 Tille it felle vppon a day, Sir lyonelle and Ector yede f In-to the foreste, tbem to play, j That floured was and braunchid swete, ; And as they went by the way, 670 With launcelot gonne they mete. What woundyr was though they were blith Whan they there master saw with sight ! On knees they felle also swithe And ail they thankid god all-myght ; 675 loye it was to se and lythe The metynge of the noble knighte. And sithe he f reyned also swithe : " how fares my lady brighte ? " Than answerd the knightis fre 680 And said that she was seke full sare : " Grete doelle it is to hère and se, So mekylle she is in sorow and care ; The kinge, a sory m an y s he In courte for that ye corne no mare; 685 Dede he wenys that ye be And aile the courte both lasse & mare. Sir, were it your wille with vs to fare, For to speke with the quene, Blithe I wote wele that she ware, 690 yif that she had you onys sene. The kynge is mekille in sorow and care, And so ys ail the courte by-dene ; Dede they wene welle that ye Are Frome courte for ye so longe haue beue." 695 LANCELOT RETURNS TO COURT 23 he grauntis theni at that ylke sythe home that he wille with theni Ride; There-fore the knightis were fulle blithe And biisked thein with mykelle pride To the courte also swithe ; 700 Nyght ne day they nold abyde. The kinge and aile the courte was blithe, The tydandis whan they herde pat tyde. The kinge stode in a toure on highe, Be-sydes hym standis syr Gawayne ; 705 launcelotte whan that they sighe, Were nevir men on mold so fayne. They Ranne as swithe as euyr they might Oute at the gâtes hym Agayne ; Was nevir tidandis to them so light. 710 The kinge hym kissyd and knight & swayne ; To a chamber the kynge hym lad ; feyre in Armys they gon hym fold, And sette hym on A Riche bedde That sprad was with a clothe of gold; 715 To serve hym was there no man sad. Ne dight hym as hym-self wold To raake hym bothe blithe and glad ; And sithe Auntres he them told. Thre dayes in courte he dwellid there 720 That he ne spake not with the quene : So myche prees was Ay hym nere , The kyng liym lad and courte by-dene. The lady, bright as blossom on brere, Sore she longid hym to sene ; 725 Wepinge was hyr moste chère, Thoughe she ne durste hyr to no man mené. 24 LE MORTE ARTHUR Than it felle vppon a day, The kinge gan on liiintynge Ride In-to the foreste liyni to playe, 730 With Lis kniglitis be liis syde ; launcelot longe in bed laye, With the quene he thought to byde ; To the chamber he toke the way And sahies hyr with mekell pryde ; 735 Friste he kissyd that lady shene And salues hyr with herte fre, And sithe the ladyes ail by-dene, For loye the teres Ranne on ther ble. " Well-a-way ! " than sayd the qu.ene, 740 " launcelot, that I euyr the se ! The loue pat hathe be vs by-twene That it shall thus departed be ! Allas ! launcelot du lake, Sithe thou hast ail my hert in wold 745 Therlis doughter that thou wold take OIï ascalot, as men me told ! Now thou leviste for hyr sake Aile thy dede of Arinys bold, I may wofully wepe and wake 750 In clay tylle I be clongyn cold. But, launcelot, I be-seche the hère, Sithe it nedelvnofis shalle be so, That thou nevir more dyskere The loue that hathe bene be-twyxe vs two, 755 Ne that slie nevir be with the so dere Dede of Armys })at thou be fro, That I may of thy body hère, Sithe I shall thus be-leve in woo." LANCE LOT DEPARTS F ROM COURT 25 launcelot fulle stille tlian stode, 760 his herte was hevy as Any stone ; So sory he wexe in his mode. For Routhe hym thought it ail to-torne. " Madame," lie said, "for crosse and Rode, What by-tokenyth ail this mone ? 765 By hym pat bought me with his blode, Off thèse tydandes know I none ; But by thèse wordis thynkith me A-way ye wold pat I ware ; Now haue good day, my lady fre, 770 For sothe thou seest me nevir mare." Oute of the chambyr pan wendis he ; Now whethir his hert was full of Care ! The lady swownyd Sithes thre Almost she slew hyr-selfe thare. 775 launcelot to his chambyr yede, There his owne atyre in lay, Armyd hym in a noble wede, Thoughe in his hert were litell play ; Forthe he spronge as sparke of glede, 780 Withe sory chère, for sothe to say ; Vp he worthis vppon his stedo And to a foreste he wendis a-way. Tithyngis corne in-to the halle That launcelot was vppon his stede ; 785 Oute than Ranne the knightis aile, Ofï there witte as tliey wold wede ; Boerte de Gawnes and lyonelle And Ector that doughty was of dedo Folowyn hym on horsys snelle, 790 Fulle lowde goune tiiey blowe and grede. 26 LE MORTE ARTHUR There miglit no man hym ovir-take, he Kode in-to a forest grene ; Moche mone gonne they niake The knightis that were bold and kene. 795 " Allas ! " they sayd, " launcelot du lake, That euyr shuldistow se the quene ! " And hyr they cursyd for his sake That euyr loue was them by-twene. They ne wiste nevir where to fare 800 Ne to what land J)at he wold ; Ageyne they went with sîghyng sare, The knightis pat were kene & bold ; The quene they found in swownyng thare, hyr comely tresses ail vnfold ; 805 They were so full of sorowe & Care There was none hyr comfort wold. The kynge than hastis hym for his sake And home l'an come that ylke day, And asked after launcelot du lake, 810 And they sayd : " he is gone away." The quene was in hyr bed ail nakyd, And sore seke in hyr chambyr lay, So moche mone the kynge gon make, There was no knight pat lust to playe. 815 . The kinge klepis Gawayne pat day And aile his sorow told hym tylle : " Now ys launcelot gone A-way And come, I wote, he nevir wille." he sayd " allas and wellaway ! " 820 Sighed sore and gaff hym ylle : " The lord that we hâve lovid all-way, In courte why nylle he nevir dvvelle I " KNTGHTS SEEK HIM 27 Gawayn spekis in that tyde And to the kynge sayd he there : 825 " Sir, in this castelle shall ye byde, Comforte you and make good chère, And we shall bothe go and Ride In ail landis ferre and nere ; So preuely he shall hym not hyde 830 Throughe happe that we ne shall of hym hère." Knyghtis than sought hym wide, Off launcelot myght they not hère, Tylle it felle vppon a tyde, quene Genure, bright as blossom on brere, 835 To mete is sette that ylke tyde, And syr Gawayne satte hyr nere, And vppon that other syde A scottysshe kuight pat was hyr dere. A squyer in the courte hath thought, 840 That ylke day, yif that he myght, With a poyson p»at he hath wrought To slae Gawayne, yif that he mighte ; In frute he hath it forthe brought And sette by-fore the quene bright ; 845 An Appille ouereste lay on lofte, There the poyson was in dighte. For he thoughte the lady bright Wold the beste to Gawayne bedo, But she it yaff to the s"cottisshe knight, 850 For he was of an vnkduth stede, There-of he ete a lytell wight, Off tresoun toke there no man hede ; There he loste both mayne and might And died sone, as I you Kede. 855 860 28 LE MORTE ARTHUR They nyste what it myglit by-mene, But vp hym sterte syr Gawayne, And sitlien ail the courte by-dene, And ouyr the bord they haue hym drayne. « Wellaway ! " than sayd the quene, " Ihesu Criste ! what may I sayne ! Certis, now will ail nien wene My-self that I the knight haue slayne." Triade there was anone forth brought, The quene wende to save his lyff, 865 But ail that myght helpe hym noght, For there the knight is dede as swithe ; So grete sorow the quene than wrought, Grete doele it was to se and lythe ; "lord, suche syttes me haue sought ! 870 Why ne may 1 nevir be blithe ! " Knyghtis done none other myght, Bot beryed hym with doele I-noughe, At a chapell with Riche lyghte, In a f oreste by a cloughe ; 875 A Riche toumbe they dyd by dight, A Crafty clerke the lettres droughe, how there lay the shottysshe knyght That quene Genure with poyson slough. Aftyr thys a tyme by-felle, 880 To the courte ther corne a knyght, his brodyr he was, as I you telle. And syr mador for sothe he highte ; he was an hardy man and snelle, In turnamente and eke in fight, 885 And mykell louyd in Courte to duelle, For he was man of myche myght. THE DEATH OF THE SCOTTISH KNIGHT 29 Tlian it felle vppon a day, Sir raador wente witli rnekill pride In-to the foreste, hym for to play, 890 That floured was and braunchid wyde ; lie found a chapell in his way. As lie cam by a cloughis syde, There his owne brodyr lay, And there at masse he thought to abyde. 895 A Riche toumbe he found there dight With lettres that were fayre I-noughe ; A while he stode and Redde it Right, Grete sorow than to his herte droughe, he found the naine of the scottysshe knight 900 That quene Genure with poysoun sloughe ; There he loste bothe mayne and myght And ouyr the toumbe he felle in svvoughe. Off swownynge whan he myght awake, his herte was heuy as Any lede ; 905 he sighed for his brothers sake, he ne wiste what was beste Rede ; The way to courte gan he take, Off no-thinge ne stode he drede ; A lovde Crye on the quene gonne make 910 In chalengynge of his brothers dede. The kynge fulle sore than gan hyni drede, For he myght not be ageyne the Right ; The ({uene of witte wold nyghe wede. thoughe pat she agilte had no wight, 915 She moste there by-know the dede. Or fynde a man for hyr to fight ; For welle she wiste to deth she yede yif she were on a queste of knightis. 30 LE MORTE ARTHUR Thoughe Arthur were kynge pe land to wekl, 920 he niygbt not be agayne tbe Rigbte ; A day be toke witb spere and sbeld ïo fynd a inan for byr to fight, Tbat sbe shalle eytber to detb hyr yeld Or putte byr on a queste of knigbtis ; 925 There-to bothe tbere bandis vp-hekl And trewly there trouthis plighte. Whan they in Certeyne had sette a day And tbat quarelle vndir-take, The Word sprange sone throw eche contrey 930 What sorow tbat quene genure ganne make ; So at tbe laste, sbortely to say, Word corne to launcelot du hdce, There as he seke I-woundyd lay ; Men tokl bym holly ail tbe wrake, 935 how tbat quene Genure the brigbt had slayne witb grete treasoun A switbe noble scottisbe kuigbt At tbe mete witb stronge poysoun ; There-for a day was taken Rigbt 940 Tbat sbe sbould fynd a knight full bowne For hyr sake for to fîgbte Or ellis be brente with-oute Raunsowne. Whan ])at launcelot du lake had berd holly ail tbis fare, 945 Grete sorow gon be to byni take, For tbe quene was in suche care, And swore to venge byr of tbat wrake Tbat day y if pat be ly vand ware ; Tban payned he hym bis sorows to slake 950 And wexe as brème as Any bare. THE QUE EN ACCUSED 31 Now levé we laiincelot there he was, withe the ermyte in the forest grene, And telle we forthe o£ the case That touchith Arthur the kynge so kene. 955 Sir Gawayne on the morne to conselle he tase. And mornyd sore for the quene, In-to a toure than he hym has And ordeyned the beste there them by-twene. And as they in there talkynge stode, 960 To ordeyue how it beste niyght be, A feyre Ryuer vndyr the toure yode, And sone there-in gonne they see A lytelle bote of shappe full good To theyme-ward with the strenie gon te ; 965 There myght none feyrer sayle on flode Ne better forg-id as of tree. "o' Whan kynge Arthur saw pat sighte, he wondrid of the Riche apparrayle That was aboute the bote I-dighte, 970 So Richely was it coueryd sanzfayle, In maner of a voûte with clothis I-dighte, Aile shynand as gold as yt ganne sayle. Than sayd Sir Gawayne the good knight : " This bote is of A ryche entayle." 975 " For sothe, sir," sayd the kynge tho, " Suche one sawgh I neuyr Are ; Thedir I Rede now pat we go ; Som aventures shalle we se thare ; And yif it be with-in dight so 980 As with-onte or gayer mare, I darre sauely say therto, By-gyime wille auntres or ought yare." 32 LE MORTE ARTHUR Oiite of the toure adowne they wente, The kynge arthur & sir Gawayne; 985 To the bote they yede with-oute stynte, ïhey tvvo allone, for sothe to sayne ; And whan they come there as it lente, They by-held it faste, is not to layne ; A clothe that ouer the bote was bente 990 Sir Gawayne lyfte vp, and went in bayne. Whan they were in, with-outen lèse, Full Richely aRayed they it found, And in the myddis a feyre bedde was For Any kynge of Cristene lond. ' 995 Than as swithe, or they wold sese, The koverlet lyfte they vp with hand ; A dede wonian they sighe ther was, The fayrest mayde J»at niyght be found. To Sir Gawayne than sayd the kinge : 1000 " For sothe dethe was to vn-hende, Whan he wold thus fayre a thinge Thus yonge oute of the world do wend ; For hyr biaute witli-oute lesynge I wold fa3me wete of hyr kynd, 1005 What she was, this swete derelynge. And in hyr lyff where she gonne lend." Sir Gawayne his eyen than on hyr caste And by-held hyr fast with herte fre So that he knew welle at the laste, 1010 That the mayde of Ascalote was she, Wliiohe he som tyine had wowyd faste his owne leman for to be, But she annsweryd hym Ay in haste, " To none bot launeelot wold she te." 1015 i. THE FUNERAL BARGE OF THE M AID 33 To the kinge J^an sayd sir Gawayne tlio : " Thinke ye not on this endris day, Whan my lady the quene & we two stode to-gedir in youre play, Off a mayde I told you tho 1020 That launcelot louyd paramoure Ay ? " " Gawayne, for sothe," the kynge sayd tho, " Whan thou it saydiste wele thinke I may." " For sothe, syr," pan sayd sir Gawayne, "This is the mayd that I of spake ; 1025 most in this world, is not to layne, She lovid launcelot du lake." " For sothe," the kynge ]?an gon to sayne, *' me Rewith the deth of hyr for his sake ; The inchesoun wold I wete full fayne ; 1030 For sorow I trow deth gon hyr take." Than sir Gawayne, the good knight, Souglit aboute hyr with-oute stynte, And found a purs fulle Riche a-Righte, With gold and perlis pat was I-bente; 1035 Ail erapty semyd it noght to sight. That purs full sone in hond he hente, A letter there-of than oute he twight : Than wete they wold fayne what it mente ; What there was wreten wete they wold ; 1040 And sir Gawayn it toke the kynge And bad hym open y-t that he shold ; So dyd he sone with-oute lesynge ; Than found he whan it was vn-fold, Bothc the ende and the by-gynnynge 1045 (Thus was it wreten, as men nie told) Otï that fayre maydens deynge : 34 LE MORTE ARTHUR " rrio kyng arthur and ail his knightis 1 That longe to the Kounde table, That corteyse bene and most of myghtis, 1050 Douglity and noble, trew and stable, And most worshipfull in ail fyghtis, To the nedefull helpinge & profitable, The mayde of Asealot to Rightis Sendith gretinge, with-outen fable : 1055 To you ail my playnte I make Off the wronge that me is wroghte, But noght in maner to vndir-take That Any of you shold mend it ought ; Bot onely I say for this sake, 1060 That, thoughe this world were throw sought, Men shokl nowhere fynd your make, AU noblisse to fynde that myght be sought ; There-fore to you to vndirstand That, for I trewly many a day 1065 haue lovid lelyest in lond, Dethe hathe me fette of this world away ; To wete for whome yif ye will found, That I so longe for in langoure lay, To say the sothe will I noght wound, 1070 For gaynes it not for to say nay ; To say you the sothe taie, For whome I haue suffred this woo, I say deth hathe me take with baie For the noblest knight pat may go ; 1075 Is none so doughty dyntis to dale, So Ryalle ne so fayre ther-to ; But so churlysshe of maners in feld ne haie Ne knovv I none of frende ne fo ; THE LETTER OF THE M AID OF ASCOLOT 35 Ofî foo ne frend, the sotlie to say, 1080 So vn-hend of thewis is ther none ; his gentillnesse was ail a-way, Ail churlysshe maners he had in wone ; For for no thinge put I coude pray, Knelynge ne wepinge with RewfuU mone, 1085 To be my leman he sayd euyr nay And sayd shortely he wold haue none. For-thy, lordis, for his sake I toke to herte grete sorow and Care, So at the laste deth gonne me take, 1090 So fat I might lyve na mare ; ^For trew louynge had I suche wrake And was of blysse I-browghte AU bare ; Ail was for launcelote du lake, To wete wisely for whom it ware." 1095 When that arthure, the noble kyng, had redde the letter and kene the name, he said to gawayne, with-oute lesynge, that launcelott was gretly to blâme, And had hym wonne a Reproovyng 1100 For euyr and a wikkyd famé, Sythe she deide for grete louyng, that he her refusyd it may hym shame. to the kyng than sayd syr gawayne : *' I gabbyd on hym thys Jendyr day, 1105 that he longede whan I gon sayne With lady other with som othyr maye ; bot sothe than sayde ye, is not to layne, that he nolde nouglit hys loue laye In so low A place in vayne, 1110 But on a })ryse lady and a gaye." ^ The second scribe begiiis ut this line, see p. iii. 36 LE MORTE ARTHUR " Syr gawayne," sayd tlie kyng tboo, " What is now thy best rede ? how mow we vvitli thys inaydyn do?" Syr gawayne sayd : " so god me spede, 1115 Iff that ye wille assent ther-to, AYorsbippffully we slniUe liyr lede In-to the palys and bery lier so, As fallys A dukys doughter in dede." tber-to the kyng Assentid sone ; 1120 Syr gawayne dyd men sone be ^are, And worshippfully, as fell to done, In-to the palyse they her bare, the kyng than tolde with-out lone to AU hys barons, lesse and mare, 1125 how launcelot nokle noughte graunte hyr bone, ther-fore she dyed for sorovv and care. to the quene than went syr gawayne And gon to tell hyr Ail the case : "For sothe, madame," he gon to sayne, 1130 " I yelde me gyllty of A trespas. I gabbyd on launcelot, is not to layne, of that I tolde you in thys place; I sayde that hys bydyng bayne the dukys doughter of Ascolote was ; 1135 off.ascalot that mayden fEre, I sayd you she was hys leman ; that I so îrabbvd it reweth me, for Ail the sothe now telle I can ; he nold hyr nought, we mowe welle se; 1140 For-thy dede is that white as swanne; thys lettere there-of warannte wolle be ; She playnethe on launcelot to eche man." SIR GAWAYNE'S APOLOGY TO THE QUEEN 37 the quene was as wrotlie as wyncle And to syr gawayne sayd she tlian : 1145 " For sothe, Syr, thou were to vnkynde to gabbe so vppon any man, but thou haddyst wist the sothe in mynde, Whether that it were sothe ore nan ; thy curtessy was Ail be-hynde, 1150 Whan thou thoo sawes freste began ; thy worshippe thou vn-dediste gretlyehe, Suche wronge to wite that good knyglit ; I trowe lie ne a-gulte the neuyr nought myehe Why that thou oughtiste with no Ryghte 1155 to gabbe on hym so wylanlyche, thus be-hynde hym, oute of hys syghte. And, syr, thou ne woste not Ryght wiseliche What harme hathe falle there-o£ and myght ; I wende thou haddiste be stable and trewe 1160 And full of Ail curtessye, bot now me thynke thy maners newe, thay bene AU tournyd to vilanye, now thou on knyghtis makeste thy glewe to lye vppon hem for envye ; 116à Who that the worshippeth, it may hem rewe ; there-fore devoyede my companye." Syr gawayne than slyghly wente awaye ; lie syghe the quene agreiiyd sore ; No more to hyr than wolde lie saye 1170 Bot trowyd hyr wrathe haue euyr more, the quene than, as she nyghe wode were, wryngyd hyr handys and said : " well-awaye ! Allas ! in world that I was bore ! that I am a wreche welle say I may! 1175 38 LE MORTE ARTHUR herte, Allas ! why were tliou wode to trowe that launcelot du lake were so falsse and fykelle of mode A-nother lemniau than the to take ? nay, sertes, for Aile thys worldis goode 1180 he nolde to me haue wrougbt suche wrake." [One leaf missing in MS. For conveuience I hâve followed Dr. liruce's numberiug of lines in the EETS édition.] To fynde A man for byr to feyghte Or elles yeld her to be brente ; Iff sbe were on a queste of knygbtis, 1320 Wele scbe wiste sbe sbold be sbente ; Tbougbe tbat sbe agilte bade no wight, No lenger lyffe mygbt byr be lente. Tbe kynge tban sigbed and gaffe hym ylle And to syr gawayue tban be yede, 1325 To bors de gawnes and lyonelle, To estor tbat dougbty was in dede, And askyd yif eny were in wille To belpe bym in tbat mykyll nede. Tbe queue one knes be-fore bem felle, 1330 Tbat neygbe oute of byr wite sbe yede. Tbe knygbtes answeryd witb lytell pride, ber bertes was fuU of sorow and wougbe, Sayd : "ail we saugbe and satte besyde, Tbe knygbt wlien sbe witb poyson sloughe ; 1335 And sytlie, in berte is nougbt to byde, Syr gawayne ouer tbe bord bym drougbe ; A-gayne tbe Kygbt we wille not Kyde, We saw tbe sotbe verely I-nougbe." THE QUE EN CAN FIND NO DEFENDER 39 The quene wepte and sighed sore, 1340 To hors de gawnes went she thoo. On knes by-fore hym fell she thore, That nyghe her hert braste in two : " lord bors," she seyde, " thyn ore ! To-day 1 shall to dethe goo, 1345 Bot yiffe thy worthy wille wore To brynge my lyffe oute of thys woo." Bors de gawnes stille stode And wrothe a-vvay hys yjen wente. " Madame," he sayde, " by crosse on rode 1350 Thou art wele worthy to be brente ; The nobleste bodye of flesshe and blode That euyr was yete in erthe lente For thy wille and thy wykkyd mode Out of oure companye is wente." 1355 Than she wepte and gaffe liyr ille And to syr gawayne than she yede, On knes downc be-fore hym felle, That neigh oute of hyr witte she yede ; " Mercy," she cryed loude and shrylle, 1360 " Lord, as I no guilt haue of thys dede, Yif it were thy worthy wille To-day to helpe me in thys nede ? " Gawayne answeryd with litelle pride, Hys hert was f uU of sorow and woughe : "Dame, saw I not And-sat be-syde, 1366 The knyght whan thou with poyson sloughe ? And sythe, in hert is not to hyde, My-selfe ouer tlie bord liym droughe ; A-gayne the Kyght wille 1 not Kyde, 1370 I sawghe the sothe vcrrye T-noughe." 40 LE MORTE ARTHUR Tlian she wente to lyonelle, ïhat euer had bene lier ovvne kiiyght, On knes downe be-fore hym felle That neyglie she lost mayne and myght. 1375 " Mercy," she cryed loude and shrylle, "lord, As I ne haue gilte no wyght, Yif it were thy worthy wylle for my lyffe to take thys fyght ? " " Madame, how may thou to us take 1380 And wote thy-selfe so wytterly That thou hast launeelot du lake Brought oute of ower companye ? We may syghe and monynge make Whan we se knightis kene in crye ; 1385 Be hym thatt me to man gan shape We ar glade that thou it a-bye ! " Than full sore she gan hyr drede, Welle she wiste hyr lyffe was lorne ; Loude gon she wepe and grede 1390 And estor kneles she be-forne. " For hym that on the Rode gon sprede And for vs bare the crone of thorne, Estor, helpe now in thys nede, Or, certes, to-day my lyfe is lorne ! " 1395 '^ Madame, how may thou to us take, Or how sholde I for the feyght ? Take the now launeelot du lake That euyr lias bene thyn owne knyght ; My dere brothei-, for thy sake 1400 I ne shall hym neuyr se with sight ; Ciu'syde be he that the batalle take To saue thy lyffe a-gayue the Kyghte î " SHE FINALLY PERSUADES SIR BORS 41 Ther wolde no man the batavle take, Tlie queue wente to her cliambyr soo, 1405 So dulefully moue gon she make That nyghe hyr hert brast iu twoo ; For Sorow gon she sheuer and quake And sayd: "Allas and wele-A-woo! Why nade I now launeelot du lake ! 1410 Ail the curte nolde me no^ht sloo. yuelle haue I be-sette the dede That I haue worshipped so manyaknyght, And I haue no man in my nede ^ 1413a For my lyffe darre take a fight. 1414 lord kynge of Ail thede ! 1415 That ail the worlde shall Rede and Ryght, launeelot thou saue and hede. Sithe I ne shalle neuyr hym se with syght!" The quene wepte and gaue hyr ylle ; Whan she sawe the fyre was yare, 1420 than mornyd she full stille; To hors de gawnys went sho thare, By-sought hym, yif it were hys vville, To helpe hyr in hyr mekylle care ; In swounynge she be-fore hym felle, 1425 That wordys myght sho speke no mare. Whan hors saw the queue so bryght, Of her lie hade grete pyte ; In hys armys he helde her vpe-Kyght, Bade hyr of good comfort be : 1430 " Madame, but there come a better knyght That wohie the bataile take for the, I shalle my-selue for the flghte, Whyle aiiy lyffe may laste in me." * Lille niissiiig in M S. Tliis is Dr. Fuinivairs eniciulation. 42 LE MORTE ARTHUR Than was tlie qiiene wonder blythe 1435 That bors de gawnys wolde for her f eyglit, That nere for loye she swounyd swythe, But as that lie her helde vp-Ryglit ; To hyr chambre he led hyr blythe, To ladyes and to inaydens bryght, 1440 And bad she shulde it to no man kythe, Tylle he were armyd and redy dyght. Bors, that was bolde and kene, Clepyd Ail hys other knyghtis. And tokyn conselle hem be-twene, 1445 The beste that thay couthe and myght, how that he hathe hyght the quene, That ilke day for hyr to feyght A-yenste Syr mador f uU of tene, To saue hyr lyfe yife that he myght. 1450 The knyghtis answerd with wo and wrake, And sayd they wyste wetterlye That " she hathe launcelot du lake Browght oute of ouere companye. Nys non that nolde thys bataile take, 1455 Er she hade any vylanye. But we nylle not so glad hyr make By-fore we ne suffre hyr to be sorye." Bors and lionelle, the knyght, Estor, that doughty was of dede, 1460 To the forest than went thay l\yght, There orysons at the chapelle to bede, To oure lord god AU full of myght That day sholde lene hem wele to spede, A grâce to venquesshe the feyght ; 1465 Of syr mador thay hade grete drede. THE KNIGHTS DISCOVER LANCELOT 43 As they came by the forest sytle, There orysons for to inake, The nobleste knyght tlian saue tliay Ryde That euer was in erthe shape ; 1470 hys loreme lemyd Ail witli pi-icle, stede and armui^e AU was blake ; hys name is noght to hele and hyde, he hyght Syr launcelot du lake. What wondyr was thoughe they were blythe, 1475 Whan they ther niayster se with syght ! On knes Felle thay as swythe And thankyd Ail to god All-m^^ght ; loye it was to hère and lythe The metynge of the noble knyglit ; 1480 And after he askid Also swythe : *' how now farys my lady bryght ? " Bors than tolde hym Ail the Ryght, It was no lenger for to hyde, How there dyed a scottysche knyght 1485 Atte the mete the quene besyde : "To-day, syr, is hère dethe Ail dyght, It may no lenger be to byde. And I for hyr haue take the feyght ; Syr mador, stronge thQugh that he be, 1490 I hope he shall welle proue hys niyght." " To the courte now wende ye thre And recoumforte my lady bryghte, Bot loke ye speke no word of me, I wolle come as A strange knyght." 1495 44 LE MORTE ARTHUR launcelot tliat was moclielle of myght A-bydys in the forest grene ; To the courte wente thèse othyr kuyghtis For to lecomforte the quene, To make hyr giade with AU theyre myght ; 1500 Grete loye they made hem by-twene ; For-why she ne shokle drede no wyght, Off goode comforte they bade her bene. Bordes were sette and clothys sprede, The kyng hym-selfe is gone to sytte, 1505 The quene is to the table lade, With chekys that were wanne and wete ; Off sorow were they neuyr vn-sad, IVIyght they neyther drynke ne ete ; The quene of dethe was sore A-drade, 1510 That grymly terys gone she lete. And as thay were at the thryd mese, The kynge and Ail the courte be-dene, Syr mador Ail redy was, With helme And shelde and haubarke shene ; 1515 A-nionge hem AU be-fore the dese Ile bloweth oute vppon the quene, To haue hys Ryght with-outen lèse, As were the covenantes hem by-twene. The kyng lokyde one AU hys knyghtis, 1520 Was he neuere yet so woo, Saw he neuj'r on hym dyght A-yenste Sir mador for to goo ; Syr mador swore by goddys myght, As he was raan of herte thro, 1525 Bot yif he hastely haue hys Ryght, A-raonge hem AU he sholde hyr slo. LANCELOT COMES TO DEFEND THE QUEEN 45 Tliau spake the kynge of mekelle myght, Tliat Ay was cortayse and liende : "Syr, lete vs ete, and sytheu us dyght, 1530 Thys duy nys nouglit yit gone to the ende ; yet myglit there corne sache A knyght, yi£ goddys wyll were hym to sende, To fynde t!ie thy fylle of fyghte, Or the sonne to grounde wende." 1535 Bors than loughe on lyonelle, Wyste no man of hère hertys worde ; hys chanibyr A-none he vvendys tylle With-oute any othyr worde, Arniyd hym at Ail hys wille 1540 With helme and haubarke, spere and sworde ; A-gayne than coniys he full stylle And sette hym downe to the borde. The terys ranne on the kyngis kne For loye that he sawe bors adyght ; 1545 Up he rose with herte free And bors in armys clyppis Ryght, And sayd : " bors, god for-yelde it the, In thys nede that thow wolde fyghte : Welle Acqny teste thou it me 1550 That 1 haue worshipped any knyght." Than as Syr mador loudeste spake, The quene of treson to by-calle, Comys syr launcelot du lake Rydaiid Kyght into the halle ; 1555 hys stede and armure AU was blake, hys visere ouer hys y^en falle ; Many A man by-gonne to quake : A-drade of hym nyghc were tliey Aile. 46 LE MORTE ARTHUR Tben spake tlie kynge, mykelle of myght, 1560 That hend was in Iclie A sythe : " Syr, is it youre wille to lyghte, Eté and drynke and make you blytlie?" launcelot sjjake as A strange knyglit : " Nay, syr,' ' he sayd as swytlie, 1565 " I lierde telle hère of A fight ; I corne to saue A ladyes lyue ; yeuell hatbe the quene by-sette hyr dedys That she hatbe worsshippid many A knyght And she hatbe no man in her nedys 1570 That for hyr lyfe dare take a fight. Thon that hyr of treson gredys, Hastely that tbow be dygbte. Oute of tby witte poughe that tbou wedis, To-day tbou sbalt proue Ail tby myght." 1576 Than was Syr mador Also blytbe As foule of day after the nygbt; To hys stede be vvente that Sythe, As man that was of moche myght ; To the felde than Ryde thay swythe, 1580 hem folowes botbe kvng and knv<ibt, The bataile for to se and lythe. Saugh nevir no man A stronger fygbt ; Vn-borsid were botbe knygbtis kene, Tbey metten vvith so m3'cbe mayne, 1585 And sythe thay faught with swerdys kene, Botbe ou fote, for sothe to sayne ; In Aile the batailles that launcelot had bene, With hard acountres bym A-gayne, In poynte had be nevir bene 1590 So nyghe bande for to haue be slayne. HE VANQUISHES SIR MADOR 47 There was so wondyr stronge A fyghte, O fote nolde nouther fle ne foimde fronie loughe none tylle late nyglit, Bot gyffen many a wofull wounde. 1595 launcelot than gaffe A dynte with mj^ght, Syr mador fallys at laste to grounde ; "Mercy," cryes that noble knyglit. Fore lie was seke and sore vnsound. Thonghe launcelot were brème as bore, 1600 FuU stournely he ganne vp stande ; O dynte wolde lie sniyte no more, liys swerd he tlirewe oute of bis bande. Syr mador by god tlian sware ; "I haue fougbte in many A lande, 1605 With knyghtis bothe lesse and mare. And neuyr yit er my mâche I founde ; Bot, Syr, A prayer I wolde make, For thynge that ye loue moste on lyfe And for oure swete lady sake, 1610 youer nanie that ye wolde me kythe." launcelot gaii hys viser vp take And hendely hym shewed that sythe. Whan he saughe launcelot du lake, Was neuyr man on molde so blythe : 1615 " lord," thane said he, " welle is me, Myne Auauntement that I may make That I haue stande on dynte of the And foughten with launcelot du lake; My brother's dethe for-gcffen be 1620 To the qucne for thy sake." launcelot hym kyste with herte fre And in hys arniys gan hym vp take. 48 LE MORTE ARTHUR Kynge Arthur tlian loude spake A-nionge hys knyglatis to the quene: 1625 " ja, yonder is launcelot du lake, Tiff I hym euyr with syght haue sene." Thay liyden and ronue tlian for hys sake, The k^'nge aud Aile hys knyghtis kene : In hys armys he gon hym take, 1630 The kynge hym kyste and courte by-dene. Than was the quene glade I-noghe Whan she saw launcelot du lake, that nyghe for loy she felle in swoughe Bot as the lordys hyr gan vp take. 1635 The knj^ghtis Ail wepte and loughe, For loye as thay to-gedyr spake ; Withe Syr mador, with-outen wouglie, Full some acordement gon they niake. It was no lenger for to A-byde 1640 Bot to the castelle thay Rode as sw3'the, Withe trompys and with mykelle pryde, That loy it was to hère aud lythe; Thoughe syr mador myght not go ne Ryde To the curte is he brought tliat sythe, 1645 And knyghtis vppon Iche A syde To make hym bothe glad and blythe. The squeers than were takyn Aile And thay ar jnit in harde payne, "Whiche that seruyd in the halle, 1650 Whan the knyght was with po3'Son slayne. There he grauntyd A-monge hem Aile, Tt tnyght no lenger be to layne, IIow in an Appelle he dede the galle And hadde it thought to syr gawayne. 1655 THE QUE EN VINDICATED 49 Whan syr mador lierde Ail tlie Ryg'lit, That no gylte hadde the lady sliene, For sorowe lie loste mayue and niyglite And on knees felle be-fore the quene ; launcelot then hym Lelde vppe Kyghte 1600 For loue that vvas them be-t\vene ; Hym kyste bothe kynge and knyght And sythen AU the curte by-dene. The squyer than was done to shende, As it vvas bothe lawe and Ryght, 1665 Drawen and hongyd and for-brende Be-fore syr mador, the noble knyghte. In the castelle thay gan forthe lende, The loyus gard than was it hyghte ; launcelot that was so lien de 1070 Thay honouryd hym with Aile ther myght. Atyme be-felle, sothe to sayne, the knyghtis stode in chambyr and spake, Bothe gaheriet and syr gawayne And mordreite that mykelle couthe of wrake : 1675 " Allas ! " than sayde syr A-grawayne, " How fais men schalle we vs niake ! And how longe shalle we liele and layne The treson of launeelote du lake ! Wele we wote, with-outen wene, 1680 The kynge artliur oure eme sholde be And launeelote lyes by the quene ; A-geyne the kynge traytor is lie ; And that wote AU the curte by-dene, And Iche day it hère and see ; 16S5 To the kynge we shulde it mené, Yif ye wille do by the counselle of me." 50 LE MORTE ARTHUR " Wele wote we," sayd syr gavvayne, ' Tliat we ar of the kyngis kyuiie, And launcelot is so luykyll of mayne 1690 That suche woidys were better blynne. , Welle wote thou, brothyr agrawayne, Tliere-of shulde we bot liannys wynne ; yit were it better to liele and layne Than werre and wrake thus to be-gynne. 1695 Welle wote thou, brother agrawayne, launcelot is hardy kuyglit and tliro ; kynge and courte hade ofte beue slayne, Nad he bene better than we mo ; And sythen niyght I neuyr sayne 1700 The loue that lias bene by-twene vs twoo ; launcelot shalle I neuyr be-trayne By-hynde hys bake to be hys foo. launcelot is kynges sonne full good. And therto hardy knyght and bolde, 1705 And sythen and hym ned by-stode, Many A lande wolde with hym holde ; Shedde ther sholde be mykelle blode For thys taie, yifïe it were tolde ; Syr Agrawayne he were full wode 1710 That suche a thynge be-gynne wolde."' Tjian thus gatys as the knyghtis stode, Gawayne and AU that other près, I In coine the kynge with niylde mode ; Gawayne than sayd : " felaus, pees." 1715 The kynge for wrathe was neghe wode For to wette what it was ; Aggrawayne swore by crosse And Rode : "I shalle it you telle with-oute lees." AGRA VAINE ACCUSES THE QUE EN 51 Gawayne to liys chambyr wente, ' 1720 Ofî thys taie nolde he noght hère ; Gaheriet and gaheryes of hys A-sente Withe hère brother went they there ; Welle they wyste that Ali was shente And syr gawayne by god than swere : 1725 "hère now is made A conisemente That bethe not fynysshyd many A yere." Syr Agrawayne tolde Aile be-deno To the kynge with symple chère, How " launeelot liggys by the quene, 1730 And so has done fnll niany A yere, And that wote Ail the courte by-dene And Iche day it se and hère, And we haue false and treytours bene That we ne wolde neuyr to you dyskere." 1735 " Allas ! " than sayd the kynge thore, " Certes, that were grete pyte, So As man nad neuyr hit more Ofï biaute ne of bounte Ne man in worlde was neuyr yit ore 1740 Off so mykylle noblyte. Allas ! f uU grete duelle it were In hym shulde Any treson be ; But sythe it is so, with-outen fayle, Syr Agrawayne, so god the Kede, 1745 What were now thy beste consayle For to take hym with" the dede ? he is man of suche Apparayle, Off hym I haue full mychelle drede ; Ail the courte nolde hym Assayle 1750 Yiff he were Armyd vppon hys stede." 52 LE MORTE ARTHUR " Syr, ye and Ail tbe courte by-dene Wendythe to-morowe on Imntynge Rygbt, And sythen send word to the quene That ye wille dwelle with-oute Ali nyglit, 1755 And I and other xii knygbtes kene Full preuely we shall vs dyght ; We shalle hym haue with-outen wene, To-moro\v or Any day by lyglit." On the morow with Ail the courte by-dene 1760 The kynge gonne on huntynge Kyde, And sythen he sent word to the quene That he wolde Ail nyght oute A-byde. Aggrawayne with xii knyghtys kene Atte home be-lefte that iike tyde ; 1765 Oiï Aile the day they were not sene, So prewely thay gonne hem hyde. Tho was the quene wondyr blythe That the kynge wolde at the foreste dwelle ; To launcelot she sente as swythe 1770 And bad that he shulde corne lier tille. Syr hors de gawnes be-ganne to lythe, Thoughe hys herte lyked ille ; "Syr," he said, "I wolde you kythe A word, yif that it were your wille : 1775 Syr, to-nyght I rede ye dwelle ; I drede ther be som treson dight Withe Agrawayne, that is so felle, That waites you bothe day and nyght ; Oit" Aile that ye haue gonne hyr-tylle 1780 • Ne greuyd me neuyr yit no wiglit Ne neuyr yit gaffe myn herte to ille So mykelle as it dothe to-nyght." LANCELOT COMES TO THE QUEEN'S BOWER 53 " Bors," lie sayd, "holde stylle ; Suclie wordys ar noughte to kythe ; 1785 I wille wende my lady tille, Sora new tythandes for to lythe ; I ne shall nogbt bote wete hyr wylle, loke ye make youe glad and blytlie ; Certenly I nelle nougbt dwelle 179f- Bot corne A-gayne to youe Ail swythe." For-why he wende liaue comynne sone, ^ For to dwelle had be not tbougbt, Non Armore be dyde bym vppon Bot A Kobe Ail sengle wrougbt; 1795 In bys band A swerd be fone, Off tresson dred be bym Kygbt nogbt ; ïhere was no man vndyr tbe moue be wende witb barme durste bym baffe sougbt. Whan be corne to tbe lady sbene, 1800 be kissid and clypped tbat swete wygbt ; For sotbe, tbey neuyr vvolde wene Tbat any treson was tber dygbt; So mykylla loue was beni by-twene Tbat tbey nogbt de-parte Mygbt ; 1805 To bede be gotbe witb tbe quene And tbere be tbougbte to dwelle Allenygbt. be was not buskyd in bys bedde, launcelot in tbe quenys boure, Conie Agrawayne antl syr niordreit ISIU Witb xii knyglitys stiffe in stowre ; Launcelot of tresson tbey be-gredde, Callyd bytn fais and kyngys treytoure, And bo so strongly was by-stedde Tbere-inue be badde non Aruioure. 1^15 64 LE MORTE ARTHUR " Welaway ! " than sayd the quene, " launcelot, wliat shall worthe of vs twoo ! The loue that hatbe bene vs be-twene To suche endynge tbat it sholde goo ! ^ AVithe Agrawayne that is so kene, 1820 That nyght And day hatbe bene oiu-e foo, Now I wote, with-outen ^A'ene, That Aile oure wele is tornyd to woo." "Lady," he sayd, "thow moste blynne ; Wyde I wote thèse wordis bethe Ry£fe ; 1825 Bot is hère any Aruioure inné, That I may haue to saue my Ij^ffe?" " Certis, nay," she sayd thenne, " Thys Antoure is so wondyr stryft'e That I ne may to none Anuoure wynne, 1830 Helme ne hauberke, SNverd ne knyffe." Euyr Agrawayne and syr mordred Callyd hyni Recréante fais knyght, Bad hyin Ryse oute of hys bedde, For he moste nedis with them f3'gbt ; 1835 In hys Robe than he hym cled, Thoughe he none Armoure gete myght ; Wrothely oute hys swerd he gredde, The chamber dore he sette vp Ryght. An Armyd knyght be-fore in wente, 1840 And wende launcelot wele to sloo, Bot launcelot gaffe hym soche A dynte That to the grounde gonne he go ; The other ail agayne than stente ; Aftyr hym dorste folowe no moo ; 1845 To the chauibyr dore he s2)rente And claspid it with barres twoo. LANCELOT KILLS AGRA VAINE 55 The knyght that launcelot lias slayne, Hys Armoure founde lie fayre and bryglit ; Hastely he hathe hem ofdrayne 1850 And theria hym-selfe dight. "Now, know thon wele, syr Agrawayne, Thow presons me no more to-Nyght." Oute than sprange he with niykell mayn, Plym-selfe a-yenste hem aile to fyght. 1855 Launcelot than smote with herte goode, Wete ye welle, with-outen lèse ; Syr Agrawayne to dethe yode, And sythen Ail the other presse ; Was non so stronge that hym with-stode 1860 Be he had made A lytelle Rese ; Bot mordreit fled as he wero wode, To saue hys lyff full fayne he was. 1 Launcelot to hys chambre yode, I To bors and to hys other knyghtis ; 1865 Bors Armyd be-fore hym stode, To bedde yit was he noît dight ; The knyghtis for fere was nye wode, So were they drechyd ail that nyght. Bot blythe wcxid they in lier mode 1870 Whan they her niastyr sawghe with syght. " Syr," sayd bors, the hardy knyght, " Aftyr you haue we thoght full longe, To bedde durste I ne^ no^t dight, For drede ye hade som Aunter stronge ; 1875 Owre knyghtis haue be drechyd to-nyght, That som nakyd oute of bed sj)ronge, For-thy we were full sore a-fryglit Leste som treson were vs Amoni^e." 66 LE MORTE ARTHUR " Ya, bors, drede tlie no wiglit, 1880 Bot betlie of Iierte good and bolde, And swj^the A-wakeu vp AU ray knyglitis And loke wbiche wille witb vs hokle ; Loke they be Armyd and redy digbt, For it is sothe tbat tbou nie tokle, 1885 We baue be-gonne thys ilke nygbt ïhat sball brynge many A nian full colde." Bors than spake Avltb drery mode : j " Syr," he sayd, " sithe it is so, We shalle be of hertis good 1890 Aftyr tbe wele to take tbe \vo." The knygbtis sprent as tbey were wode And to tbere harneise gon tbe go ; At tbe niorow Armyd be-fore bym stode An hundretlie knyglitis and squyers mo. Whan they were armyd and redy digbt, 1896 A softe pas fortb gon ne tbey Ride, As men tliat were of mykelle mj^ght, - To A forest tbere be-syde ; Launcelot Arrayes Ail bys knygbtis 1900 And tbere tbey loggen bem to byde Tylle tbey herd of tbe lady brygbt, What Auntere of hyr sbulde be-tyde. Mordreit tban toke A way full gayne, And to tbe forest wente he Riglit, 1905 Hys Auntures tolde, for sothe to sa3'ne, Tbat were by-fallyn that ylke nygbt. " Mordreit, baue ye that treitonr slayne. Or bow baue ye with bym digbt? " "Nay, syr, bot dede is aggrawayne, 1010 And so Ar Ail ourc other knvsrhtis." THE QUEEN IS TO BE BURNED 57 Whan it herde syr gawayne, That was so hardy knyght and bolde, " Allas ! is my brother slayne ? " Sore hys herte be-gan to colde ; 1915 " I warnyd wele syr Aggrawayne, Or euyr yit thys taie was tolde, Launcelot was so niycbe of niayne, A-yeiiste bym was stronge to bolde." It was no lenger for to byde, 1920 Kynge And AU bys knygbtis kene Toke tbere counselle in tluit tyde, What was beste do with the quene. It was no lenger for to byde, That day for-brent sbuld sbe bene. 1925 The fyre tlian made they in the felde, There-to they brought that lady fre. Ail that euyr niyght wepene welde A-boute lier Armyd for to bee. Gawayne, that stifPe was vndir shelde, 1930 Gaheryet ne gaheryes ne wold no^t see ; la there chamber they hem holde; Ofî hyr they had grete pyte. The kynge Arthnre that ylke tyde Gawayne And gaherys for sent ; 1935 liere Answeres were.no^t for to hyde, They ne wolde nojt be of hys assente ; Gawayne wolde neuyr be ncre by-syde There Any wonian sliuld be broute ; Gaheriet And gaherlos with ly telle pryde, 1940 Ail vu- Armyd thedyr they weute. 58 LE MORTE ARTHUR A squeer gonne tho tythandes lytlie, That launcelot to courte had sente ; To the foreste lie wente as switlie Tliere launcelot and hys folke was lente, 1945 Bad hem corne and haste blytlie, The quene is ledde to be brente ; And they to hoi-s and Armes swythe And Iche one be-fore other sprente. The quene by the fyre stode, 1950 And in hyr smoke Ail redy was ; lordyngis was thei-e many and good And grete power, with-outen lèse. Launcelot sprente, as he were wode, FuU sone partyd he the prees, 1955 Was none so styffe a-^eynste hym stode, Be he had made a lytelle Rese. There was no stèle stode hem ajeyne ; Though faught they but A lytelle stound, Lordyngys that were mj^che of mayne i960 Many goode were brought to grounde ; Gaheriet and gaheries bothe were slayne, Wythe many A doulfull dethes wounde; The quene thay toke with-oute layne, And to the foreste gonne they founde. 1965 The tythyngis is to the kynge brought, how launcelote has tane away the quene. " Suche wo us there is wroughte ! Slayne ar Aile oure knightis kene." Downe he felle and swounyd ofte, 1970 Grete duelle it was to hère and sene ; So nere hys herte the sorowe soughte All-moste hys lyffe wolde no man wene ; LANCE LOT RESCUES THE QUE EN 59 " Ihesu cryste! what may I sayne? In erthe was neuyr man so wo ; 1975 Suclie knyglitys as there ar slayne In Ail tliys worlile there is no rao. Lette no man telle Syr gawayne, Gaheriet hys brother is dede liym fro, But weilaway ! the reufulle Rayne, 1980 Tbat euyr launeelotc was my fo ! " '1 Gawayne gonne in his chambyr hym holde, Off AU the daye lie nolde not oute goo ; A squyer than the tythandys tolde What wondyr theighe hys herte were wo ! 1985 *' Allas ! " he sayde, " my brother bolde, Where gahereit be dede me fro?" So sore hys hert be-gan to colde All-moste he wolde hym-selff sloo. The squyer spake with drery mode, 1990 To re-comfort syr Gawayne : ' Gaheriet eyles noght bot goode ; ^ he wolle sone corne A-gayne." '• Gawayne sprent as he were wode To the chambre there they lay slayne ; 1995 The chambre flore Aile ranne on blode, And clothys of golde were ouer hem drayne. A clothe he heuys tlian vp])on hyght ; What wondyr thoughe hys hert were sore So dulfully to se them dight 2000 That ère so doughty knyghtis were ! Whan he hys brother sawghe with syght, A word myght he speke no more ; There he loste mayne and myght And Guyr hyra fclle in swounynge thore. 2005 60 LE MORTE ARTHUR Off swounynge whan he myglit A-wake, The hardy knyglit, syr gawayne, Be god he sware and loude spake, As nian that niyche was of mayne : " Be-twixte me And launcelote du lake 2010 Nys man in erthe, for sothe to sayne, Shall trewes sette and pees make, Er outher of vs haue other slayne." A squyer that launcelot to court hadde sente Ofï the tythandys gonne he lythe ; 2015 To tlie foreste is he wente And tolde launcelot Also swythe, how lordynges that were Riche of rente Fêle goode had loste hyr lyffe, Gaheryet and gaheries sought hère ende; 2020 Bot than was launcelot no-thynge blythe ; "Lord," he said, " what may thys bene? Ihesu cryste ! what may I sayne ? The loue that hathe be-twexte vs bene, That euyr gaheryet me was A-gayne ! 2025 Now I wote for Ail by-dene, A sorye man Is syr gawayne ; A-cordement thar me nevyr wene. Tille eyther of vs haue other slayne." launcelot gonne with hysse f olke forthe wende, 2030 With sory hert and drery mode ; • To quenys and countesses fêle he sende And grete ladyes of gentill blode, That he had ofte hère landis deffende And foughten whan hem nede by-stode. 2035 Ichone her power hym lende. And made hys party stiffe and goode. THEY PREPARE FOR WAR 61 quenys and eountesses that Ryche were Sende liyrn erlys with grete nieyne ; Otlier ladies tliat mvabt no more 2040 Sente liym barons or knyghtis free ; So niykelle folke to liym gon fare, Hydous it was liys oste to see ; To tlie loyus gard wente he thare And helde hym in that stronge Cyte. 2045 Launcelotis herte was full sore For the lady fayre and bryght ; A damosselle he dyd be yare, In Ryche Apparayle was she d3'ght, Hastely in message for to fare 2050 To the kynge of niykelle myght, To prove it fais (what myght lie mare ?) Bot proferys hym there-fore to fyght. The mayden is Redy for to Ryde, In A full Ryche Aparaylmente, 2055 Off Samytte grene, with mykyll pryde, That wroght was in th.e oryente ; A dwerffe shulde wende by hyr syde, Suche was launcelotis comaundement ; So were the manerys in that tyde, 2060 Whan A mayde on message wente. To the castelle whan she come, In the paleise gonne she lyght ; To the kynge hyr erande she sayd sone, By hym satte syr gawayne the knyght, 2065 Sayd that lyes were sayde hym vppon ; Trewe they were by day and nyght ; To proue it as a knyglit shulcU; done Launcelot proferis hym to fyghte. 62 LE MORTE ARTHUR The kynge Arthure spekys thore 2070 Wordys tluit were kene and thro : " He ne inyglit proue it neuer more Bot of my men that he wokl slo ; Be Ihesu cryste," the kynge swai'e, And Syr gawayne than Also, 2075 " his dédis shall be bought full sore, Bot yife no stèle nyll in hym go." The mayden hathe hyr answere, To the loyus garde gonne she Kyde ; Such as the kynges wordis were 2080 She tokl launcelot in that tyde ; Launcelot Syghed wounder sore, Teres fronie hys yjen ganne glyde ; Bors de gawnes by gode than svvare : " In mydde the fekle \ve shall hem byde." 2085 Arthnre wolde no lenger a-byde Bot hastis hym with Ail hys myght ; Messengeres dyd he go and Ryde, That thay ne shnlde lette for day ne nyght, Thorow-oute yngland by Iche a syde 2090 To erle, baroun and to knyght, Bad hem corne that ilke tyde "VA'ithe hors stronge And Armure bryght. Thonghe the knyght that were dede hem fro, Thore-of was AU there mykelle kare, 2095 Thre hundrethe thay made mo, Oute of the castelle or they wokl fare, Off ynglonde And yreland Also, Oiï walys and scottis that beste were, Launcelot And hys folkys to slo, 2100 With hertis brème as Any bore. ARTHUR BESIEGES JOYOUS GUARD 63 Wlian tliys oste was Ail bowne, It was no lenger for to byde, Rayses spere and gounfanoune, As men that were o£ mykelle pryde; 2105 With helme and shelde and hanberke browne, Gawayne hyni-selfe be-fore ganne Ryde To the loyiis garde that Hyche towne, And sette A sege on Iche A syde. A-bonte the loyns garde they laye 2110 Seuentene wokys And well mare, Tille it felle vppon A day launcelot home bad hem fare : " Breke youre sege ! wendys a-\vaye ! You to slae grete pyte it ware." 2115 He sayd " Allas and weilawaye ! That euyr beganne this sorewe sare! " Evir the kynge and Sir gawayne Calde hym fais Recréante knyght, And sayde he had hys bretherne slayne 2120 And treytour was by day and nyght, Bad hym come And proue hys mayne In the felde with hem to fyghte. Launcelot sighed, for sothe to sayne, Grete duelle it was to se with sight. 2125 So loudc they launcelot gonne Ascrye With vois and hydous hornys bere, Bors de gawnes standis hym by And launcelot makys yuelle chère. "Syr," he sayd, " whare-fore and why 2130 Shnlde we thèse proude wordys herc ? me thynke ye fare as cowardlye As we ne durste no man nyghe nere. 64 LE MORTE ARTHUR Diglit we vs in Ryche Araye, Bothe with spere Aiîd with slielde, 2135 As swithe as euyr that we maye, And Ryde we oute in-to the felde ; Whyle my lyffe laste niaye, Thys day I ne shall my wepen yelde ; There-fore my lyffe I darre wele laye 2140 We two shall make hem Ail to helde," " Allas ! " quod launeelot, " wo is me, That euyr shuld I se with syghte A-jeyne my lord for to be, The noble kynge that made me knyght ! 2145 Syr gawayne, I be-Seche the, As thou arte man of myche myght, In the felde let not my lorde be Ne that thy-selfe with me not fyghte." It may no lenger for to byde 2150 But buskyd hem and made Ail bowne ; Whan thay were Redy for to Ryde, They Reysed spere and gonfanoune ; Wlian thèse ostes gan samen glyde, ^^ ithe vois and hydous hornys sowne, 2155 Grete pyte was on ej'ther syde, So fêle goode ther were layd downe. Syr lyonelle with myche mayne Withe A spere by-fore gan founde; Syr gawayne Rydys hym A-gayne, 2160 hors and man he bare to gronnde, That Al] men wende he had ben slayne, Syr lyonelle hade suche A wounde ; Oiite of the felde was he drayne, For he was seke and sore vn-sounde. 2165 LANCE LOT SPARES THE KING 65 In Ail the felcle that ilke tyde Myght no man stonde launcelot a-^eyne, And sythen as faste As he myght Ryde To saue that no man sholde be slayne. The kynge was euyr nere be-Syde 2170 And hewe on hym with Ail hys mayne, , And he so çorteise was that tyde O dynte that he nolde smyte a-gayne. Bors de srawnes saughe at laste And to the kynge than gan he Ryde, 2175 And on hys heline he hytte so faste That nere he loste Ail hys pryde ; The stede Rigge vndyr hyni braste That lie to grounde felle that tyde, And sythen wordys loude he caste, 2180 Wythe Syr launcelot to chyde : " Syr, shalthou Ail day Sufîer so That the kynge shall the assayle, And sethe hys herte is so thro Thy çorteise niay not A-vaile ? 2185 Batailles shall there neuere be mo, And thou wilt do be my consalle ; 3euyth vs leue them Ail to slo, For thou haste venquesshid thy s bataille." " Allas ! " quod launcelot, " wo is me, 2190 That euyr shulde I se with syghte By-fore me hyra vnhorsyd bee, The noble kynge that made me knyght ! " he was than so çorteise and fre That downe of hys stede he lyghte ; 2105 The kyngo ther-on than horsys ho And bade hym He, yiffe that he myght. 66 LE MORTE ARTHUR Whan the kynge was horsyd there, Launcelot lokys lie vppon, How corteise was in hym more 2200 Then enyr was Any man ; He thought on thyngis tliat had bene ore, The teres from liys y^en Knnne ; He Sayde "Allas! " with syghynge sore, "That euyr yit thys werre be-gan ! '' 2205 The parties arne with-drawen A-waye, Oiï knyghtis were they wexyu thynne ; On morow on that other daye Scholde the bataille ef te begynne ; Thay dyght hem on A Kyche Araye 2210 And partyd ther ostes bothe in twynne ; he that by-ganne thys wrechyd playe, What wondyr thoughe he had grete synne ! Bors was brème as Any bore, And oute he rode to syr gawayne ; 2215 For lyonelle was woundyd sore, Wenge hys brother he wolde full fayne ; Syr gawayne gonne A-jeyne hym fare, As man that myche was of mayne ; Eyther throughe other body bare, 2220 That welle nere were they bothe slayne ; Bothe to grouiide they Felle in fere, There-fore Mère felc folke full woo. TJie kynges party Redy were A-way to take hem bothe two ; 2225 launcelot hym-selfe come nere, Bors rescous he them f roo ; Oute of the felde men hym bere, So were they woundyd Jbothe two. THE WAR CONTINUES 67 Oiï thys bataille were to telle, 2230 A man that it wele vndyrstode, How knyghtis vndyr sadels felle And sytten downe witli sory mode ; Stedys that were bolde aud siielle A-monge hem waden in the blode, 2235 Bot by the tyme of euyn belle Launcelot party the better stode. Off thys batayle was no more, Bot thns departen they that daye; Folke hère Frendys home ledde and bare 2240 That slayne in the feldys laye. Launcelot gonne to hys castelle fare, The bataille venquesshyd, for Sothe to saye ; There was duell and wepynge sare, Amonge hem was no chyldys playe. 2245 Into ail landys northe and soutîie Off thys werre the word spronge, And yit at Konie it was fuU couthe, In ynglande was sache sorowe stronge ; There-of the pope had grete Routhe, 2250 A lettre lie selid with hys hande ; Bot they accorded welle in trowthe, Enterdite he wolde the lande. Thon was A bischo])0 at Rome, Off Rowchester, with-outen lèse ; 2253 Tylle ynglande he, the message, Corne, To karllylle ther the-kynge was ; The popis lettre oute he nome In the paleis by-fore the desse, And bade thom do the popis dôme 2260 And holde yngland in Reste and pes. 68 LE MORTE ARTHUR Redde was it by-fore AU by-dene, The lettre tliat tbe pope gonne make, How be moste baue a-jeyne tbe quene And a-eorde witbe launcelot du lake ; 2265 Make a pas hem by-twene For euyr more and trews make, Or ynglande entyrdyted sbukle bene And torne to sorow for tber sake. The kynge a-jeyne it wokle nojte bene, 2270 To do the popys comaundemente, Blythely A-yeyne to baue tbe quene ; Wolde he noght that ynglonde were shente ; Bot gawayne was of berte so kene That to bym wokle be neuyr Assente 2275 To make A-corde bera b3'-twene, Wbile Any lyffe were in bym lente. Througb tbe sente of Ail by-dene Ganne tbe kynge A lettre make ; The bysschope in message yede by-twene 2280 To syr launcelot du lake, And Askyd yiffe be wolde tbe quene Cortessly to bym by-take, Or yngland enterdyt sbuld bene And torne to sorow for tber sake. 2285 launcelot Answerj'cd witb grete fauoure, As knygbt tliat bardy was and kene: " Syr, I baue stande in many A stoure, Bothe for tbe kynge and for the quene ; Full colde bad bene bys beste towre, 2290 Yilï that I nadde my-selfe bene ; he quytes it me witb lytelle honoure, That I baue seruyd bym Ail by-dene." THE POPE INTERVENES 69 The bysschope spake with-oute fayle, Thoughe lie were nothynge A-froughte : 2295 " Syr, tliynke tliat ye baue venquysshid many A bataille Throwgh grâce tbat god liathe for you wrought ; ye slialle do now by iny counsayle : Thynke on liyni that yen dere bought ; Wemen Ar frêle of liyr entayle ; 2300 Sir, lettes not yuglaiide go to noght." " Syr byssbope, castelles for to holde Wete you wele I haue no nede. I mygbt be kynge, yif that I wolde, Ofî Ail benwike, that Ryche thede, 2305 Ryde in-to my landys bolde Withe my knyghtes stytïe on stede. The qiiene, yif that I to them yolde, Oiï lier lyffe I haue grette drede." " Syr, be mary that is niayden floure, 2310 And god that Ail shall rede and Ryght, She ne shall haue no dyshonoure, There-to my trouthe I shall you plyght, Bot boldely brought in-to hyr boure, To ladyes and to maydens bryght, 2315 And holdcn in vvelle more honoure Than euyr she was by day or nyght." " Now, yif I grande suche a thynge, That I delyuere shall the-qiiene, Syr bysshope, say my lorde, the kynge, 2320 Syr gawayne and hem AU by-dene, That thay siiall niake me A sekerynge A trews to holde vs by-twene." 70 LE MORTE ARTHUR Then was the bysshope woundyr blythe That lauucelot gaffe hym thys Answere ; 2325 Tylle hys palfray lie wente as swythe And tylle karllyle gonne lie fare ; Tythandys sone were done to lythe Wliiclie that launcelotis wordis ware ; The kynge and courte was Ail full blythe, 2330 A trews they sette and sekeryd thare ; Through the Assent of Ail by-dène A syker trews there they wrought ; Though gawayne were of herte keue, There-a-yenste was lie no3te, 2335 To hald A trews hem by-twene, While launcelot the queue home broglit ; Bot cordemeute thar hym neuyr wene, Or eyther other herte haue sought. A syker trews gonne they make, 2340 And with tlier seales they it bande ; There-to they thre bisshopys gon take, The wiseste that were in Ail the lande, And sent to launcelot du lake ; At loyus gard they hym fande ; 2345 The lettres there they hym by-take And there-to launcelot held hys bande. The bisshopis than went on her way To karlyll there the kynge wase ; Launcelot shall come that other day 2350 AVithe the lady proude in près, he dight hym In a llyche Araye, Wete ye wele, with-outen les ; An hundreth knyghtis, for sothe to saye The beste of AU hys oste he chese. 2355 LANCELOT ESCORTS QUE EN TO CARLISLE 71 Launcelot and tlie quene were cledde * In Robes o£ A Riche wede, 0& Sarayte white, with syluer sliredde, yuory sadyll and white stede, Saumbues of the same thvede, 2360 That vvroght was in the heythen thede ; launcelot îiyr brydelle ledde. In the Romans as we Rede ; The othei- knyghtis enerychone In Samyte grene o£ heythen lande 2365 And in there kyrtelles Ryde Aliène, And Iche knyght a grene garlande, Sadillis sette with Ryche stone, Ichone A braunche of olylïe in hande, Ail the felde A-boute hem schone ; 2370 The knyghtis Rode f ull loude synghand. To the castelle when they corne In the paleise gonne they lyghte ; Launcelot the quene of hir palfray nome, They Seyde it was A semly syghte ; 2375 The kynge than salowes he full sone, As man that was of rayche myghte ; Feyre wordys were there fone, Bot wepynge stode there many A knyghte. Launcelot spake, as I you mené, 2380 To the kynge of mykelle myght: " Syr, I hane the broght. thy quene And sauyd hyr lyfïe with tho Ryght, As lady that is feyre and shone And trewe is bothe day and nyght i 23S5 Iffe Any man sayes she is noght clcne, I profre me thcre-fore to feyght." 72 LE MORTE ARTHUR The kj'ngc Arthur Answerys thore Wordys that were keue and throo : " Launcelot, I ne wende neuyr more 2390 That thow wokle me haue wroght thys woo ; So dere as we samen were, There-vndyr that thou was my foo ; Bot noght f or-thy me Rewis sore That euer was werre by-twexte vs two." 2395 LAnncelot than Answeryde he, ' Whan he had lystenyd longe : " Syr, thy wo thow witeste me And welle thou woste it is with wronge ; I was neuyr fer frome the, 2400 Wheu thow had Any sorow stronge ; Bot lyers lystenes thow to lye, Olï whome Ail thys word oute spronge." Than by-spake hym Syr gawayne, That was hardy knyght and free : 2405 " launcelot, thou may it noght witli-sayne That thow haste slayne my brethrene thre ; For-thy schall we proue oure mayue In feld whether shall haue the grée ; Or eyther of vs shall other slayne 2410 Blythe shall I neuyr be." Launcelot Answeryd wîth hert sore, Thoughe he were nothynge A-f roughte : "Gawayne," he said, "thoufrhe I were there, My-selfe thy brethren slow I noght ; 2415 Other Ivnyghtis fêle ther were That sytlien thys werre dere han bouglit." launcelot syghed wonder sore, The terys of hys yen sowght. GAWAYNE STILL SlVEARS VENGEANCE 73 îauncelot spake, as I you mené, 2420 To the kynge and syr gawayne : " Syr, sliall I ueuyr of cordemente wene Tliat \ve niyght f rendys be A-jeyne ? " Gawayne spake witli hertekene. As man that myche was of mayne : 2425 "Nay, cordement thar the neuyr weue Tylle on of vs haue other slayne." ■'Sythe it neuyr may be-tyde That pees may be vs by-twene, May I in-to ray landys Ryde 2430 Saffely with my knyghtis kene ? Than wille I hère no lenger byde, Bot take leue off yow Ail by-dene ; Where I wende in worlde wyde, Engeloud wolle I neuyr sene." 2435 t, The kynge arthur Answered thore, The terys from hys yjen Kanne : *'By Ihesu cryste ! " he there swore, " That AU thys worlde wroght and wan, In-to thy lands whan thon willt fare, 2440 The shall lette no lyuand man." He sayd " Allas ! " withe syghynge sare, " That euyr yit thys werre by-ganne ! Sythe that I shall wende A-waye And in myn Awne landys wone, 2446 May 1 saffly wone ther aye, That ye wythe werre- not coma me on ? " Syr gawayne than sayd : " naye, By hym that nuide sonne and mone, Dight the as welle as euyr thou may, 24r,0 For \ve shall Aftcr conie full sone." 74 LE MORTE ARTHUR launcelot liys leue hatbe taken thare, It was uo lenger for to byde ; hys palfray found he Redy ^are, Made hym Redy for to Ryde ; 2455 Oute of tlie castelle gonne they fare, Gremly teres lette they giyde ; There was dwelle and wepynge sare, At the party nge was ly telle pry de. To the loyus gard, the Ryche towne, 2460 Rode launcelot, the noble knyghte ; Busked hem and made A bowne, As men that were of myehe myght, Withe spere in hand and gonfanowne (lette they nouther day ne uyght) 2465 To An hauen hight kelyon ; Ryche galleys there they fande dyght. Now ar thay shyppyd on the Hode, launcelot And hys knyghtis hende ; Wederes had they fe}' re and goode 2470 Wher hyr wille was for to wende, To An hauen there it stode As men were leuste for to lende ; Ofï benvvike bl^'the was hyr mode, Whan Ihesu cryst hem thedir sende. 2475 Now ar thay Aryued on the stronde, Ofï hem was fêle folke full blythe ; Grete lordis of the lande, A-jeyne hym they corne as swythe. And fellyn hym to fote and hande ; 2480 For her lord thay gonne hym kythe, At hys domys for to stand e, And at hys lawes for to lythe. LANCE LOT SA ILS TO FRANCE 75 ' Bors made he kynge of gawnes, As it was bothe law and Ryght ; 2485 lyonelle made kynge of fraunce, Be okle tyme gawle kyghte ; Ail hys folke he garnie Auance And landys gaffe to Iclie A kiiyghte, And storyd hys castellys for AU chance, 2490 For mykyll he hopyd more to fyght. Ester he crownys with hys hande, So sayes the boke with-outen lèse, made hym kynge of hys fadyr lande And prynce of AU the Ryclie prese ; 2495 Bad no thynge hym shulde with-stande, Bot liald hym kynge as worthy was, For ther no more hym-self vvold fande Tyllô he wiste to leffe in pes. Arthure woUe he no lenger A-byde, 2500 nyght and day hys herte was sore; messengerys did he go And Kyde Throughe-oute yngland for to fare To erlys And barons on Iche A syde, Bad hem buske and make AU ^are, 2505 On launcelot landys for to Kyde, To brenne and sle and make AU bare. At liys knyghtis AU by-dene The kynge gan hys conseUe take, And bad hem ordeyrwî hem by-twene 2510 AVho beste steward were for to make, The Rome for to saue and ;eme, And beste were for bretaynos sake ; FuU mykelle they drod liem AU by-dene That Alyens the land wokl take. 2515 76 LE MORTE ARTHUR The knyglitis answeryd, with-oute lèse, And said, for sothe, that so tliem tliouglit That syr niordred tlie sekereste was, Thouglie inen the Réme throw-oute souglit, To saue the Keme in trews and pees. 2520 Was A boke by-fore hym brought ; Syr mordreit tliey to steward chese ; That raany A bolde sythen A-bought. It was no lenger for to byde, But buskes hem And niade Ail bowne ; 2525 Whan they were Redy for to Kyde, They Reised spere and gonfanowne ; Forthe they went with mykelle pryde Tylle An hauyne hyght kerlyonne, And graythes be the lande syde 2530 Galeis grete of fêle fasowne. now are they shippid on the see And wendyn ouyr the water wyde ; Off benwyke whan they myght se, Withe grete Route they gonne vp Ryde ; 2535 with-stode hem neyther stone ne tre, Bot brente and slow on Iche A syde ; launcelot is in hys beste Cyte, Tliere he batelle wolle A-byde. launcelot clepis hys knyghtis kene, 2540 His erlys And hys barons bolde, Bad hem ordeyne hem by-twene, To wete her wylle, what they wolde, To Ryde A-jeyne hem Ail by dene Or ther worthe walles holde ; 2545 For well they wiste, with-outen wene. For no fantyse Arthur nold folde. LANCE LOT' s KNIGHTS ADVISE HIM 11 Bors (le gawnes, tlie noble knyght, stornnely spekys in that stounde : " Dougbty nien that ye be dyglite, 2550 Foundis yoLir worship for to fownd, Withe spere and sbelde and armes brygbt A-jeyne your fo-men for to fownd ; Kynge and tluke, erle and knyght, We shall bem bete And brynge to grounde." 2555 Lyonelle spekys in that tyde, That was of warre wyse And bolde : " Lordyngis, yet I rede we byde And oure worthy walles liolde ; Let them pryke with AU ther pryde 2560 I Tylle they haue Caught bothe hungre and colde ; Than shall we oute vppon them Kyde And shredde them downe as shepe in folde." Syr banndemagew, that bolde kynge, To launcelot spekys in that tyde : 2565 " Syr, cortessye And your sufferynge Has wakend vs wo full wyde ; Awise you welle vppon thys thynge : Yiff that they ouer oure landys Kyde, Ail to noght they myght vs brynge, 2570 Whyle we in holys hère vs hyde." Galyhud, tliat Ay was goode, To launcelot lie spekys thare : " Syr, hère ar knyghtis of kyuges blode Tiiat longe wylle not dioupe And dare ; 2575 Gyfïe nie leue, for crosse on Kodc, Withe my meu to tliein to fare ; Thoughe they be wers than outlawcs wode, I shall them sle and make full bare." 78 LE MORTE ARTHUR Off northe gales were bretherne seuen, 2580 Ferly aiekelle of strenghe and pryde ; Not full fêle that men coude neuyne Better dorste in bataile byde ; Ail they sayd with one steuen : " Lordyngis, how longe wolle ye cliyde ? 2585 Launcelot, for goddys loue in heuen, Witli galehud forthe lette vs Ryde." Than spake the lorde that was so hende, Hym-Self, syr launcelot de lake : " Lordyngis, A whyle I rede we lende 2590 And oure worthy wallys wake ; A message wille I to them sende, A trews be-twene vs for to take ; my lorde is so corteise and hende That yit I hope A pees to make ; 2595 Thoughe we myglit the worshyppe wynne, Off A thynge myn hert is sore : Thys land is of folke full thynne, Bataylles has it made full bare ; Wete ye welle it were grete synne 2600 Crysten folke to sle thus more ; Withe myldenesse we shall be-gynne And god shall wische vs wele to fare." &■■ And at thys Assent Ail they ware, And Sette A wacche for to wake 2C05 knyghtis brème as Any bare And derfe of drede as is the drake ; A Damyselle thay dede be jare And hastely gon lier lettres make ; A mayde sholde on the message fare 2610 A trews by-tvvene them for to take. LANCELOTS "AMBASSADOR" TO ARTHUR 79 The ma3'de was fui] shene to shewe, Vppon lier stede wliaii she was settc, Hyr paraylle Ail of one hewe, Ofï A grene weluette, 2615 In hyr Imnd A bi-annclie newe, For-why that no man sholde lier lette ; Ther-by men messangerys knewe In ostes wlian tliat men them mette. The kynge was lokyd in A felde 2620 By A ryuer brode And dreghe ; A while she houyd And by-helde ; Pavylons were pyghte on hyghe ; She saughe there many comly telde Wythe pomeîles bryghte as goldis beghe ; 2625 On one hynge the kyngis shelde, That pauylon she drew hyr nyghe. The kynges baner oute was sotte, That pauylon she diewe her nere ; Witli A knyght fuU sone she mette, 2630 hyglit Syr lucan de bottelere ; She hailsed hym and lie her grette, The mayde with full mylde chère ; hyr erande was not for to lette, lie wlste she was A messengere. 2635 Sir luean downe giui hyr take And in hys Armes forthe gan lede ; hendely to her he spake, As knyght that wise-was vndyr wede • " Thon comeste from launcelot de lake, 2640 The beste that enyr strode on stede ; Ihesu, for hys modyris sake, Yifïe the grâce wele to spede ! " 80 LE mÙrTE ARTHUR Feyre was piglit vppon a playne The paviloun in Ryche A-parayle ; 2645 The kyiige hym-selfe and syr gawayne Comely sytten in the halle ; The mayde knelj'd the kynge A-gayne, So lowe to grounde gan she falle ; hère lettres were not for to layne, 2650 They were I-rade A-monge hem Ail. hendly and feyre the mayden spake, Full fayne of speche she wold be sped : " Syr, god yow saue f rom wo And wrake And Ail your knyghtis in Ryche wede ; 2655 Yow gretis wele, syr launcelot du lake, That with yow hathe bene euyr at uede ; A xii monthe trewse he wolde take To lyue vppon h3's owne lede, And sythen, yiiïe ye make an heste, 2660 he wille it holde with hys honde, By-twene you for to make pees Stabully euer for to stonde ; He wolle Râpe hym on A Resse Myhlely to the holy londe, 2665 There to lyue, with-outen lèse, AVhyle he is man lyvande." The kynge than elepid hys counsayle, Hys dou;ty knyglitis Ail b3Mlene ; Fyrste he sayde, with-outen fayle : 2670 " me thynke it were beste to sene ; he were A foie, with-outen fayle, So feyr forwardys for to fîeme." The kynge the mess)'^ngere thus did assayle : " It were pite to sette warre vs by-twene." 2675 LANCELOTS OFFER REJECTED 81 " Sertis, nay," saycl syr gawayne, " he bathe wrogt me wo I-noughe, So traytourly he liatlie my bredren slayne, Ail for your loue, sir, tliat is treuthe, To yngland will I not torne A-gayne 2680 Tylle he be hangid on a boughe ; Whyle me Jastetlie myght or niayue, There-to I shall fynd peple I-noghe." The kynge hym-self, with-outen lèse, And Iche A lord, is nought to layne, 2685 Ail they spake to haue pesé, But hym-self, syr gawayne, To batayle hatlie he made hys hest Or ellys neuer to torne A-gayne. They made hem Redy to that Kese, 2690 There-fore was fêle folke vnfayne. The kynge is comyn in-to the halle And in hys Koyall see hym sette ; He made A knyght the mayden calle, Syr lucane de botteler, with-outen lette : 2695 " Say to launcelot and hys knyghtis Ail, suche an heste I haue hym hette, That we shall wend for no walle Tyll we with myghtis onys haue mette." The mayde had hyr Answere, 2700 Withe drery hert she gan hyr dyght ; hyr feyr palfrey fande she yare. And Syr lucan ledde hyr thedyr Kyght ; So throw A foreste gan she fare And hasted lier with Ail hyr myght, 2705 There launcelot and hys knyghtis were, In benwyk the browgh with bemys bryght. 82 LE MORTE ARTHUR Now is she went with-in tlie walle, The worthy dainysselle fayre in wede ; Hendely she Gain in-to that halle, 2710 A knyght hyr toke downe of hyre stade ; A-nionge the pryncis proude in palle She toke hyr lettres for to Rede ; There was no counsayle for to calle, But Redely buskis tliem to that dede ; 2715 As folkys that preste were to feight, Froaie feld wold they neuyr fie ; But by the inorow that daye was lyght A-boute by-segyd was Ail there Fee ; yehone theym Rayed in Ail Ryghtis ; 2720 novther party thought to Hee. Erly as the day gan sprynge, The trompettis vppon the wallis went ; There niyght they se a wondyr thynge, Off teldys Ryche and many A tente. 2725 Syr arthur than, the comely kynge, with hys folkis ther was lente, To yeff Assaute, with-oute lesyng, with Alblasters and bowes bente. Launcelot AU for-wondred was 2730 . Off the folke by-fore the walle ; But he had rather knowen that rease, Oute had ronne hys knyghtis Ail ; he sayd : " })ryncis, bethe in ])ease, For folyse fêle that niyght by-falle ; 2735 yiff thay will not ther sege sease, Full sore I hope for-thynke hem shall." THE WAR CONTINUES 83 Tlian gawayne, tbat was good at euery nede, Graythid hym in his gode Ai-monr, And styffly sterte vppon A stede 2740 That syker was in ylke A stoure ; Forthe lie sprange as sparke on giede, By-fore the yates a-gayne tlie toure ; Le bad A knyght conie kythe mayne, A cours of werre for liys honoure. 2745 Bors de gawnes buskys hym bowne Vpon A stede that shuld hym bere, With helme, shekl, And hauberke browne, And in hys hand A Full good spere ; Owte he Rode A grete Randowne ; 2750 Gawayn kyd he covde of werre ; hors and man bothe bare he downe, Sache A dynte he yaffe hym there. Syr lyonello was Ail redy than And for hys broder was wonder woo ; 2755 Redely with hys stede oute Ranne And wende gawayne for to sloo. Gawayn hym kepte as he wele can, As he that ay was kene and thro ; Downe he bai-e bothe hors and man, 2760 And euery day som seruyd he soo. And so more than halfe a yere, As longe as they there layne, Euery day men myght se there Men woundyd and som slayne, 2765 But how that euer in world it were, Sache grâce had sir gawayne, Euer he passyd hole and clore ; There uivght no man stand hym Agayue. 84 LE MORTE ARTHUR Than it by-T'elle vponn A tyde, 2770 Syr gawayne, that was hende and free, Ile made liyni redy for to Ryde By-fore the gatis of the Cyte ; Laiincelot of treson he be-Cryed That he had slayne hys bretherne thre, 2775 That launcelot myjte no lenger A-byde, But he euer A cowarde scholde be. The lord that grete was of honoure, Hym-selffe, sir launcelot du lake, A-bove the gatis vppon the toure 2780 Comely to the kynge he spake : " My lord, god saue youre honoure ! Me ys wo now for yowre sake, A-gaynste thy kynne to stonde in stoure, But nedys I muste thys batayle take." 2785 Launcelot armyd hyra full wele, For sothe had Full grete nede, Helme, hawberke and Ail of stèle And stifely sterte vppon A stede ; Hys harneyse lacked he neuer A dele, 2790 To were wantyd hym no wede, No wepyn with Ail to dele ; for-the he sprange as sparke on glede. Than was it warnyd faste on hye PIow in world that it shuld fare, 2795 That no man schold corne hem nye Tylle the tone dede or yolden were. Folke with-drew them than bye, Vpon the feld was brode and bare ; The knyghtis mette, As men it sye, 2800 how they scttc there dyntis sare. LANCELOT OVERCOMES GAWAYNE 85 Than had syr gawayne suche a grâce, An holy man had boddyn tbat boue, Whan he were in Any place, Tbere be sbuld batayle donc, 2805 Ilys strengtb sbulld wex in suebe A space, From tbe vndyr-t3ane tylle noue. And biuncelot for-bare ay for tbat case ; A-gayne xx strokys be yaiï not one : Launcelot saw tber was no socoure, 2810 nedysse muste be bys venture Abyde ; many A dynt be gan wele in-dure Tylle it drew nere tbe noon tyde ; Than be strauglit in tbat stonre And yaffe gawayne A wond wyde; 2815 Tbe blode AU coueryd bys coloure And be felle downe vpon bys syde. Tbrow tbe belme in-to tbe bede Was bardy gawayne woundyd so Tbat vnneth was byni lyfe leuyd ; 2820 On fote niygbt ho no ferther goo ; But wightly bys swerd A-bowte be wavyd. For euer be was bothe kene and thro. launcelot than bym lyAnd levyd ; For Ail tbe world be nold bym sic. 2825 launcelot than bym drew on dryhe ; hys swerd was in bys hand drawen ; And syr gawayne cryed lowde on bye : "Traytour And coward, corne A-gayne, Wlian I Am hole And goynge on bye ; 2830 Tlian wylle I prove witli niygbt and niayno, And yit A tliow woldyst nygbe me nye, Tliow sbalt welc wcte I ani n(»t slayn." 86 LE MORTE ARTHUR "Gawayne, while tliow myghtis styfflye stonde, many A stroke to-day of the I stode, 2835 And I for-bare the in euery londe For love and for the kyngis blode ; Whan thou arte hole in herte and bond, I rede the torne and chaunge thy mode ; Whyle I ani launcelot and man levande, 2840 Gode sheld me f rome werkys wode ! But hâve good day, my lord the kynge, And your doughty knyghtis Aile; Wendyth home A leue youre werryeng ; ye wynne no vvorshyp at thys walle ; 2845 And I wold my knyghtis oute brynge, I wote f ull sore i-ewe it ye shalle ; My lord, there-fore, thynke on suche thynge, how fêle folke there-fore myght falle." launcelot, that was moche of mayne, 2850 Boldely to hys Cyte wente ; Hys good kuy:;tis there-of were fayne And hendely hym in armys hente. The tother party tho toke syr gawayne, They wessche hys woundys in hys tente; 2855 Or euer he coueryd myght or mayne, vnnethe was hym the lyiïe lente. A fortenyght, the sothe to saye, Full passynge seke and vu-sonde Tliere syr Gawayne on lechynge laye, 2860 Or he were hole Ail of hys wounde. Than it by-felle vppon A day, he made hym Redy for to wound ; By-fore the yat he toke the way And Askyd batayle in that stownd : 2865 GÂ WA Y NE A G A IN CE A LLENGES LA NCEL OT 87 " Corne forthe, launcelot, and prove thy raayne, Thou traytour that hast treson vvroght ; ray thre biethern thou haste shiyne And falsly theym to grounde brought ; Whyle me lastethe niyght or uiayne, 2870 Thy s qarell levé wyll I noght, Ne pees shall ther neuer be sayne Or thy sydes be throvv sought." Than launcelot thoght it no tlij'ng gode And for thèse wordis he was full wo ; 2875 A-bove the gatis than he yode And to the kynge he sayd so : " Syr, me rewys in my mode That gawayne is in hert so thro. Who may me wyte, for corsse on Kode, . 28S0 Thou^th I hym in bataylle sloo?" ' Launcelot buskyd And made hym bowne, he will boldely the batayle A-byde, With helme, shelde. And hauberke browne, None better in AU thys worlde wyde, 2885 With spere in hand and gonfanovvne, hys noble swerd by hys syde ; Oute he Kode A grete randowne, Whau he was Kedy for to Kyde. Gawayne grypes a full good spere 2890 And in he glydes glad and gay ; Launcelot kydde he coude of were And euyn to hym he-takys the way ; So stoutely they gan to-geder bcre Thafc marvayle it was, sothe to say ; 2895 With dyntis sore gunne they c^ere And depc wondys daltyn ihay. 88 LE MORTE ARTHUR Whan it was nyghed uere-baud none, Gawayne strengthe gan to in-crese ; So bitterly he bewyd liym vppon 2900 That launcelot Ail for-wery was ; Tban to bys swerd lie grypes A-noue, And setbe tbat gawajaie wyll not sese, Sucbe A dynte he yaffe byni one Tbat many a Rycbe Rewed tbat resse. 2905 launcelot sterte fortbe in tbat stownde, And setbe tbat gawayne vvill no sease, Tbe belme tbat was Rvcbe and Rownde Tbe noble swerde rove tbat rease ; he byt bym A-pon tbe olde woimde 2910 Tbat ouer tbe sadyll downe he wente And grysely gronyd vpon tbe ground, And tbere was good gawayne sbent. yit gawayne swounynge tbere as he lay Gryped to bym botbe swerde And sbeld ; 2915 " launcelot," he sayd, " sotbely to saye, And by bym tbat Ail thys world shall welde, Wbyle me lastetbe lyffe to-daye, To tbe me sball I neuer j-eld ; But do tbe werste tbat euyr tbou raay, 2920 I schall défend me in tbe felde." Launcelot tban f ull styll stoode, As man tbat was mocbe of myght : " Gawayne, me rewes in my mode, Men bald tbe so noble A knj-gbt. 2925 Wenystow I were so wode Agaynste A feble man to fyglit? I wyll not now, by crosse on Kode, Kor neuer yit dyd by day nor nygbt. GAWAYNE WOUNDED AGAIN 89 But baue good day, my lord the kynge, 2930 And AU youre dou^ty knyglitis by-dene, Wendyth home and leue your werrynge, For hère ye shall no worshyppe wynne. y if I wohle niy knyghtis onte brynge, I hope f ull sone it shuld be sene, 2935 but, good lord, thynke vppon A thynge, The loue that bathe be vs by-twene." After was it mouthes two, As frely folke it vndyr-stode. Or euer gawayne myght Ryde or go 2940 Or had fote vpon evthe to stonde, The iij tyme he was full thro To do batayle with herte and bande, But than was word comen hem to That they muste home to y n gland. 2945 Suche raesage was hem brought, There was no man that thougbt it goode ; The kynge hym-selfe full sone it thought (Full moche mornyd he in hys mode That suche treson in ynglond shuld be wroght) 2950 That he raoste nedys ouer the flode. They brake sege and homward sought. And After they had moche Angry mode. That fais traytour, sir mordreid — The kynges soster sone he was, 2955 And eke hys owne sonne. As I rede, — There-fore men hym for steward chase — So falsely bathe he yngland ledde, Wete yow wele, with-onten Icse, Hys Eme-is wyffe wolde lie w«;d(le, 29G0 That many A man rewyd that rease. 90 LE MORTE ARTHUR Festys made lie, many and fêle, And grete yiftys lie yafe Also ; Tbey sayd with liym was loye and wele And in Arthurs tyme but sorow and woo ; 2965 And thus gan Ryght to wronge goo ; AU the coneelle, is noght to hele, Thus it was, with-outen moo, To liold mordred in londe with wele. False lettres lie made be wroght, 2970 And causyd messangers hem to brynge, That Arthur was to grownde broght, And chese they muste A-nother kynge. Ail thay sayd as hem thought : " Arthur louyd noght but warynge 2975 And suche thynge as hym-selfe soght. Ryght so he toke hys endynge." mordred let crye A parlement ; The peple gan thedyr to corne, And holly throwe there assente 2980 They made mordred kynge with crowne ; At canturbery, ferre in kente, A Fourtenyght held the feste in towne, And after that to Wynchester he wente ; A Kyche brydale he lette make bowne ; 2985 In somyr, whan it was fayr and bryght, Hys faders wyfe than wold he wedde And hyr liold with mayne and myght, And so hyr brynge as byrd to bedde. Sche prayd hym of leue A fourtenyght — 2990 Tlie lady was f ull hard be-stad — So to london sche hyr dyght, That she and hyr maydens myght be cledd. MORDRE D'S TREASON 91 The quene, whyte as lyly floure, Witli knyghtis fêle of lier kynne, 2995 She went to london to the towie And speryd the gâtes And dwellyd therin. Mordred ehanged than hys coloure, Thedyr he went and wold not blynne ; There-to he niade many A shoure, 3000 But the wallys myght he neuer wynne. The Archebysshop of canterbery thedyr yode, And hys crosse by-fore liyrn broght. he sayd : " syr, for cryste on Kode, What haue ye novv AU in your thoght ? 3005 Thy faders wyffe, whether thou be wood, To wedd lier now mayste thou noght. Corne Arthur euyr ouer the flood, Thow mayste be bold; it vvyll be boght." " A nyse olerke," than mordred sayd, 3010 "Trowiste thow to warne me of my wille? be hym that for vs suffred payne, Thèse wordys shalt thon lyke f iill ylle ! with wilde hors thou shalt be drayne And hangyd hye vpon An hylle." 3015 The bischoppe to fie than was fayne And suffred hym hys folyes to fulfylle ; Than lie hym cursyd with boke And belle, At caunterbery, ferre in kente. Sone, whan mordred* herd ther-of telle, 3020 To sèche the bisshojie hathe be sent ; The bysshop dnrste no lenger dwelle But gold And syluer he hathe lient; There was no lenger for to spelle, But to A wyldernesse he is went ; 3025 92 LE MORTE ARTHUR The worldys wele ther lie wyll for-sake, Off loye kepetli lie neuer more, But A cliai^elle lie lette make By-twene two liye lioltys liore ; There-in weryd lie tlie clothys blake, 3030 In wode as lie an erniyte ware ; Often gan lie wepe and wake For yngland that had suclie sorowis sare. Mordred liad than lyen full longe, But tlie towre myght he neuer wynne, 3035 With strengtli ne witli stoure stronge, ne with none other kynnes gynne; Hys fader dred he euyr A-monge, There-fore hys baie lie nylle not bl3'nne; He went to warne hem, Ail with wronge, 3040 The kyngdome that he was crownyd inné. . Forthe to dover J»an gan he Ryde, Ail the costys wele he kende ; To erlys And to barons on ylk A syde Grete yiftis he gaffe And lettres send, 3045 And for-sette the see on ylke A syde With bold men And bowes bente ; Fro yngland, that is brode And wyde, hys owne fader he wold deffend. Arthur, that was mykelle of myght, 3050 With hys folke corne over the flode, An C galeyse that were welle dyglit With barons bold And hye of blode ; he wende to liaue landyd, as it was Ryglit, At Dower, tlier hym tlioght full gode, 3055 And tlier lie fande iiiany An hardy knyglit That styffe in stoure A-gaynste hym stode. THE KING DEFEATS MORDRE D'S A RM Y 93 Arthur sone hathe take the land That hym was le veste in to lende ; hys fêle fonien that lie ther found, 3060 he weiide by-fore had bene hys frend. The kynge was wrothe And weliney wode, And with hys mon he gan vp wend ; So strong A stoure was vpon that stronde That many A man ther had hys end. 3065 Syr gawayne armyd hym in that stounde; Allas ! to longe hys hede was bare ; he was seke And sore vnsond ; hys woundis greuyd hym full sare ; / One hytte hym vpon the olde wounde 3070 With A tronchon of An ore ; There is goode gawayne gone to gronnde, That speche spake he nenyr more. Bold men, with bowes bentte, Boldely vp in botes yode, 3075 And Ryche hauberkis they Ryve and Rente, that Throw-owte braste the Rede blode ; Grounden gleyves throw hem wente; Tho games thoght they m nothynge gode ; But by that strong stoure was stente, 3080 The stronge stremys Ran AU on blode. Arthur was so moche of inyght, Was ther none that hym with-stode ; He hewyd vppon ther helmes bryght, That throw ther brestes Ran the blode ; 3085 By than that endyd was the fight, The false wero feld, som w^r flcdde To canterbery AU that nyght, To warne ther master, syr mordred. 94 LE MORTE ARTHUR Monlred than made liyin bowne 3090 Aiul boldely he wylle batayle A-bydc, With helme, scheld, And haiiberke browne ; So Ail liys Kovvte gan forthe Kyde ; They hem mette vppon barendowne, Full erly in the morowe tyde ; 3095 With giey vas grete And gonfanowne Grymly they gan to-gedyr Ryde; Arthur was of Ryche A-Raye And hornys blew lowde on hyght, And mordred comyth glad and gay, 3100 As traytour that was false in fyght. Thay faught Ail that longe day Tyll the nyght was nyghed nyghe; Who had it sene wele myght saye That suche A stoure neuer he syghe. 3105 Arthur than faught with hert good — A nobler knyght was neuer noon ; Throw helmes in-to hede yt yoode And steryd knyghtis bothe blode And bone. mordi-ed for wrathe was nye wode, 3110 Callyd hys folke And sayd to hem "One! Relevé yow, for crosse on Rode ! Alas ! thys day so sone is goone ! " Feîe men lyeth on bankys bare With bryght brondys throw-owte borne ; 3115 Many A doughty man dede was thar, And many A lord hys lyfe liathe lorne.; mordred was full of sorowe And care ; At canterbery was he vppon the morne ; And Arthur AU nyght he dwellyd thare, 3120 liye frely folke lay hym by-forne. THE DEATH OF SIR GAWAYNE 95 Erely on the morow tyile Arthur bad hys horiiys blowe, And callyd folke on euery syde, And many A dede beryed on A rowe, 3125 In pittes that was depe And wyde ; On Iche An hepe they layd hem lowe, So Ail that ouer gone And Ryde Som by there markys mun niyght knowe. Arthur went to hys dyner thane — 3130 hys frely folke hyui folowed faste — But whan he fand syr gawayne In A shyppe laye dede by A maste, Or euyr he coveryd myght or mayne, An C tymes hys hert nyglie braste. 3135 Thay layd syr gawayne vpon A bere And to the castell they hym bare, And in A ehapell A-mydde the quere That bold baron they boryed thare. Arthur than changyd Ail liys chère; 3110 What wondyr tUoghe hys hert was sare! hys suster sone, that was hyn» dere, Olï hyni shold he hère neuyr luare. Syr Arthur, he vvolde no lenger A-byde; Than had he Ail maner of euyll lleste ; 3115 He sought aye forthe- the southe syde And toward walys wente he westc ; At salusbury he thought to byde, At that tynie he thought was beste, And calle to hyni by AVliytesontyde 3150 Barons bold to batiiyle preste. 96 LE MORTE ARTHUR Vnto hym came many A doughty knyght, For wyde iu worlde theyse wordys sjîrange, That syr Arthur hade Ail tlie Ryglit, And raordred warred on hyui with wronge. 3155 Hydowse it was to se with syght, Arthur-is oste was brode And longe, And niordred that was mykell of mj^ght With grete gyftes made hym stronge. p- ■-. Sone After the feste of the trynyte 3160 Was A batayle by-twene hem sette, That A sterne batayle ther shuld be ; For no lede vvold they it lette ; And syr Arthur makethe game And glee For myrth that they shuld be mette ; 3165 And syr mordred cam to the contre, With fêle folke that ferre was fette. At nyght whan Arthur was brought in bedd — He shuld haue batayle vppon the morow — In stronge sweuenys he was by-stedde, 3170 That many A man that day shuld haue sorow ; hym thowht he satte in gold Ail gledde, As he was comely kynge with crowne, vpon A whele that full wyde spredd, And Ail hys knyghtis to hym bowne. 3175 The whele was ferly Ryche And Kownd, In world was neuyr none halfe so hye ; There-on he satte Rychely erownyd With many A besaunte broche And be ; he lokyd downe vpon the grownd, 31S0 A blake water ther vndyr hym he see, With dragons fêle there lay vn-bownde, That no man durst hem nyghe nj'ee. THE KING'S DREAM 97 he was wondyr ferd to falle A-monge the fendys thei' tliat faught ; 3185 The whele ouer-tornyd tlier with-All And eueryche by A lymme hym caught. The kynge gan lowde crye And calle, As marred man of wytte vn-saught ; hys chambyrlayns wakyd hym ther with-All 3190 And woodely oute of hys siepe he raught. Ail nyght gan he wake And wepe, With drery hert And sorowf ull stevyn, And A-gaynste day he felle on slepe ; A-boute hym was sette ta])ers sevyn ; 3195 Hym thought Syr gawayne hym dyd kepe With mo folke pan men can nevyn, By A Ryuer that was brode And depe ; Ail semyd Angellys cam from heuyn. The kynge was neuyr yit so fayne, 3200 hys soster sone whan that he sye ; " Welcome," he sayd, " syr gawayne ; And thon myght leue, welle were me. Now, leue frend, with-outen layne, What Ar tho folke that folow the ? " 3205 " Sertis, syr," he sayd A-gayne, " They byde in blyssc ther I motte be. lordys they were And ladyes hcndo, Thys worldys lyffe that lianne for-lorne ; Whyle I was man on lyffe to londe, 3210 A-gaynste her fone I faught hem forne ; now fynde I thom my moste Frcnde : They blysse the tyme that I was borne : They Asked love with me to wende To mete with yow vpon tliys morne. 3215 98 LE MORTE ARTHUR A monthe day of trewse moste ye take And than to batayle be ye bayne ; yow coniethe to lielpe lancelot du lake, With many A man mykell o£ mayne : To-morne tlie batayle ye moste for-sake 3220 Or ellys, certis, ye shall be slayne." The kynge gan woffully wepe and wake, And sayd : " Allas ! thys RewfPull Rayne ! " hastely hys clotliys on hym he dyde, And to hys lordys gan he saye : 3225 " In stronge sweyneys I haue bene stad, That glad I may not for no gamys gaye. We muste vnto syr mordred sende And foiinde to take An-other day, Or trewly thys day I mon be shende, 3230 Thys know I in bed as I laye. Goo thow, syr lucan de boteler, That wyse wordys haste in vvolde» And loke that thou take with the hère Bysshopys fêle and barons bolde." 3235 Forthe went they Ail in fere, in trew bokys as it is tolde, To syr mordred and hys lordis there they were, And an C knyghtis Ail vn-tolde. The knyghtis that ware of grete valoure, 3240 By-fore syr mordred as they stode, They gretyn hym with grete honowre, As barons bold And hye of blode : " Ryght wele the gretys kynge Arthur, And praythe the with mylde mode, 3245 A monethe day to stynte thys stoure, For hys loue that dyed on Rode." THE EMBASSY TO M ORDRE D 99 mordred, tliat was botlie keiie And bolde, made liym brème As Any bore at bay, And sware by ludas that Ihesus sold : 3250 " Suche sawes Ar not now to saye ; That he hathe bygbt he sball it hold ; The tone of vs shall dye thys day ; And telle hym trewly that I tolde, I schall hym marre, yife that I may." 3255 "Syr, thay sayd, with-owten lèse, Thow^ thou And he to batayle bowne, many A ryclie shall rewe that reasse, By Ail by dalte vpon thys downe ; yit were it better for to sease, 3260 And lette be kynge and bere the erowne ; And after hys dayes, f ull dredelesse, ye to welde AU yugland, towre And towne." mordred tho stode stjdle A whyle, And wrothely vp hys eyne there wente, 3265 And sa}^!: " wyste I it were hys wyllo To yeue me cornwale And kente, lette vs mete vpon yonder hylle And talke to-gedyr with gode entente ; Suche forwardys to full-fylle, 3270 There-to shall I me sone Assent. And yiffe we may with spechys spede, AVith trevv trowthes of entayle, hold the bode-worde-that we bede, To yeue me kente And cornwayle, 3275 Trew loue shall tlier lenge And lende ; And, sertis, forwardys y if we fayle, Aythur to sterte vppou A stede, styffely for to do batayle." 100 LE MORTE ARTHUR " Sur, wyll ye corne in suclie maner, 3280 With xij knyghtis or fourtene, Or ellys Ail your strenghe in fere, With belmes bryglit And liauberkys sliene ? " " Sertys, nay," than sayd he tbore, " Othur warke tbou tbare not wene, 3285 But botbe oure boostis sball nj'gbe nere, And we sballe talke tbem by-twene." They toke tber leue, with-owten lèse, And wygbtely vpon tbere way wente ; To kynge Artbur tbe way they chese, 3290 there tliat he satte with-in hys tente. " Syr, we haue proferyd pease, Yifîe ye wille ther-to Assente : Gyffe bym tbe crowne After j'our dayes And in yower lyffe corn way le and kente; 3295 To hys by-beste yiffe ye will bokle, And your trouthe ti-ewly ther-to plygbt, maketh Ail redy your men bolde, With belme, swerd, And bauberke brygbt; ye schall niete vppon yone molde 3300 That ayther oste may se with S3'gbt ; And yiff your foreward fayle to bolde, There is no bote but for to fvght." But whan Arthur berd thys nevyn, Trewly ther-to he hathe sworne, 3305 And Ai-ayed hyin with batayles seuyn, With brode baners by-fore byni borne; Thev lemyd lyght As Any levyn AVlian they shold inete vpon the morne. Thei'e lyves no inan vndyr heuyn 3310 A feyrer syght hath sene by-forne. ARTHUR AND MORDRED MEET 101 But mordred inany men had rao ; So mordred tbat was niykell of mayne, he had euyr xij A-gayuste liyni tvvo Off barons bold to batayle bayne. 3315 Arthur And mordred — bothe were thro — Shuld mete bothe vpon A ])layue ; The wyse shuld corne to And fro To make A-cord, the sothe to sayne. Arthur in hys herte hathe Caste 3320 And to hys lordis gau he saye : " To yonder traytour haue I no truste But that he woll vs falselly be-traye. yilï we may not oure forwardys faste, And ye se any wepyn drayue, 3325 presythe forthe As princes praste, That he & Ail hys hoste be slayne." mordred, that was kene And thro, hys frely folke he sayd to-forue : "I wote that Arthur is full woo 3330 That he hathe tluis hys landys lorne ; With fourtene knyghtis And no mo shall we mete at yondyr thorue : yiff Any treason by-twcne vs go, That brode baners forth be borne." 3335 Arthur with knyghtis fully xiiij, -^"o that thorne on fote they fonde, Witli helme, sheld, And hauberke shene ; Kyght so they trottcçl v])])on pe grownde. But As they A-cordyd slnilde hniie bene, 3:510 An Edder glode forth vpon tlie grownde; he stange A knyght, that men myght sene That he was seke And full vn sowude. 102 LE MORTE ARTHUR Owte lie brayed with a swerd bryght ; To kylle the Adder had lie thoghte ; 3345 Whan Arthur party saw tliat syglit, Frely tliey to-gedyr sought ; There was iio-thynge with-stande tlieym mygbt ; Tliey weiid that treson had bene wroghte. That day dyed many A doughty kiiyght, 3350 And many A bolde man was broghc to noght. Arthur stert vpon bys stede ; lie saw no thyng hym witb-stand niyght ; mordred owte of wytte nere yede, And wrothely in-to hys sadyll he lyght ; 3355 Off A-corde was no-thyng to bede. But fewtred sperys and to-geder sprente ; Full many A doughty man of dede Some there was leyde vpon the bente. mordred I-maryd many A man, 3360 And boldely he gan hys batayle abyde ; So sternely oute hys stede Ranne, many A rowte he gan throw Ryde ; Arthur of batayle neuyr blanne To dele woundys wykke and wyde ; 3365 Fi'o the morow that it by-ganne Tylle it was nere the nyghtis tyde, There was many A spere spente, And many A thro word they spake ; many A bronde was bowyd and bente 3370 And inany A knyghtis helnie they brake ; Ryche lielmes they Koffe and rente; The Kj^clie rowtes gan to-gedyr Rayke, An C thousand vpon the bente ; The boldest or evyn was made Ryght meke. 3375 THE GREAT BAT T LE IN THE WEST 103 Sytlie bretayne owte of troy was souglit And made in bretayne liys owne wonne, Sache wondrys neuyr ère was wrogbt, Neuyr yit vnder tbe sonne ; By evyn leuyd was there noght 3380 That euyr steryd with blode or bone But Arthur and ij that he thedyr broghte, And mordred was levyd there Alone. The tone was hican de botelere, That bled at many A bale-full wouud, 3385 And hys brodyr, syr bedwere, Was sely seke and sore vnsounde; Than spake Arthur thèse wordys there : " Shall we not brynge thys theffe to ground ? " A spcre he gryped with fell chère, 3390 And felly they gan to-gedyr found. he hytte mordred amydde the breste And oute At the bakke bone hym bare ; There hathe mordred hys lyffe loste, That speche spake he neuyr mare ; 3395 But kenely vp liys Arme he caste And yafï Arthur A wound sare, In-to the hede throw the hebne And creste, That iij tymes he swownyd thare. Syr bican And syr Bedwere 3400 B^^-twene theym two tîie kynge vp-held ; So fortlie went tho iij in fere, And Ail were slayne that lay in fcld. The doughty kynge that was liem dere, For sore myght not hym-self weld ; 3405 To A chapelle they went in fere — Ofï bote they saw no better bcld. 104 LE MORTE ARTHUR Ail nyglit tliay in the chapelle laye, Be the see syde, As I yow uewyn, To mary merey cryatid aye, 3410 A\'ith drery herte and sorowfull ste^^n ; And to hyr leue sonne gan they pray : " Ihesu, for thy naïuys sevyn, Wis liys sowle the Ryght way, That he lèse not the blysse of heuyn." 3415 As syr lucan de boteler stode, he sey folk vppon playnes hye ; Bold barons of bone and blode, They Refte theym besaunt, broche, and bee ; And to the kynge Agayne thay yode, 3420 Hym to warne witli wordys slee ; To the kynge spake lie full styll, Rewffully as he mj'ght than Rowne : " Sir, I haue bene At yone hylle, There fêle folke drawen to the downe ; 3425 I note whedyr they wyll vs good or ylle, I rede we bnske And make vs bowne, yiiï it be your worthy W3dle, That we wende to som towne." " Now, syr lucan, As thow Radde, 3430 lyfte me vp, whyle that I may laste." Bothe hys Armes on hym he sprad With Ail hys strengh to hold hym faste. The kynge was wondyd and for-bled And swownyng on hym hys eyne he caste ; 3435 Syr lucan was hard by-stadde ; He held the kynge to hys owne herte braste. SIR BEDWERE AND EXCALIBUR 105 Whan tlie kynge had swounyd there, By an Auter vp he stode ; Syr lucan, that was hyiu dere, 3440 Lay dede and foniyd in tlie blode. Hys bold brothyr, Sir Bedwere, Full mykell mornyd in hys mode ; For sorow he myjte not nyghe hym nere, But euyr wepyd As he were wode. 3445 The kynge tornyd hym there he stode, To syr Bedwere with wordj^s kene : " Hâve Excalaber, my swerde good ; A better bi'ond was neuyr sene ; Go, Caste it in the sait flode 3450 And thou shalt se wonder, as I wene. hye the faste, for crosse on Rode, And telle me what thou haste ther sene." The knyght was both hende and free, To save that swerd he was full glad, 3455 And thought " whethyr I better bee, yif neuyr man it After had ; And I it caste in-to the see, Off mold was neuyr man so mad." The swerd he hyd vndyr A tree, 3460 And sayd : " syr, I ded as ye me bad." " What saw thow there ? " than sayd the kynge, " Telle me now, yif thow eau." " Sertes, syr," he sayd, " nothynge But watres depe And wawes wannc." 3465 " A ! now thou haste broke my byddyuge ! Why liaste thou do so, thow false man ? A-notlier bode thou muste nu; brynge." Thanne careiïully the knyght forthc Kauue 106 LE MORTE ARTHUR And thought tlie swerd yit he wold hyde, 3470 And keste the scauberke in the flode. " yif Any Aventurs sliall be-tyde, There-by shall I se tokenys good." lu-to the see be lette the scauberke glyde ; A wbyle on the hmd bee tbere stode, 3475 Than to the kynge he wente tbat tyde, And sayd : " syr, it is done, by the Kode." " Saw thou Any wondres more ? " " Sertys, syr, I saw nought." "A ! false traytor," he sayd thore, 3480 " Twyse thou haste me treson wroght ; That shall thou rew sely sore ; And, be thou bold, it shal be bought." The knyght than cryed : " lord, thyn ore ! " And to the swerd sone he sought. 3485 Syr bedwere saw that bote was beste, And to the good swerd he wente ;- In-to the see he hyt keste ; Than myght he se what that it mente. There cam An hand with-outen Reste 3490 Oute of the water And ieyvQ it hente, And brandysshyd As it shuld braste, And sythe, as gleme, A-way it glente. To the kynge A-gayne wente he thare, And sayd : "levé syr, I saw An hand ; 3495 Oute of the water it cam Ail bare, And thryse brandysshyd that Ryche brande." " helpe me sone that I ware there." he lede hys lord vnto that stronde ; A ryche shyppe, with maste And ore, 3500 Full of ladyes, there they fonde. THE LADIES AND THE BARGE 107 The ladyes, that were feyre and free, Curteysly the kynge gan they fonge, And one that brvirhtest was of blee wepyd sore and handys wrange. 3505 " Broder," she sayd, " \vo ys nie ! ' Fro lechyng hastow be to longe. I wote that gretely greuyth me, For thy paynes Ar f uU strouge." - The knyght kest A rewfuU rowne, 3510 There he stode, sore and vnsownde, And sayde : " lord, whedyr Ar ye bowne ? Allas !■ whedyr wyll ye fro me f ownde ? " The kynge spake with A sory sowne : " I wylle wende a lytell stownde 3515 In-to the vale of Avelovne, A whyle to hele me of my wounde." Whan the shyppe from the land was broght, Syr bedwere saw of hem no more ; Throw the forest forthe he soughte, 3520 On hyllys and holtys bore. Of hys lyffe Kought he Ryght noght, Ail nyglit he went wepynge sore ; A-gaynste the day he fownde ther wrought A chapelle hy-twene ij lioltes bore. 3525 To the chapell he toke the way ; There myght be se A wotindyr syght ; Than saw be where an ermyte laye By-fore A tombe t-bat new was dygbte ; And ooveryd it was with marboll grave 3530 And with Ryche h^ttres liaylcd Aryght ; There-on An herse, sotbely to saye, With an C tappers lygbte. 108 LE MORTE ARTHUR vnto the ermyte wente lie thare And Askyd wbo was beryed tliere. 3535 The ermj'te Answeryd svvythe yare : " Tliere-of can I tell no more. A-bowte mydnyght were ladyes hère, In woild ne wyste I wliat tliey were ; Thys body tbey brogbt vppon a bere 3540 And berj'ed it with woundys sore ; Besavntis offred thcy bere brygbt, I hoj^e an C povnd and more, And bad me pray botbe day and nygbt For hym that is buryed in thèse moldys bore 3545 Vnto ower lady botbe day And nygbt, That sbe bys sowle belpe sbolde." The knygbt redde tbe lettres A-rygbt ; For sorow be fell vn-to tbe folde. *' Ermyte," be sayd, " witb-oute lesynge, 3550 bere lyetb my lord tbat I baue lo.rne, Bold artbur, tbe beste kynge Tbat euyr was in bretayne borne, yif me som of tby clotbynge. For bym that bare tbe crowne of tborne, 3555 And leue tbat I may witb tbe lenge, Wbile I may levé, And pray bym forne." Tbe boly ermyte wold not wounde — Some tyme Arcbebishop be was, Tbat mordred flemvd oute of londe, 3560 And in the wode liys wonnyng cbase — he thankyd Ihesu AU of bis sonnd That syr bedwere was comyn in pease ; he resayved bym witb berte And bonde, To-gedyr to dwelle, witb-outen lèse.* 3565 GUINEVERE GOES TO ALMESBURY 109 Whan queue Gaynor, tlie kyiiges wyffe, Wyste that Ail was gone to wrake, A-vvay she went witli ladys fyve To Avniysbery, A nonne ïiyr lor to make. Ther-in she lyved An lioly lyffe, 3570 In prayers for to wepe And wake ; neuyr After she covvde be blythe ; There weryd she clothys whyte And blake. Whan thys tydyngis was to launcelot broght, What wondyr thowgli hys hert were sore ! 3575 hys men, hys frendys, to hyui sought And Ail the wyse that with hym were. her gallayes were Ail Kedy wroght, They buskyd theyme And niade yare ; To helpe Arthur was ther thoght 3580 And make uiordred of blysse full bare. lancelot had crownyd kyngis sevyn, Erlys fêle And barons bold ; The nombyr of knyghtis I can net uevyn, The squyres to fêle to be told ; 3585 They lemyd lyght as Any levyn, The wynde was as hein-self wold, Throw the grâce of god of hevyn ; At douer they toke hauyn And hold ; Thore herd telle lancelot in that towne, 3590 In lond it is not for to layne, how they had faught at barendowne, And how beryed was-syr gawayne. And iiow inordred wold be kyngc with crownc, And how ayther of thcyin had other slayn, 3595 And AU that were to bataylo bowne At salysbery lay dedc vpou the playne ; 110 LE MORTE ARTHUR Also in lonile lierd hyt kythe, That made liys liert wonder sare, quene Gaynour, tlie kyngis wyfïe, 3600 Myclie bad levyd in sorow and care ; A-way she went with ladyes fyve, In lond tbey wyste not whedyr whar, Dolwyu dede or to be on lyve ; Tbat made hys mornyng mocbe tbe mare. 3605 lancelot clepid bys kyngis witb erowue, Syr bors stode byni nere be-syde ; he sayd : " lordyngis, I wyll wend to-forne, And by tbese bankys ye sball A-byde Vnto fyftene days at tbe morne. 3610 In lond what so enyr vs be-tyde, To herkyn wbat lord bys lylïe batbe lorne, loke ye Rappe yow not vp to Ilyde." There bad be noutber Roo ne Reste, But fortbe be went witb drery mode, 3615 And iij dayes be went euyn weste, As man tbat eowde notber y vell nor good ; Tban sygbe be wbere A towre by weste Was byggyd by A burn5's flode ; Tbere be bopyd it were beste 3620 For to gete Iiym som ly ves stode. As be cani tlirow A cloyster clere — All-moste for wepynge be was mad — be see A lady brygbt of 1ère, In nonnys clotbyng was sbe clad. 3625 Tbryse sbe swownyd swyftely tliere, So stronge paynes sbe was in stad Tbat many A man tban n3'gbed byr nere, And to byr cbambyr was sbe ladde. MEETING OF LANCE LOT AND GUINEVERE 111 " Mercy, madame," they saytl Ail, 3630 " For Iliesu, that is kynge of blysse, Is there Any byi'd in boiue or halle hathe wrathed yow ?" she sayd : " nay, I wysse." lancelot to liyr gan they calle, The Abbes and the other nonnys I-wysse, 3635 They that wonyd with-in the walle ; In covnselle there than sayd she thus : "Abbes, to you I knowlache hère » That throw thys ylke man And me, For \ve to-gedyr han loved vs dere, 3640 AU thys sorowf ull werre hathe be ; my lord is slayue, that had no père, And many A doughty knyght And free ; There-fore for sorowe I dyed nere, As sone As I euyr hyni gan see — - 3645 Whan I hym see, the sothe to say, Ail my herte by-gan to colde, That euyr I shuld A-byde thys day, To se so many barons bolde Shuld for vs be slayne A-way ; 3650 Oure wylle hathe be to sore bought sold ; But god, that AU myghtis maye, Now hathe me sette where I wyll hold ; I-sette I am In suche A place, my sowle hole I wyll A-byde, 3655 Telle god send me soiii grâce, Throw mercy of hys wionndys wyde, That I niay do so in thys ])l:icc, my synnys to A-mendc tliys ilke tyde, After to haue A syght of hys fa(!e 3()()0 At domys day on liys Ryght syde. 112 LE MORTE ARTHUR There-fore, sj'r lancelot du lake, For iny loue now I the pray, m}' Company thow Aye for-sake Ami to tliy kyngdome thow take thy way; 3665 And kepe thy Reine from werre and wrake, And take A wyffe with her to play, And loue wele than thy world^s make, God yiff yow loye to-ged3T, I pray ! Vnto god I pra}^, All-myghty kynge, 3670 he yefïe yow to-ged^'r love And blysse, But I beseche the in Ail thynge That newyr in thy lyfïe After thj'sse Ne come to me for no sokerynge, ' Nor send me sond, but dwelle in blysse ; 3675 I pray to god euyr lastynge To Graunte me grâce to mend my mysse." "Now, swete madame, that wold I not doo, To haue Ail the world vnto my mede; So vntrew fynd ye me neuyr mo ; 3680 It for to do erj'ste me for-bede ! For-bede it god that euvr I shold A-gaynste yow worcbe so grete vnrygbt, Syne we to-ged3'r vpon thy s mold haue led owre lyfïe by day And nyght ! 3685 Vnto god I 3nffe a heste to holde, Tiie same desten}' that j'ow is d^'glite I will Kesseyve in som house bolde, To plese here-After god All-myght ; To please god AU that I maye 3690 I shall here-After do myne entente, PARTING OF LANCELOT AND GUINEVERE \V6 And euyr for yow specyAlly pra)^ While god wyll me lyfte lente." " A ! wylte thovv so," tlie quene gan say, " Full-fyll thys forward that thou lias ment?" lancelot sayd : "yiff I sayd nay, 3696 I were wele worthy to be brent ; Brent to bene worthy I were, Yiff I wold take non suche A lyffe, To byde in penance, as ye do hère, 3700 And snffre for god sorow and stryffe ; As we in lykynge lyft'ed in fere, j \ By mary nioder, made and wyffe, Tyll god vs départe with dethes dere, To penance I yeld me hère As blythe. 3705 Ail blyve to penance I wyll me take As I may fynde Any ermyte That wylle me Resseyue for goddys sake, me to clothe with whyte And blake." The sorow that the tone to the tother gan make 3710 myght none erthely man se hytte. "madame," than sayd launcelot de lake, " kysse me, And I shall wende as tyte." " nay," sayd the quene, " that wyll I not ; launcelot, thynke on that no more ; 371.1 To Absteyne vs we muste haue thought. For suche we haue delyted in ore ; lett vs thynk on hyu) that vs hathe bought An(,l we shall please god ther-fore ; Tliynke on thys world liow there is noght 1 3720 But warre And stryffe And bataylu sord." 114 LE MORTE ARTHUR What helpeth lenger for to spelle ? With tliat they gan départe in twene, But none erthely mati covde telle Tlie sorow tliat there by-gau to bene ; 3725 Wryngyug ther baiidis and lowde they yelle, As they neuyr more shuld blynne, And sythe in swonne bothe downe they felle ; Wbo saw that sorow euyr myght it mené. But ladyes than with mornyng chère, 3730 In-to the chambyr the quene they bare, And AU f ull besy made-theym there To cover the quene of hyr care. many Also that with lancelot were, They comforte hyra with rewfull care ; 3735 Whan he was coveryd, he toke hys gère And went frome thense with-outen mare ; hys hert was hevy As Any lede, And leuer he was hys lyffe liane lorne ; he sayd : " Ryghtwosse god ! what is niy Rede? 3740 Allas î for-bare ! why was I borne ? " A-way he went, as he had fled, To A foreste that was Inin by-forne ; hys lyfïe fayne he wold hane leuyd ; hys Ryche A-tyre he wold haue of-torne. 3745 Ail nyght gan he wepe And wrynge And went A-boute As he were wode ; Erely, As the day gan sprynge, Tho syghe he where A chapell stode ; A belle herd he rewfull}' Eynge ; 3750 he hyed hym than And tliedyr \'ode ; A preste was Redy for to synge, And masse he herd with drery mode. THE HERMIT RECEIVES LANCELOT 115 The Arsliebysshoppe was ermyte thare, That fleniyd was for liys werkys trew ; 3755 The masse he sange with syghyng sare, And ofte he ehangyd hyde and hewe ; Syr bedwere liad sorow And eare And ofte mornyd for tho werkys newe ; Aftyr masse was mornynge mare, 3760 Whan Iche of hem othyr knewe. Whan the sorow was to tlie ende, The byshope toke hys obbyte thare, And welcomyd lanncelot as the hend, And on hys knees downe gan he fare : 37G5 " Syr, ye be welcome as oure f rende Vnto thys byggying in bankys bare ; Were it yower vvyll with vs to lende Thys one nyght, yif ye may no mare ! " Whan they hym knew at the laste, 3770 Feyre in Armys they gan hym folde, And sythe he askyd frely faste Ofï Arthur And of other bolde ; An C tymes hys hert nere braste, AVhyle syr Bedwere the taie tokî. 3775 To Arthur-is tombe he caste, Hys carefiill corage wexid Ail cold ; Ile threw hys armys to the walle, That Ryche were and bryght of blee ; By-fore the ermyte Ire gan downe falle, 3780 And comely knelyd \-pon hys knee ; Than he shrove liym of hys synnos Aile And prayd he niyght hys Ifroder be, To serne god in boui-e and halle, That myght-full kynge of mercy frce. 3785 116 LE MORTE ARTHUR Tliat holy bisshope noltl not blynne, But blythe was to do liys boone ; He resseyuyd hym witli wele and wynne And thankyd Ihesu trevv in troue, And shroiïe hym tber of liys synne, 3790 As clene as he had neuyi- doue none : And sythe he kyste hym cheke and chynne And an Abbyte there dyd hym vpon. Hys grete hooste at dover laj^e, And wende he shuld hâve eomyn A-gayne, 3795 Tylle After by-felle vpon A day, Syr lyonell, that was mekyll of mayne, With fyffty lordys, the sothe to saye, To sèche hys lord he was f ull fayne ; To london he toke the Ryght way ; 3800 Alas for woo ! there was he slayue. Bors De gawnes wold no lenger Abyde, But buskyd hym And made Ail bowne, And bad Ail the este homeward Ryde — God send theym wyud and wedyr Rownd — 3805 To seke lancelot wyll he Ryde. Ector aud eche dywerse wayes yode, And bors sowght forthe the weste syde, As he that cowde nowther yvell nor gode. Full Erly in A morow tyde 3810 In A foreste he fownd A welle ; he Rode euyr forthe by the Ry ver syde, Tyll he had syght of A chajielle ; There at niasse thought he A-byde ; Rewfully he lierd A belle Rynge ; 3815 Ther lancelot he fand with mekelle pryde And prayd he myght with hym there dvvelle. LANCELOT IS ABOUT TO DIE 117 Or the lialfe yere were comen to the ende, There was comyn of tliere felowse sevyn, Wliere ychone had sought tliere frend, 3820 With soi-owfiiU herte Aud drery stevyn; liad neuyr none wyll A-way to wend, Whaii they herd of launcelot iievyn, But Ail to-gedyr there gan they lend, As it was goddys wyll of heuyn. 3825 holyche Ail tho sevyn yerys lancelot was preste and niasse songe ; In penance and in dyverse prayers That lyffe hym thought no-thyng longe ; Syr bors And hys other ferys 3830 On bokys Redde and bellys Ronge ; So lytell they wexe of lyn And lerys, ïheyni to know it was strotige. hytte felle A-gayne an enyn-tyde That launcelot sekenyd sely sare ; 3835 The bysshop he clepyd to his syde And Ail hys felaws lesse and mare ; he sayd : " bretherne, I niay no lenger A-byde, my baleffull blode of lyffe is bare ; What bote is it to hele And hyde? 3840 my fowle flesshe will to erthe fare. but, bretherne, I pray yow to-nyght, To-morow, whan ye fynde me dede, vpon A bere that ye wyll me dyght And to loyes garde tlian me lede ; 3845 For the loue of god All-iiiyglit, Bery my body in that stede ; Some tyme my trowthe tluir-to I plyght. Allas ! me fur-thynketh that I so dyd." 118 LE MORTE ARTHUR " mercy, syr," they Sayd Ail three, 3850 " for hys loue that dyed on Rode, ' yif Any yvell haue greuyd tlie, hyt ys bot lievynesse o£ yower blode ; To-morow ye shall better be. Whan were ye but of eomforte gode ? " 3855 merely spake Ail men but he, But streyght vuto hys bed he yode, And clepyd the bysshope hym vntylle, And shrove hym of hys synnes clene, Ofï Ail hys synnes loude and stylle, 3860 And of hys synnes niyche dyd he mené ; Ther he Resseyved with good wylle God, mary-is sonne, mayden clene. Than hors of wepyng had neuyr hys fylle ; To bedde they yede than Ail by-dene. 3865 A lytell whyle by-fore the day, As the bysslîop lay in hys bed, A laughter toke hym there he laye, That Ail they were Ryght sore A-dred. They wakenyd hym, for sothe to saye, 3870 And Askyd yif he were hard by-sted. he sayd : " Allas And wele A-way ! Why ne had I lenger thus be ledd ? Allas ! why nyghed ye me nye, To A-wake me in word or stevyn ? 3875 hère was launcelot bryglit of blee AVitli Angellis xxx thousand and sevyn ; hym they bare vp on hye ; A-gayuste hym openyd the gatys of hevyn ; Suche A syght Ryght now I see, 3SS0 Is none in ertlie that myght it nevyu." THE DE A TH AND BURIAL OF LANCELOT 119 '• Syr," thay sayd, " for crosse on Kode, Dothe suclie wordys eleiie A-way. Syr lancelot eylytlie no-thynge but gode ; he shall be liole by pr^ine of day." 3SS5 Candell tliey lyght And to liyin y ode, And fownde liyiu dede, for sothe to saye, Rede and fayer of flesshe and blode, Kyght As he in slepynge laye. " Allas ! syr bors, that I was borne ! 3890 ïhat enyr I shnld see thys in dede ! The beste knyght hys lyffe hathe lorne That euyr in stoure by-strode A stede. Ihesu that crownyd was with thorne, In heuyn hys soûle foster and fede ! " 3895 Vnto the fyfty day at the morne They lefte not for to synge And liede, And After they made theym A bere, The bysshop and thèse other bold, And forthe they wente, Ail in fera 3900 To loyes garde, that Kyche hold. In A chapell a-niyddys the quere A grane they made as thay wold. And iij dayes they wahyd hym there, In the castell with carys cold. 3905 liyght as they stode A-boute the bere And to bereynge hym shold hane browght, In cam syr Ector, hys brodyr dere, That vij yere A-fore had liytii songlit. he lokyd vj) in-to tlie (jncrc ; 3910 To hère A masse than liad he tliought ; For that they AU Kavysshyd werc, They knew hym and he iieni nought. 120 LE MORTE ARTHUR Syr bors bothe wepte And songe, Whan they tbat feyre faste vufold ; 3915 Tbere was none but bys handys wrange, The bysshop nor noue of the otber bold. Syr Eetor than thought longe ; What thys corps was feyne wete be wolde ; An C tymes bys berte nye sprange, 3920 By tbat bors bad byni tbe taie tolde. Full bendely syr bors to bym spakke And sayd : '• welconie, syr Ector, I-wysse ; hère lyetbe my lord lancelot du lake, for wborae tbat we baue mornyd tbus." 3925 Than In Arniys they gan bym take, Tbe dede body to clyppe And kysse, And prayed AU nygbt be inygbt bym wake, For Ibesu love, kynge of blysse. Syr Ector of bys wytte nere wente, 3930 Walowed and wronge as be were wode ; So wofully bys mone be mente, bys sorow myngyd AU bys mode ; Whan tbe corps in Armys be bente, Tbe terys owte of bys yen yoàe ; 3935 At tbe laste they mygbt no lenger stent, But beryed bym witb drery mode. Sythen on tbere knees they knelyd downe — Grete sorow it was to se witb sygbt — " Vnto Ibesu cryste Aske I A boone, 3940 And to bys moder, mary brygbt. lord. As tbow niadyste botlie sonne and mone, And god Antl man arte moste of mygbt, Brynge thys sowle vnto thy trône. And euyr tbow Rewdyste on gentyll knyght."3945 THE DEATH AND BURIAL OF GUINEVERE 121 Syr Ector tent not to bys stede, Whedyr Le wold stynt or Kenne Away, But witli theym to dwelle and lede, Foi- lancelot Ail liys lyffo to ])iay. On hyin dyd he armytes wetle, 3950 Aud to liyr cbapell went liyr way ; A fourtenyght on fote tliey yede, Or they home corne, for sotlie to say. Whan tliey came to Avmysbery, Dede they faunde Gaynour the quene, 3955 With Koddys feyre and Kede as chery ; And fortlie they bare byr tbeym by twene, And beryed byr with niasse full merry By syr Arthur, as I yow mené. Now hyg'ht there cbapell glassynbery, 3960 An Abbay full llyche, of order clene. Off lancelot du lake telle I no more, But tbus by-leve thèse ermytes sevyn ; And yit is Arthur beryed tbore, And quene Gaynour. as I yow nevyn ; 3965 With monkes tbat ar llygbt of lore. Tbey Rede and Synge with mylde stevyn. Ihesu, that suffred woundes sore, Graunt vs AU the blysse of hevj-n ! Amen. 3970 Explycit le morte Arthur. NOTES 1. Lordingis. Merely " Sirs." Frequcntly uscd in the romances, suggesting niinstrel origins. Cf. the end of Chaucer's Franklin s Taie, where the franklin, addressing the other pilgrims, says: — Lordingis, this question wol I aske now, Which was the moste fre, as tbinketh yow? 2. Lystenyth. Plural of the imperative in -eth or -j^th. Notice future occurrences of this and other iniperative fornis, and cf. the singular in 11. 37 aud 511. 5. Arthur dayes. The uninflected genitive is very common in ME., and is probably due to OF. influence. Cf. 1. 4^26, therle sonne; 2178, the stederigge; 2237,Lancelot party; 2H9!), Gawayne strengthe; 3142, suster sonne ; 334G, Arthur party; 3655, sowle hele. 8. That. The antécédent must be there, i.e., oure eldris, as wiste is a prétérit. 10. Hère, as elsewhere, the downfall of the court follows the quest of the Graal. 14. That is, even for money thcy would not Icave them alive. Mod.E. alive is merely a shortcned form of the phrase on b'fe, which was still current in the seventeenth century. Cf. 11. 520, (532, 636. 36. That is, by ridiiig to dceds of arins. Cf. 1. 2123, where the infuiitive is again used as a gerund. 45. stiff on stede. One of the convcntional ;iHit<Tative phrases of ME. ])oetry. 63. with the dede. In the act; cf. 1.1747 and Malory XX, 2, where Arthur says to Agravaine, " .Vnd 124 NOTES but-if lie betakenwiththe dede.hewillfight, . , . therefore I would lie were taken with tlie deed." 79. Arni yourselves quickly. A kind of liortatory sub- junctive, due to influence of French que -\- subj.; cf. 11. 211, 1573, 2550, 3335. 105. on highte. Merely " above; " cf . on lyff, 1. 14, and note. 120. launcelott du lake. So called because he was brouglit up by the Lady of tlie Lake; cf. Introduction, p. vii. 159. Provided that lie had company. 176. your bothis wede. The clotlies of you both (bothis, genitive). Cf. Piers Plowman, B. xvi, 165: — Cryst toke the bataille, Ajeines deth and the deuel destruyed her botheres myjtes. and Romeo and Juliet, ii, iii, 51 : — both our remédies (i.e., remedy for us both) Within thy help and holy physic lies. 179. Tliis is a good example of the division of a line by allitération. 202. Do not give yourself ill (i.e., pain) for my sake; cf. 11. 821, 1324, 1356, 1419. 211. See note toi. 79. 229. brème as bare. Tliis or brème as bore (according to the demand of the rime) is another of the conventional alliterative phrases; cf. stiff on stede, 1. 45. 278. next. The old superlative of nigh, of which near was the comparative. In Mod.E. nearer we therefore hâve a double comparative. Cf., for this use of next, / Henry IV, m, i, 264: — 'T is the next way to turn tailor. 315. one. In the sensé of alone, which was orîginally merely a strengthcncd for m of onc, al -\- one. . NOTES 125 378. had I levir. I sliould prefer; cf. Mod.E. juM as liej. " The past subjunctive, had = would hâve, is iised with adjectives (or adverbs) in the comparative, as better, liefer, sooner, raiher ; in the superlative, as hest, liefest ; or in the positive with as, as soon, to express préférence or comparative desirabihty. In the carhest form of thèse expressions in OE., the adjectives lëôfre, hêtre, were used with be and the dative, e.g., him waere hetcre, it would be better for him. In ME., side by side with this, appears hâve and the nominative, in the sensé ' I should hold or find it better or préférable.' The extension to rather is later, and the use of as soon, sooner, as well, is récent, since liefer and better began to be felt as adverbs." N. E. D. For the use of lief with be, see Chaucer, Prologue,'iOS-dG:— For him was levor hâve at his beddcs heed Twonty bokcs, clad in hlak or rccd, Of Aristotle and his philosophye, Than robes riche. See aiso 1. 3739, leuer he was, a confusion of the two correct forms, leuer him was and leuer he had. A similar confusion appears in Chaucer's Clerk's Taie, 1. 444: — Al had hir lever han born a knave child. 411. hole and fere. Burns, Epistle to Davic, ii : — We're fit to earn our daily bread. As lang's we're haie and fier. Scott, Antiquarij, xxvii: " I trust to find ye 1)ailli haill and fere." 457. Bordis were sette. CI". I. 1.504. The ordinary dining-table of the fourteenth century was still a primitive affair, consisting of a coupl(> of tre.stles holdinf^ up rouf^h planks or boards. Ti>is table (or board, as it was commonly callcd) was 126 NOTES renioved after meals. The permanent table, the table dormant of Chaucer's franklin (Prologue, 353), was introduced in the fourteenth century, and was regarded as a sign of great luxury and hospitality. This use of the word board survives to-day in Mod.E. hoarding-house, hed and board, etc. Cf. Chaucer's knight, who often had " the bord bigonne," i.e., taken precedence at table. 487. Direct discourse introduced by that; uncommon in ME. 489. wise vndir wede. Another purely conventional alliterative phrase; cf. stiff on stede, brème as bare, etc. 542. tithandis. For the many spellings of tidings, see Glossary. The forras ending in -and are Northern, -and being the regular pr. pie. ending in the Northern dialects. 544. The phrase to take leave at, to, or on was in as good usage as to take leave of, in the fourteenth and fîfteenth centuries. Cf. 1. 612. 575. he: i.e., Lancelot. 581-82. Change from indirect to direct discc urse; cf. 1. 487. 595. knew. Subjunctiv^e, should know. 603. launcelottis sheld de lake. Cf. II. G44-45 and 746-47, Therlis doughter of Ascolot; also Malory, "Thy father's death, King Lot," and Matthew Arnold, Balder Dead, "Doubtless thou fearest Balder's voice, thy brother." The modem English custom is to inflect the last word of such a group rather than the first; we should say, "Launcelot du Lake's shield," etc. 623. In the romances and in Malory, Gawaine is ahvays " corteyse and hend," the perfection of knighthood and chivalry. It is only in Tennyson NOTES 127 that he is tlie ineffîciont cad. His dégradation hy Tennyson is best illustrated by comparinfî tliis Maid of Ascolot épisode with Teunyson's Lancelot and Elaine. 729. on hunting. Cf. on lyff, 1. 14, note. 764. for crosse and rode. The usualformula is crosse on rode (see 11. 1350, 2928, 3111, 3452 , but we also find corsse on rode, I. 2880, and cryste on rode, I. 3004. Bruce takes cross on rood as the original expression, and explains " cross " as ret'erring to the short crosspiece of the rood. It is possible, however, that corsse on rode is the original expression {God's hody ! is a comnion oath), and that by metathesis (as in jrist, first ; bird, bride, etc., see Glossary) and association with rode, it changed lo crosse on rode, which is a rather raeaningless oath. 788. Lancelot later makes Bors king of Gawnes, or Guienne, in France; see 1. 2484 and note. Bors is often referred to, rather prematurely, by his future title. 840-952. The épisode of the poisoned fruit and Sir Mador is related by Malory in the first part of his eighteenth book,and ])rccedesthe Maid of Astolat story. Malory 's eighteenth book opens at llie sarae point as our romance, the return of the knights from the quest of the Graal. Guinevere immediately banishcs Lancelot from court because he has becn during the quest " a faNc recréant knight andacommon lécher." Lancelot angrily Icaves the court, and the Sir ÎNLulor épisode follows. Malory 's version givcs, ])erhai)s, slightly better motivation l'or llie anger ol" Lancelot's friends against (;uin<'ver(\ Our i)o<>t lollows the arrangement of the OF. Morl Arlu (hereafler referred to as M. A.). 128 NOTES 876. They caused to be made; cf. by for be in 11.34 and 1759. 905. heuy as any lede. N.E.D. gives two examples of the use of any with lead in this comparison: R. Brunne, Handl. Synne, 11730, "This Ananyas fell down as blak as any lede." Hawes, Past. Pleas., XVII, 76, " Dyane derlyng pale as any leade." 934. In the M. A. we are told that this news was brought to Lancelot when he was at a hermit's in the forest (cf. 1. 953), recovering from a wound accidentally given hini by one of the king's huntsmen. See Bruce's édition of the M. A., pp. 78-79. The English romancer in condensing the story has forgotten to account for Lancelot's sickness. 95^ ff. We now return from the Sir Mador digression to the last part of the Maid of Astolat story. Notice that in the M. A. and in our romance, Lancelot is absent from court when the boat arrives. In Malory and Tennyson, Lancelot's présence adds considerably to the pathos of the situation. Cf. the last stanza of Tennyson's Lady of Shalott: — But Lancelot muscd a little space; He said, "She has a lovely face; God in his mercy send her grâce, The Lady of Shalott." !)53. Sce note on 1. 934. !)67. as. Often used pleonastically with prépositions. 1)91. bayne. Bruce takes this as the adverb, readily, from ON. beinn. Seyferth's assumjition that it is the pronoun bnth, OE. hegcn, seems to me more probable. At least they both do get into the boat immediatcly; cf. 1. 992. Cf. also the M. A. (Bruce éd., p. 74) : " La nacele estoit coverte a NOTES 129 volte, et me sire Gaïuiins soslieve . i . peu del drap dont ele estoit co verte et dist au roi, ' Sir, entrons dedans Si verons kil i a.' Li rois saut maintenant en la nacele et me sire Gauains après." 1012-15. According to the M. A., Gawaine makes love to the Maid before lie knows of Lancelot's supposed love for her, and when he discovers Lancelot's shield he says to the Maid: " Por Diu ie vos pri ke se ie vos ai dite parole ki vos desplaise, ke vos le me pardonnes." Tennyson makes Gawain's love for Elaine a light, disloyal, and contemptible thing. 1181-1318. The M. A. continues wilh a description of the burial of the Maid of Escalot, and then proceeds with an account of the circumstances of Lancelot's receiving, in the forest, the news of the Queen's trouble (Bruce éd., pp. 78 fF.). The burial of the iNLiid is described as foUows: " Li rois fist la damoiselle ensevelir au plus biel et au plus ricement con pot, Si comme damoisele de grant linage, et le fist entierer en la mère église de Camaalot, et fist met sor li vne tombe biele et rice. et auoit sor le tombe letres escrites, ki disoient, ' chi gist La damoisele d'escalot, qui por lamour de lanselot morut.' et cstoient les letres faites, les vues dor et les autres dasurc, trop ricement." 1537. That is, of their private conversation. 15GI. Iche a swythe. Iche (cnch), is connuoniy followed by the article, wilh meaning " each " or " every "; cf. Scotch illc, /VAy/, and 1. 1(J17, etc., Iche a syde. 1573. See note on I. 7f). " IGGO. The castle of Joyous Guard. oflcn identidcd with Bamborongh Castle in the nortlicastcrn part of England, formerly known as DuU)rous 130 NOTES Guard, was présentée! by Arthur to Lancelot on this occasion, and, according to some legends, renamed in honor of the joyful deliverance of the Queen. 1681. Gawaine, Gareth, Agra vaine, Gaheris, and Modred were sons of Arthur's sister, Bellicent, wife of Lot, King of Orkney. Modred, according to the romancers, was the son of Arthur and Belhcent, and later became the instrument of fate in punishing Arthur for this incestuous union, which occurred before Arthur knew of his own real parentage. 1688-1711. Thèse stanzas ilhistrate well the mixed motives of the real mediaeval knights of the romances, as contrasted with the lofty, single motives of Tennyson's idealized knights. In the romances and in Malory, the emphasis is generally upon the practical and the useful, rather than upon fine feeling, love, loyalty, and friendship. Notice hère tliat Gawaine's first thought is of Lancelot's physical strength, and the difficulty of taking him, " there of shulde we but harmys "uynne "; then comes the thought of his love and gratitude to Lancelot, and then again the practical objection to stirring up trouble. Arthur's réception of the news is similar; cf. 11. 1736-51. With this latter passage compare Arthur's first words, on hearing the taie, in Malory, xx, 2: " I would be loath to begin such a thing but I might hâve proofs upon it, for Sir Lancelot is an hardy knight and ye ail know he is thé best knight amongst us ail, and but-if he be taken with the deed, he will fight with him that bringeth up the noise and I know no knight that is able to match him." Malory, himself, then tells us briefly that " Lancelot had NOTES 131 done so much for him and for the queen, that wit ye well the king loved him passingly well." 1728. Hère, and in Malory, Agravaine tells his story wilHngly. In the M. A. Arthur has to resort to threats to get it frora him. 1736-51. Cf. note on 1688-1711. 1747. Cf. note on 1. 63. 1760. In the M. A., Gawaine tries to persuade Lancelot to go hunting with the King. 1839. vp. In the sensé of " open "; so in Chaucer's Squire's Taie, 1. 615: "his dore is uppe." In Malory, xx, 4, Lancelot says: " Fair Lords, leave your noise and I shall set open the door." 1840. In the M. A., this knight is Sir Tanaquins; in Malory, Sir Colgrevance of Gore. 1858. Our romance and Malory differ from the M. A., in which Agravaine escapes hère to be killed later, when Lancelot rescues the Queen. 1876-77. Malory, xx, 5: " Sir, said Bors, after yc were departed from us, we ail that be of your blood and your well-wishers, were so dretched that some of us leapt out of our beds naked." The verbal parallels betwecn the last part of our romance and Malory's twentieth and twcntyfirst books niake it clear that whatcvcr ollior sources Malory used, he had before him either this romance or another English version of the story, from which this romance was also directly drawn. 1895. Twenty-eiglit, accordiiig to tlu' J/.J., and twenty-two accordiiig to Malory, who enumerates them (xx, 5). 1912-19. This idca is worked out more in dolailby Malory (xx, 8). Gawainc is uiiwilliiig to Iake vengeance uj)on Lancelot for llic ((«Nil h of 132 NOTES Agra vaine, inasmuch as the latter failed to lieed Gawaine's warnings. 1939. In Malory (xx, 8), Gawaine's feelings are more Personal. He refuses " to be in that place where so noble a queen shall take a shameful end." 1940-41. Malory (xx, 8): " Then said the king to Sir Gawaine, suffer your brothers. Sir Gaheris and Sir Garetli, to be there. My Lord, said Sir Gawaine, wit you well tbey will be loath to be there présent, but they are young and full unable to say you nay." 1943. That: i.e., the squire. 1970-77. Arthur's grief over the loss of his knights is far greater than over the sin and disloyalty of his wife and friend. Cf. note on 11. 1688-1711, and Malory, xx, 9: "And therefore, said the king, wit you well my heart was never so heavy as it is now, and much more am I sorrier for my good knights' loss than for the loss of my fair queen; for queens I might hâve enow% but such a fellowship of good knights shall never be in no Company." Tennyson's Arthur is supposed to be raised high above this, but one wonders, sometiraes, in reading his farewell to Guinevere, whether Tennyson's Arthur also is not grieving more over his own broken purposes, " the loss of his good knights," than over the sin and shame of his fair queen. 1979. , Thedevotion of Gawaine tohis youngest brother, Gareth, is emphasized in ail versions of the story. In their emphasis of Gawaine's grief over Gareth, both our poet and Malory seem to forget at times that Gaheris is dead, too. 2024-25. Tennyson brings ont the dévotion of Gawaine and Lancelot to Gareth in Gareth and Ly nette. NOTES 133 2028. See thar in GlosKary. 2044. See note on 1. 1609^ 2048. The maiden appears at this point in neither the M. A. nor Malory, but see 1. 2G08 and note. 2085. In mydde. Amid ; cf. on lyff, 1. 14, note, and also the modem use of halj. 2094-95. Though their great trouble was because of the knights who were scparated from them by death {lit. dead from them). Cf. 1. 1979. 2114. wendys. Imperative in -ys; cf. 11. 37 and 2301. 2168. Neither could any man ride so fast as he. 2254. Rochester. One of the oldest sees in England, dating from the seventh century. Roche.ster is about halfway betAveen London and Canterbury. M. A. bas rouenceastre and loucestre. 2257. karllylle. Carlisle, in Cumberland, not far from the traditional Joyous Guard in Northumberland. 2305. benwike. The city of Bayonne in southwestern France; see note on 1. 2466. 2310. mayden floure. Flower of maidens or of virginity. 2338. Cf. 1. 2028. 2356-71. A typical mediœval picture; notice the use of détail and color. 2379. MaIor>% xx, 14: " And wit you well there was many a bold knight there that wept as tenderly as though they had seen ail llicir kiii afore them." 2388-95. xVrthur's reply is omitted by Malory. 2402. Malory, xx, 15: " But liars ye hâve listened." 2466. kelyon. Caerleon on l'sk, in soullicrn Walcs, near the Bristol Cluimicl. Malory, xx, 18: " They sailed from Cardilf [ucar Cai^rlcoii] imto Benwick [cf. 1. 2474|: soiuc mcn call il Bayonni-, and some men call it Beau ne, wlierc llic wine of 134 NOTES Beaune is." In the M. A., Lancelot and his companions sail from the kingdom of Logres (the name always given to England in the French romances) to the kingdom of Gaunes, and Bors is made King of Gaunes (cf. 1. 2484). Gaunes is apparently Guienne, in southwestern France, in which is situated the city Bayonne, for Malory says, XX, 18: " and Sir Ector de Maris, that was Lancelot's youngest brother, he crowned him King of Benwick, and King of ail Guienne, that was Sir Lancelot's own land." As a matter of fact, the geography of the romancers was very confused, and seems to hâve been largely a matter of names. Lancelot certainly takes a very roundabout route from Carlisle (northwestern England) to Bayonne (southwestern France), via Joyous Guard (northeastern England) and Caerleon (southern Wales). 2484. See note on 1. 2466. 2550. See note on 1. 79. 2556-87. There is nothing like this in the M. A. Malory apparently paraphrases our poem very closeh'. 2564-71. Malory, xx, 19: " Then spake King Bagdemagus to Sir Lancelot: Sir, your courtesy will shende us ail, and thy courtesy has waked ail this sorrow; for and they thus over our lands ride, they shall by process bring us ail to nought, whilst we thus in holes us hide." Banndemagew is not mentioned in this place in M. A., as he has already been killcd by Gawaine beforc the great tournament at Winchester. Malory retains both the death (bk. xvii) and the conversation with Lancelot, hère, — a characteristic slip! 2608. The maiden does not appear in M.A.\ in lier place an old woman, richly dressed and on a NOTES 135 white palfrey, warns Arthur of his folly in hesieging the city of Gaunes, There is no preliminary negotiation for a truce; the battlc begins at once. In Malory, the maiden is accompanied by a dwarf ; sec 1. 2058. 2620 ff. Malory condenses greatly, and sacrifices much of the beauty of the picture. 2732, Uniess he had foreseen their plan to attack. 2738-69. M. A. omits, and inscrts a long account of Modred's treacherous behavior in England. Malory again follows our text closely. 2806. This is one of the earliest Gawaine myths, and is also told later of many other mediaival knights. It probably originated in some Celtic SunDivinity myth. 2808. In M. A. and Malory, Lancelot does not know of Gawaine's magie power, but " as the French book saith. Sir Lancelot wende when he felt Sir Gawaine double his strength that he had been a fiend and no earthly man." 2830. goynge on hye. Not necessarily " going in haste," as Bruce interprets it, but mcrely " when I am not laid low." 2945-46. Hère endeth Malory 's twentieth book, and hère beginneth his twenty-fîrst, which continues to follow our romance closely. The M. A. dirt'ers markedly, inserting at this point an account of a Roman invasion, in which Arthur kills the Roman emperor, and Gawaine, after l)cing fatally wounded, advises Arthur to makc pcacc with Lancelot, and ask his aid. 2956. See note on 1. 1681: 3010. nice. Origiiially " fooiish " (Lat. ncscins), so in Chauccr and iicrc; then, " foolislily ])articular over trilles," " fastidious "; thcii," i rivial "(traiisference of sensé to the triflcs thcmselves); so in 136 NOTES Romeo and Juliet, v, ii, 18 : " The letter was not nice, but l'ull of charge." Then the idea of foUy was lost, and nice began to signify " accurate," as, a nice observer, a nice distinction. Thiis it passed into the sensé of " good, excellent." See, Greenough and Kittredge, Words and their Ways in Engliish Speech. 3018. Malory, xxi, 1 : " And so the bishop departed, and did the cursing in the most orgulist wise that raight be done." 3094. barendowne. Barham Down, in Kent, halfway between Dover and Canterbiiry. 3127. " They made a low mound over each." {?) 3133. In M. A. Gawaine asks tobe buried with Gareth at Camelot. There follows a long description of his funeral and burial, and then an account of his appearing to Arthur in a dreain, and urging peace with Lancelot. In Malory, Gawaine writes Lancelot a long letter before he dies, urging him to corne to England to help Arthur. 3196. In M. A. the dream follows- the appearance of Gawaine. 3228-3229. In M. A. there is no attempt at making a truce; Arthur insists upon meeting Modred at once. 3250. Ihesus. The manuscript lias the common mediœval abbreviation Ihc (often written IHC or IHS), representing the Greek IH2, the first two and the last letters of the name IH20Y2, Jésus. The more familiar form IHS lias often been erroneously explained as standing for " lesus Hominum Salvator" or " In Hoc Signo." See also note on 1. 3302. Similarly the familiar abbreviation XP — often written as a monogram ^ — is an abbreviation of the Greek NOTES 137 3259. Before ail is décidée! ; literally, by (thc time that) ail be dealt. 3261. Bruce's einendation seems unneccssary and undesirable, as it changes the meaning of the line, which is clear as it stands. Lette should be taken in the sensé of " refrain from," not " allow." 3302. Above this Hne, at the top of tlic leaf in the manuscript, are the words Ihu Merc. Ihu stands for " Jesii," by analogy with Ihc, " Jésus," see note on 1. 3250 ; merc is perhaps an abbreviation of " mercy." 3318. The wyse. The wise nien, the leaders. 3335. See note on I. 79. 3357. The fewtre is the fclt-Hned socket in which a knight or man-at-arms carried the spear. Notice the omission of the subject in this sentence. 3376-77. According to Geofîrey of Monmouth, the founder of London (New Troy) and ancestor of the Britons was Brut or Bru tus the Trojan, a great-grandson of yEneas. Ilis adventures form the substance of Wace's Roman de Brut, which was translated and expanded into a i)oem of some 32,000 verses, by La^amon, the EngHshinan, about 1200. Notice the change in construction in the middle of the sentence. As the poet h;is neglected to supply a subject for the second half , we may insert " Brut." 3386. Bedevere does not appear in the M. A. His place is taken by Girflet, the traditional cotnpanion of Lucan. 3413. Ihesu, for thy names sevyn. Cf. Towndcy Plays, Secunda Pastoruni, 190: — Now, Lord, for tliy names si-vyii. I have been unablc to discovcr wli;it tlic scvi'U names arc, or wiicthcr tiiis is aiiytliiii^ more 138 NOTES than a conventional oath. Seven is the mystic number denoting perfection of power, as three dénotes perfection of being. 3465. Evidently the source of Malory's great phrase: " I saw nothing but the waters wappe and the waves wanne." Cf. Tennyson's — I heard the ripple washing in the reeds. And the wild water lapping on the crag. There is no parallel in the M. A. 3474. Hère our poet follows the M. A. Malory makes the second épisode the counterpart of the first. 3490. withouten Reste: i.e., without the rest of the body. M. A. (p. 248): " il vit ke vne mains issi del lac, mais del cors de quoi le mains estoit ne vit il point." 3569. Avmysbery. Almesbury, in Salisbury Plain, halfway between Salisbury and Stonehenge. 3862-63. That is, he received the holy sacrament, the body of our Lord. , GLOSSARY a, adj., ail, 2462. [Cf. modem Scotch; rare in ME.] a, conj., if, 2832; and, 2844. [Abbreviation of and.] abbyte, n., habit, 3793. abought, see abye. abyde, v., ùif., await, 1G2, G28, 2811, 3091, 3G55. V., inf., wait, 701, 3802. abye, v., subj., suffer for, pay the penalty for, 1387; abought, prêt., 2523. [a-, prefix, = back + OE bycgan = to buy.] acountres, n., encounters, 1,389. adyght, pp., equipped, 1545. afrought, pp., frightened, 2295, 2413. agayne, prep., towards, 709; before, opposite to, 2648, 2743. Cf. agaynste and ageyne. agaynste, prep., opposite, 3879. ageyne, prep., back, in opposite direction, 802; against, 238, 267, 913. agilte, pp. wronged, sinned against, 915, 1322; agulte, prêt., 1154. [a-, intensive prefix, + OE. gijlUin = to sin.j agoo, pp., gone, 149. agulte, see agilte. alblasters, n., cross-bows, 2729. [OF. alblastre, Lat. arcubalUstra.] ail, adv., as, 3706. [Cf. also, of v»hich this is a contraction, and as.] also, adv., as. 394, 549, 1576; witli nicre intensive force (cf. Lat. quant in qnam maximum), 368, 531, 642, 674. [Cf. the contractions ail and as; OE. al = ail + sxoa = so.] and, cnnj., if, 161, 239, 1706, 2846, 3203. antoure, see aunter. apparayle, n., e(|uii)incnl, 1748. are, adv., before, 291, 977. [Northern fonn of erc] armytes, n., gen., hcrmit's, 3950. arne, v. près., are, 2206. 140 GLOSSARY as, adiK, with mère intensive force (cf. Lat. quam in quam 7na.rimum), 488, 3705, 3713. [Contraction of also, q. v.; see also ail.] ascrye, v., inf., call upon, 2126. assay, v., inf., discover, 300. auauntement, n., boast, 1617. aught, V., -prêt., owned, 653. [Past tense of OE. agan, îrom which is derived owe and ovm.] aunter, n., adventure, 1875; auntere, 1903; auntre, 33; antoure, 1829; ■plu., auntres, 719; aunturs, 3, 11, 19; auntures. 1906. auter, ?i., altar, 3439. awaytes, v. près., keeps watch, 64. [OF. aumtier, to watcb; cf. OF. waite, gaite, a guard. See also waites.] awise, v., imp., advise, 2568. ay, pron., he, 110. ay, adv., ever, 1021. ayther, pron., each, 3301, 3595; aythur, 3278. B baie, n., woe, sorrow, 1074, 3039. baleffuU, aJj., woeful, 3839. batayles, n., battalions, 3306. bayne, adj., ready, obedient, 1134 (.?), 3217, 3315. bayne, pron., both, 991. be, conj., by the time that, 1801, 1957; by, 3080, 3259. be, n., bracelet or necklace, 3179; bee, 3419; beghe, 2625. [OE. hëâ^, ring.] becryed, v., prêt., accused, 2774. Cf. bycalle. bede, v. inf., proclaim, 32, 41, 348. V. inf., offer, 849, 1402, 3356; près., 3274. [OE. hêodan, to command or offer, Mod. E. hid.\ bedene, see bydene. bee, see be. beghe, see be. begredde, v., prêt., accused, 1812. [be, prefix, + OE. grœdan to cry.j beld, n., relief, 3407. belette, see beleve. GLOSSARY 141 beleue, r., inf., leave, 558; byleve, près., 3963. beleve, v., inf., remain, 759; belefte, prêt., 1705; byleft, prêt . 00. Cf. lefte. bemys, n., plu., trumpets, 2707. bente, n., field, 3359, 3374. bere, n., clamour, 2127. besaunt, 7i., bezant, a Byzantine coin wortli from ton to twenty shillings, 3419; besaunte, 3179; /;/,/., besauntis, 3542. besette, pp., employer!, 1412 ; bysette, 15G8. bethe, v., près., are, 1825 ;/?/<., shall he, 1727; imp., hv, 1881. bette, V., prêt., beat, 13. biaute, n., beauty, 125, 240, 1004. blanne, see blynne. ble, n., color, complexion, face, 739; blee, 3504, 3779, 3876. bloweth oute, v., près., defame, expose, bring into discrédit, 1517. blyndis, v., près., becomes blind, 311. blynne, v. inf., cease, stop, 37, 1824, 2999, 3039, 3727; pp., 1691; blanne, prêt., 3364. blythe, adv., gladly, 1940, 3705. Perliaps confused with blyve, q. v. blyve, adv., quickly, 3700. [Originallv two words, bi and lif, with life.] boddyn, 7jp., prayed, 2803. [Past participle of OE. bcodan (cf. bede) confused with and substituted for pp. of OE. biddan, to pray.] bode, n., message, 3408. bode-word, n., commandment, 3274. boght, pp., paid for, redeemed, 3009; bought, 470, 3483. bold, adj., sure, 3009, 3483; bolde, 3088. bone, n., prayer, request, 1120, 2803; boone, 3787, \V^\0. bot, conj., unless, 2073, 2252; but, 1148, 1431; bot yif. hul if. unless, 199; bot yife, 2077; bot yiffe, 1340. bote, n., amends, 3486; remedy, 3303, 3407, 38 K). (OE. hôt, boot; probably a derivative of tlio root bat-, good, uscfui, from which the comparatives bettcr, is durivcd.J bought, see boght. bounte, n., bounty, 125, 1739. boure, n., bower, private ai)artment, 1809, 2311', ;J032. bowne, v., près., bound, spriiig, 3257. 142 GLOSSARY bowne, r., près., bow, 3175. bowne, adj., ready, prepared, 941, 2102, 2151, 2462, 2985. brast, V., prêt., burst, broke, 188; braste, 1343, 2178, 3077. braundisshid, v., prêt., moved, shook, 117. brayed, v., prêt., beat, struck, 3344. brème, adj., fierce, 229, 206, 951, 1600. [Origin unknown.] brenne, v., inf., burn, 2507; brent, pp., 3697; brente, prêt., 2537; pp., 943, 1319. brere, n., rose-biish, 179, 724, 835. browgh, n., town, 2707. burnys, n., gen. sing., stream's, 3619. buske, V., inf., hasten, 349, 2505, 3427; busked, prêt., 699, 2402; buskes, près., 2525; buskis, près., 547, 553, 2715; buskyd, prêt., 2151, 2882; buskyd, pp., prepared, 1808. but, see bot. by, prep., in, 3. [Cf. Mod. E. hy day, hy night.] by, conj., see be. by, V., be, 34, 876; subj., 1759, 3259. bycalle, v., inf., accuse, 1553. Cf. becry. bydene, adv., together, 24, 49, 70, 546, 693; bedene, 1513, 1728. bydyng, n., bidding, 1134. byforne, prep., before, 3743. byggyd, pp., built, 3619. [ON. hyggja, Mod. Se. big, build.] byggying, n., buikling, 3767. byheste, n., ofifer, 3290. byknow, v., inf., acknowledge, 916. byleft, see beleve. byleve, see beleue. bymene, v., inf., mean, 856. byrd, n., brkle, 2989; lady, 3632. flNIod. E. bride, by metathe- sis of i and r. In like manner, Mod. E. bird was ME. brid.] bysette, see besette. bytake, v., inf., deliver, hand over, 2283; près., 2346. care. n., trouble, 1424; kare, 2095; carys, plu., 3905. carefull. adj., full of sorrow, 3777. carys, see care. GLOSSARY 143 case, n., occurrence, 1129. [Lat. casus.] caste, V., -prêt., turned, 3776. chase, see chese. chère, n., expression, manner, 482, 5t0, 1729, 2129, 3U0; mood, frame of mind, 183, 477, 72G. (OF. chicre, face.] chese, v., inf., choose, 2973; -prêt., 419, 514, 2355, 2522, 3290; chase, prêt., 2957, 3561. churlysshe. ad}., harsh, brutal, pertaining to a churl or serf, 1078. clepis, V., près., calls, summons, 106, 387, 2540; clepid, prct. 2668, 3606; clepyd, prêt, 1444, 3858. See klepis. clerke, n., cleric, churchman, scholar, 877, 3010. clongyn, pp., stifïened, shrunk, 751. cloughe, n., ravine, valley, 875; cloughis, gen. sing., 893. clyppe, V., inj., embrace, 3927; clypped, prêt., 1801; clyppis, près., 1547. comely, adv., in a seemly manner, 3781. coloure, n., complexion, face, 2816. comsemente, n., commencement, 1726. {Comse and cumse are common shortened forms of commence in ME.] corage, n., mind, spirit, 3777. cordement, n., accord, 2338, 2422, 2426. corsse, n., body, 2880. corteise, n., courtesy, nobleness, 2185, 2200. corteise, adj., courteous, noble, 2172; corteyse, 623; courteyse, 166. coude, V., prêt., knew, had knowledgo of, 2892; covde, prêt., 2751; cowde, prêt., 3617, 3809; covde, prêt., was ablc, 3724; cowde, prêt., 3572. courteyse, sec corteise, adj. couth, V., prêt., could, 104; couthe, 223, 1446; couthe, prêt., knew, 1675, pp., 2248. covde, see coude. cover, r., inf., recovcr, 3733; cpveryd, pp., 3134, 3730. cowde, see coude, crafte, n., skill, 370. crafty, adj., skillfiil, learnod, 877. craftely, adv., skillfully, 390. cryand, pr. p., crying, 3410. crye, 7i., pack, crowd of peof)!e, 44. [Originally f lie yelping of a 144 GLOSSARY pack of hounds, then the pack itself, and finally any pack of peoplc] curte, n., court, 1411. D dale, V. inf., deal, 1076; dalte, pp., dealt, decided, 3259; daltyn, prêt., dealt, 2897. dare, ?'., inf., fear, 2575. [Known from about 1200; not found in OE., nor in any early Teutonic language.] dede, n., deeds, prowess, 493; phrase, in dede, in truth, 1119. dede, n., death, 911; dead man, 3125. dede, adj., dead, 385, 686, 694. dede, v., prêt., did, put, 1654. deffend, v., inf., prohibit, 3049. dele, n., bit, portion, 2790. départe, v.,fitt., divide, 3704; departith, près., divides, scat- ters, 417; departed, pp., 743. dere, n., injury, harm, 839, 3704. dere, v., inf., to do harm, 2896. derfe, adj., bold, brave, 2607. dese, n., dais, 1516; desse, 2259. devoyede, v., imp., avoid, leave, 1167. deynge, n., dying, 104:7. dight, V. inf., prépare, make ready, 167, 1874, 2134, 2450; tend, treat, 326, 717; pp., prepared, 142, 254, 573; dyghte. pp., 3687; dyght, pp., clothed, 2049. do, V., inf., cause to, 1003; done, inf., 129; donc, inf., do, 1122; done, pp., caused, 1664, 2328; dothe, imp., put, 3883; dyd, prêt., caused, 341, 876, 1121, 2048; dyd, prêt., put, 3793, 3950; dyde, prêt., put, 1794, 3224. doelle, see duell. dolwyn, pp., buried, 3604. [Pp. of delve.] dôme, 7t., judgment, command, 2200; domys, plu., 2482; domys day, judgment day, 3061. done. see do. dore, r., inf., dare, 238. dostow, dost thou, 69. dothe, see do. drake, n., dragon, 2007. GLOSSÀRY 145 drayne, pp., drawn, 859, 1997, 2164, 3014, 3325. drechyd, pp., troubled ia sieep, 1869, [OE. dreccean; unknown in other Teutonic languages.] drede, 7i., fear, 2607. drede, adj., afraid, 909. drede, v., inf., fear, 912, 1388; près., 71; imp., 498. dreghe, adj., great, miglity, 2621. [Conimoner spelling drcc] droughe, v., prêt., designcd, carvcd, 877. droupe, v., inf., flag, tire, 2575. dryhe, adj., far off, 2826. [Commoner spelling drce, cf. dreghe.] duelle, n., sorrow, grief, 1971, 2125, 2244; dwelle, 2458; doelle, 682, 873. [OF. doel, Mod. F, deuil.] dulfully, adv., dismally, 2000. dwelle, n., see duelle. dwelle, V., inf., stop, stay, 1769, 1776, 1793. dwellynge, n., remaining, stayiiig, 80. dyd, dyde, see do. dyght, dyghte, see dight. dynte, n., stroke, 470, 484, 503; dyntis, plu., 1076. dyskere, v., inf., discover, 754, 1735. [OF. dcscuevre, ME. diskever and diskere.] E eche, for he?, 3807. edder, n., adder, 3341. [OE. nœdre; cf. adder, I. 3345. The initial n was lost after 1300, tlirougli tlie erroneous division of a naddre as an addre; so with Mod. E. apron, akui to napery, napkin, etc.] efte, adv., again, 2209. eme, n., uncle, 1681; eme-is, gen. sing., 2960. endris, adj., former, 1017. [ON. endr, formcrly; OE. end. adv., formcrly; common ME. form ender.] entayle, n., quality, form, 975; character, nature. 2300; rank, 3273. enterdite, v., inf., interdict, 2253; enterdyt, pp., 2284; enter- dyted, pp., 2268. er, conj., ère, 2013. 146 GLOSSARY eueryche, pron., every (one) 3187; euerychone, every one, 23G4. eylythe, v., près., aileth, 3884. eyne, n., plu., eyes, 3435. Cf. yen. falle, pp., happened, 1159; fallys, près., befits, 1119; fell, prêt., was proper, 1122; felle, prêt, happened, 888, 3834. famé, n., réputation, 1101. fande, v., inf., go, visit, 2498. fantyse, n., fancy, 2547. fare, n., action, ' doings," 945. fare, v., inf., go, 156, 222, 800. fasowne, n., fashion, 2531. faste, V., inf., to make fast, 3324. fauoure, n., grâce, submission, 2286. fayne, adj., glad, 604, 707, 3200. fee, n., property, 2719. fêle, adj., many, 6, 2019, 2157. fell, felle, v., see falle. felle, adj., tierce, 888. ferd, adj., afraid, 3184. fere, n., companion, company; ferys, plu., 3830; phrase, in fere, together, 2222, 3282, 3402, 3702. fere, adj., strong, 411, 552. ferly, adv., wonderfully, 6, 3176. ferre, adv., far, 134, 332. ferys, see fere. fette, pp., fetched, 1067, 3167. fewtred, pp., 3357, see note. fieme, v., inf., rcject, 2673; fîemyd, prêt., banished, 3560; fiemyd, pp., 3755. fold, V., inf., croucli, 99. folde, n., ground, 3549. folde, V., yield, 2547. folyd, pp., fooled, 402. folyse, n., plu., foUics, 2735. fomyd, V., prêt., foamed, 3441. fone, n. plu., foes, 3211. GLOSSARY 147 fone, adj., few, 2378. fone, V., see fonge. fonge, V., inf., receive, 3503; fone, prêt., grasped, 1790. [OE. fôn, common ME. form, fang.] for, conj., since, because, 293, 095, 2210. forbled, pp., covered with blood or cxliaustcd from loss of blood, 3434. forbrende, pp., burned up, IGGG; forbrent, 1925. foreward, 7i., agreement, promise, 3302; forward, 3695; for- wardys, plu., 2673, 3270, 3324. forlorne, pp., lost, 3209. Cf. lorne. forne, prep., for, 3557. forsette, v., prêt, guarded, 3040. forthy, conj., thereforc, 104, 1088, 1141, 2394, 2408. forthynke, v., irtf., repent, 2737; forthynketh, près., 3849. forward, forwardys, n., see foreward. forwery, adj., tired out, 2901. forwhy, cojij., wherefore, 33; because, 97, 1792; provided that, 389, in order that, 2617. forwondred, pp., much astonished, 2730. foryelde, v., subj., requite, 1548. found, V., inf., try, strive, 1008; founde, 3229; foundis, imp., 2551; founde, inf., go, 1593; fownde, 3513; found, inf., rush 3391; founde, 1905, fownd, 2553; founde, inf., strike, 2159; fownd, inf., establish, 2551. fownd, see found. fre, adj., noble (stock epithet of compliment), 75, 90, 210. frêle, adj., frail, 2300. frely, adv., noble (stock epithet of compliment), 2939, 3121, 3131, 3329. frely, adv., very, 3772. freste, adv., first, 1151; friste, 149, 736. [For metathesis of i and r, cf. byrd.) freyned, v., prêt, asked, 678. [OE. fregnan, ME. frayne, Ger. fragen.] friste, see freste. gabbe, i'., inf., lie, slandcr, 1147, 1150; gabbyd, prit., 1105, 1132, 1138. 148 GLOSSARY galeis, n., phi., galleys, 2531; galeyse, 3052. galle, n., poison, 1C54. gam, n., sport, joy, 96; game, 430, 3164; gamme, 611; games, plu., 3079; gamys, 3227. gan, V., prêt, literally began, but used before the active in- finitive as a mere auxiliary, = Mod. E. did, 116, 118, 184, 197, 222; ganne, 143, 438; gon, 357, 576, 621, 713; gonne, 99, 139, 192, 249; gonne, pp., begun, 1780. gatys, phrase thus gatys, in this way, 1712. gayne, adj., straight, 1904. [ON. gegn, straight; occurs but once in OE.] gaynes, v. près., profits, 1071. gère, n., possessions, 3736. glad, V., inf., rejoice, 3227. gledde, pp., clothed, 3172. [Variant of cled, pp. of clead, to clothe.] glede, n., fire, 780, 2742, 2793. glente, v., prêt., glided, 3493. [From gleiit, to move quickly with gliding motion; related to Ger. glanzen, to shine, but application to light is secondary.] glewe, n., sport, jests, 1164. [Supplanted in 16th century by paraliel form, glee.] gleyves, n., plu., spears, 3078, 3096. [Mod. E. glaive.] glode, V., prêt., glided, 3341. go, V., inf., walk, 431, gon, gonne, sec gan. gonfanoune, n., a small flag attached to a knight's spear, immediately below the head, 2153, 2464; gonfanowne, 2886, 3096; gounfanoune, 2104. grande, v., inf., grant, 2318. graythes, v. près., equips, fits eut, 2530; graythid, preL^ 2739. gre, n., prize, 48; grée, 2409. gredde, v., prêt., graspcd, 1838. grede, v., inf., sliout, cry, 791, 1390; gredys, près., accuse, 1572. grée, soc gre. gremly, adv., griuily, billorly, 2457; grymly, 1511, 3097. gretlyche, adv., greally, 1152. grounden, pp., sbarpcned, 3078. GLOSSARY 149 grymly, see gremly. grysely, adv., terrihiy, 2912. gynne, n., trick, 3037. H hailsed, v., prêt., greeted, 2632. haidys, v., près., holds, takes, 89. haie, n., hall, 1078. han, V., près., hâve, 2417; hanne, 3209. happe, n., chance, 831. hastow, hast thou, 3507. hede, v., inf., heed, care for, liVÏ. hedyr, adv., hither, 134. held, V., inj., incline, 184; yicld, 2G1; helde, 2141. hele, n., salvation, 3G55. hele, V. inf., conceal, 143, 4GG, 1473, 1G78, 29G7. hem, pron., thein, 1464, 1855, 1901. [Tlie scribe wlio copied 11. 1-1902 used exclusively the Northern forms thcm and theym; the second scribe, who finished the poem, was apparently a Southerncr, for he used the Southern forms exclusively. Cf. her.] hend, adj.. courteous (a stock cpithet of compliment), 110, 1G6» 541, 596; hende, 561, 2469. hend, adv., near, 332. hendely, adv., courteously, 600, 2710, 2853. hent, pp., taken, 3023; hente, prêt, 1037, 2853. her, pro7i., their, 2481, 2543; hyr, 2471, 2474. [Cf. hem; first scribe uses exclusively Northern forms, their and thcrc, second scribe, her and hyr.] heraude, n., herald, 354; heraudis, plu., 341. herse, n., a framevvork to hold cand'es over a coffin, 3532. hest, 71., vow, promise, 2688; heste, 2660, 2697, 3686. hette, pp., see hight. heuys, v. près., lifts, 1998. hewe, V., prêt., struck blows, 21T1. hight, V., prêt., was cuilcd, 93; highte. 883; hyght. 147 1-; hi^ht. pp.,(allcd, 138;hyghte, 2tH7; hyght, v., pns., is callcd, :!!l(IO; hyght, iip., proniised, 1447, .')252; hette, pp., pruniibcd, 2697. hode, n., head, 277; hood, 309. 150 GLOSSARY hold, n., castle, 3589. holden, pp., held, considered, 123. hoUy, adv., wholly, 935, 945; holyche, 3826. holtes, 71., plu., groves, 3575; holtys, 3029, 3521. holyche, see hoUy. holys, n., plu., holes, 2571. hood, see hode. hope, V., près., think, 490, 1491, 3543. hore, adj., old, grey, 314, 3029, 3521. hornys, n., gen. plu., horns', 2127. houyd, see hovid. hovid, V., prêt., lingered, 259; houyd, 2622. [From Jwve, dérivation unknown, superseded by hover.] hyde, n., color, 3757. [Used in this sensé only in phrase hide and hue.] hyght, see hight. hynge, v., prêt, hung, 2626. hyr, see her. hyrtylle, adv., up to this time, 1780. hyt, pron., it, 3488, 3598; hytte, 3711, 3834. ibente, pp., striped, banded, 1035. iche, pron., each, 1561, 1685, 2367, 3761; phrase, on iche a syde, on each side, on every side, 1646, 2090, 2109, 2504. See note on 1. 1561. ichone, pron., each one, 419, 627. idighte, pp., prepared, 610. imanased, pp., menaced, threatened, 479. [ME. prefix {- or y- represents the OE. pp. prefix ge-; cf. Ger. ge-.] imaryd, v., prêt., marred, 3360. inchessoun, n., occasion, reason, 56, 1030. inoughe, adj., enough, 2677. [OE. genôg.] irade, pp., read, 2651. iwysse, adv., surely, 3635. [OE. gewis.] K kare, soe care. kende, see kenne. GLOSSARY 151 kene, adj., bold, 803, 955, 1385. kene, v., see kenne. kenne, v., inf., know, 175; kende, prêt., 3043; kene, prêt., 1097. kepe, V., inf., watcli, guard, 319G; kepit, prd., heeded, 102. kest, V., prd., cast, 3510; keste, prêt., 3188; keste, pp., 455. kithe, see kythe. klepis,w., près., calls, 81G; klepitte, prêt., 191; klepyd, prc/.,536. See clepis. knowistow, knovvest thou, 107. knowlache, v., près., ackiiowledge, coufess, 3638. kyd, kydde, see kythe. kynd, n., kin, family, 1005. kythe, v., inf., déclare, make known, show, 1411, 1611, 1774, 2481, 2744; kythe, pp., 3598; kithe, inf., 533; kyd, prêt., 2751; kydde, prêt., 2892. lade, pp., lead, 1506. layne, n., concealment, 602, 1964, 3204. layne, v., inf., conceal, 989, 1026, 2650, 3591. lèche, n., physician, 200, 368; lechis, plu., 325. lechynge, n., médical treatment, 2860, 3507. lede, n., land, 653, 2659; man, 3163; lead, 3738. lede, V., inf., carry, 1117, 2637; to lead his life, 3948. lees, see lèse. leff, adj., dear, 1. lefte, V., prêt., remained, 53. See beleve. lelyest, adv., most loyally, 1066. leman, n., lover or niistress. 582; lemman, 586, 605, 637. [Early ME. leof, dear (cf. leff, above) and man.] lemyd, v., prd., shone, 1471, 3308, 3586. lend, V., inf., stay, rest, 565, 617, 1007, 3824; lende, 1008. 2590. 3059, 3210; lente, prd., 988; lente, pp., 1353, 1945, 2277, 2727. lende, v., inf., land, 2473. lene, v., inf., lend, grant, 1464. lenge, v., inf., stay, 3276, 3556. lenger, adv., longer, 40, 162. lente, v., inf., give, 3693; pp., 1323. Sec aiso lend and Icne. 152 GLOSSARY 1ère, n., face, cheek, 3624; lerys, plu., 3832; leyre, stnj., 475. 1ère, n., learning, 521. 1ère, v., inf., learn, 641. les, sce lèse, n. lèse, n., lie, deceit, 423, 992, 1518, 2255; lees, 27G, 299, 512; les, 2353. lèse, V., subj., lose, 3415. lesynge, n., lying, 1004, 1043, 2728, 3550. let, sec lette, v. lete, V., inf., let fall, 1511. lette, n., hindrance, 2095. [Survives in modem légal phrase, mithout let or hindrance, and in the expression " let ! " in tennis.] lette, V., with infinitive, signifying to bring a thing about, cause it to happen, 2985, 3028; let, 2978; lett, 41. lette, V. inf., hinder, 205, 2441, 2G17, 3163; cease, stop, 201, 665, 2089. laue, adj., dear, 3204, 3412. Cf. lefiE. leue, V., inf., live, 3203; levé, 3557. leue, V., imp., grant, 3556. leuer, adv., liefer, moregladly, 3739; levir, 378. See note to 1. 378. leueste,arf;., most lief, most glad, most anxious, 2473; leveste, 3059. See leuer and note to 1. 378. leuyd, pp., left, 2820, 3380, 3744; levyd, pp., 3383; levyd, prêt., 2824. levande, pr. p., living, 2840. levé, leveste, see leue. levir, see leuer, and note to 1. 378. leviste, v., près., dost leave, 748. levyd, see leuyd. levyn, n., lightning, 3308, 3586. leyre, sec 1ère, liggys, V., près., lies, 1730. loggen, V., près., lodge, 1901. lokyd, pp., enclosed, 2620. lone, n., concoalment, 1124. Cf. layne, n. longede, r., prct., belonged, 1100. lore, n., learning, 3906. loreme, r/., tra{)pings, 1471. [Variant of lorain.\ lorne, pp., lost, 1389, 3117, 3331. Cf. forlorne. GLOSSARY 153 loughe, adj., blazing, 1594. [Formée! from n. low or loghe, flame.] lust, V., prêt, desired, 815. lyand, pr. p., lying, 2824. lyghte, n., plu., Windows, 874. lykynge, n., pleasure, 3702. lymmys, n., plu., limbs, 101. lyn, n., flesh, 3832. [OE. lynd.] lythe, V., inf., listen, C7G, 8G9, 1479, 1772, 1942. lyuand, pr. p., living, 2441; lyvand, 949; lyvande, 2667. M make, n., iri,atch, equal, 1062; mate, wife, 3668. [OE. gemaca, an equal.] make, v., siibj., bring tô pass, 199. manerys, n. plu., customs, 2060. mare, adj., more, 2052. marred, adj., bewildered, troubled, 3189. may, n., maid, 196; maye, 1107. mayne, n., strength, 269, 2122, 3219. [OE. mœgn; survives in Mod. E. phrase, might and main.] mede, n., reward, 3679. mekelle, mekill, mekylle, see mykell. mena, v., inf., tell, spcak, 22, 727, 1686; près., 2380, 2420, 3959; mente, prêt., 3932; ment, pp., 3695. mené, v., inf., remember, 3729; lament, 3861. merely, adv., merrily, 3856. mese, n., mess, course, 1512. message, n., ambassador, 2256; phrase, in message, 2050, on message, 2061, as an ambassador. meyne, n., company, 2039. [More commonly sp<'ned meinie.] mo, pron., more, in the sensé of others, 190, 587, l(i99. mochelle, adj., great, 1496. [Forni of micidc; see mykell.] mode, n., mind, heart, 386, 660, 762, 1178, 1354. mold, n., eartli, ground, 707, 3459, 3684; molde, 1615. 3300; moidys, plu., 3545. moldys, see mold. mon, »., près. 1 sing., must, 3230. moste, adj., grcatest, 3212. 154 GLOSSARY moste, V. près., 2 sing., must, 201; près., 3 sing., 916; près., 2 plu., 3216, 3220. motte, V., près., may, am permitted, 3207. mow, V., près., may, 1114; mowe, 1140. myche, adj., much, 96, 722, 3861. mychelle, see mykell. mykell, adj. and adv., great, much, many, 8, 178, 184; mykelle, 1560, 1675; mykyll, 1690; mychelle, 1749; mekill, 269; mekelle, 1528; mekylle, 1424. myngyd, v., prêt., disturbed, 3933. [Variant of mengyd.] mynne, v., inf., remind, 169. mysse, n., sin, 3677. N nad, V., prêt, ne had, had not, 1699; nade, 1410. nan, adv., none, not at ail, 1149. nas, V., prêt., ne was, was not, 579. ne, adv., not, 76, 98. nedelyngis, adv., necessarily, 753. nedysse, adv., needs, necessarily, 2811. neghe, adv., nigh, 1716. nelle, v., ne will, will not, 1790; nyll, 2077; nylle, 823. nere, v., prêt., ne were, were not, 411. nerehand, adv., nearly, 2898. neuyne, see nevyn. nevyn, v., inf., name, tell, 3197, 3304, 3823; neuyne, 2582; newyn, 3409. newyn, see nevyn. nold,t)., ne would, would not, 128, 633, 701; nolde, 1109, 2173. nome, v., prêt., took, 2258, 2374. nonne, n., nun, 3569; nonnys, gen. sing., 3625; nonnys, nom. plu., 3635. noon, pron., none, no one, 038, 3107. note, V., près., ne wot, knovv not, 3426. novther, adj., neither, 2721. nyee, adv., nigh, 3183. nyghe, v., inf., approacli, 2133, 3183, 3444; nyghed, prêt., 3874. nyll, nylle, see nelle. nys, V., près., ne is, is not, 2011. GLOSSARY 155 nyse, aâj., nice, silly, 3010. nyste, v., prêt., ne wiste, knew not, GIG, 856. O o, adj., one, 1593, 1602, 2173. obbyte, n., habit, 3763. ofdrayne, pp., drawn off, 1850. Cf. drayne. ofshere, v., inf., eut off, 213. one, cxcL, on! 3111. onys, adv., once, 691. or, conj., ère, 78, 526, 983, 2856. ordeyne, v., inf., plan, 961, 2510, 2542; ordeyned, prêt., 959. ore, n., mercy, 1344, 3484. ore, n., oar, 3071. ore, adv., formerly, 1740, 2202. 3717. other, conj., or, 1107; othyr, adj., other, 1107. ouereste, adj., topmost, 846. ought, adv., aught, very, 526, 983. palle, n., rich cloth, 2712. paramoure,a(Zî>.; phrase to love paramoure, to be in love with, 1021. paraylle, n., apparel, 2614. pas, n., gait, 1897. payne, n., torture, 1649. payned, v., prêt., strove, 950. pight, pp., pitchcd, 2644; pyghte, 2623. playnethe, v., près., complainetli, lamenteth, 1143. playnte, n., lament, 1056. praste, sec preste, adj. prees, n., press, crowd, retinue, 280, 722; près, 2351; prese, 303, 2495; presse, 244; prese, hurry, 518. près, prese, presse, sec prees. presons, v., près., imprisonest, 1853. preste, n., pricst, 3827. preste, adj., rcady, cagcr, 2716, 3151; praste, 3326. presythe, v., imp., prcss, 3326. 15G GLOSSARY preuely, adv., secretly, 830; prewely, 1767. prewely, see preuely. previte, n,, private affairs, 657. pride, n., glory, splendeur, 38, 52, 308, 699, 1471; pryde, 141, 630, 735, 2105, 2459. proferys, v., près., ofFers, 2053. pryme, n., the first hour of the day, 3885. pryse, adj., " prize," i.e., of high rank, désirable, 1111. pyghte, see pight. pyte, n., pity, 2115. Q quere, n., choir, 3138, 3902. queste, n., a judicial inquiry, 919, 925, 1320. quite, adj., free, clear, 490. quytes, v., près., requites, 2292. R radde, see rede. randowne, n., speed, violence, 2750, 2888. [A great randon (OF. a grant randon), a common jNIE. adverbial phrase, signifying viokîitly, at great speed. Cf. Mod. E. ai random.] râpe, v., inf., hasten, 2664; rappe, 3613. rappe, see tape. raught, V., prêt., started up, 3191. ravysshyd, pp., entranced, 3912. rayed, v., prêt., prepared, 2720, 3306. rayke, v., inf., rush, 3373. rayled, pp., adorned, 3531. [OF. reiller, Lat. regulare.] rayne, n., kingdom, 1980, 3223. rease, reasse, see rese. recomforte, v., inf., soothe, comfort, 1499; recoumforte, imp., 1493. rede, n., advice, plan, 907, 1113, 3740. rede, adj., red, 176, 179. rede, v., inf., direct, advise, tell, 1416, 2311; près., 168, 232, 855, 1776; radde, prêt., 3430. rede, v., près., read, 2956; inf., 3897. reden, v., prêt., rode, 313. GLOSSARY 157 relevé, v., imp., delivcr, 3112. reme, n., realm, 2512, 2519, 2520, 3GG6. rente, n., revenue, income, 2018. rese, n., rush, attack, 18G1, 1957, 2G90; resse, 2905; rease, 2909, 29G1; reasse, 2732, 3258. [OE. rœs, whence Mod. E. race.] resse, n., journey, pilgrimage, 2GGi. Sec also rese. rewdyste, v., prêt., didst hâve pity, 39-15. rigge, n., back, 2178. right, adj. and adv., straight, straightway, IGl, 620. roddys, see rode. rode, n., color, cheek, 179; roddys, plu., 395G. rode, n., rood, cross, 7G4, 1350. 1392, 2880. roffe, V., prêt., rived, split, 3372. roo, n., rest, 3G14. [ON. rô, Ger. Ruh.] rought, V., prêt., recked, 3522. rownd, adj., hrisk, 3805. rowne, n., speech, cry, 3510. rowne, v., inf., speak, 3423. rowte, n., company, liand, 3363; rowtes, plu., 3373. ryalle, adj., royal, 1077. ryche, n., kingdom, 2905, 3258. [OE. rlce, Ger. Reich; survives in Mod. Eng. in suffixes -rie, -rick, -ry, as in bishopric, Frederick, Henry.] rydand, pr. p., riding, 1555. rySe, adj., rife, 1825. ryghtwosse, adj., righteous, 3740. S sad, adj., satisfied, weary, 71G; sadde, 461. saff, V., infin., save, 200. salowes, see salues. salued, see salues. salues, V., -près., salutes, (>8, 735, 737; salowes, près., «iHC; salued, prêt., 39G. samen, adv., iogether, 2154, 2392. samytte, n., samite, a rich silk fabric, 2050. |()E. mmit. Ijit. examitum,?Àx-\\\VQa.<\vx\, from Gr. ?{, six. and ^/to», tlireml; cf. dimity, lit. two-thrcaded.] 158 GLOSSARY sangrayle, n., the Holy Grail, 10. [Often written sangreal in OF. and JNIE., because of supposée! etymology, sa?ig real. Real etymology. Saint Graal, the holy dish or cup, Lat. gradalis, corruption of cratella, diminutive of crater.] sanzfayle, adv., without fail, surely, 971. saue, ?•., prêt., saw, 1469. saumbues, n., saddle-cloths, 2360. sawes, n., plu., speeches, taies, 1151, 3251. sayne, v., inf., say, 861, 3319; pp., declared, 2872. scauberke, n., scabbard, 3471, 3474. [OF. escauberc] scryved, v., prêt., opened, 382; pp., 407. ■ [OF. escrevre, Lat. excrepare; common ISIE. form, screeve.] sèche, v., inf., seek, 437, 3021. see, n., seat, 2093. seke, adj., sick, 54, 158, 173. sekenyd, v., prêt., sickened, 3835. sekereste, adj., surest, most trustworthy, 2518. Cf. syker. sekeryd, v., prêt., made sure, confirmed, 2331. sekerynge, n., assurance, 2322. sely, adv., very, 3387, 3482, 3835. semblant, n., appearance, 659. semely, adj., beautiful (one), 639; semly, 2375, sene, v., inf., see, 725. sengle, adv., unusually, 1795. sente, n., assent, 2278. sethe, see sithe. sey, V., prêt., saw, 3417. shape, V., inf., make, form, 1386; pp., 1470. shende, n., shame, 1664. shende, pp., disgraced, injured, 3230; shent, 2913; shente, 1321, 2273; shente, pp., ruined, 1724. shene, adj., fair, bright, 51, 736, 1515, 2384. shent, shente, see shende. shore, pp., shom, 84. shoure, n., attack, 3000. [OS. skûr, battle, OE. scûr, shower; cf. Lat. obscurus.] shredde, n., strips, 2358. shredde, v., inf., eut, 2563. shuldistow, shouldst thou, 797. ' shynand, pr. p., shiuing, 973. GLOSSARY 159 sighe, V., prêt., saw, 70(5. sithe, corïj., since, 12G, 134, 209, 234, 74.5; sethe, 2184, 2903, 2907; sythe, 3376. sithe, adv., then, 398, 678, 719; sithen, 614. sithes, n., see sythe. sitte, n., sorrow, trouble, 497; syttes, plu., 870. siee, adj., sly, 3421. slo, V., iîif., slay, 1527, 2100, 2188; sloo, 1411, 1841, 2881; slough, prd., siew, 879. slough, see slo. smoke, n., smock, 1951. snelle, adj., quick, active, 790, 884, 2234. softe, adj., gentle, slow, 1897. sokerynge, n., succor, help, 3674. sond, n., message, 3675; sound, 3562. sorow, n., fear, anxiety, 474. soth, n., truth, 60, 396; sothe, 93, 226. sought, V., prêt., went, 2952; pp., traveled; was sought, see note on 1. 3376; sowght, 2419. Sound, see sond. sowght, see sought. sowne, n., sound, speech, 2155, 3514. spede, V., inf., prospcr, 235, 1115. spelle, V., vif., talk, 3024, 3722. speryd, v. prêt., fastcned, 2997. spill, V., inf., perish, corne to ruin, 23. [OE. spillan, to destrov-l sprede, v., inf., stretch, 1392. sprent, v., prêt., sprang, darted, 1892, 1994; sprente, 1846. 1949, 1954, 3357. [Cf. Mod. E. sprint.] stad, pp., oppressed {lit. placed), 3226, 3627. stede, n., place, 203, 851, 3847. [Cf. modem use of stead m bedstead, homestead, steady, and in phrase instead of.\ stedis, n., gcn. sing., stced's, 114. stente, see stynt. sterte, v., inf., spring, 3278; pret._, 857, 2740, 2789; stert, prct., 3352. steuen, see stevyn. stevyn, n., voice, 3193, 3411, 3821; steuen. 258i. [UE. difn, Ger. stimmc] stiff, adj., strong, 228; stiffe, 236, 1811. 1930; styffe, 1950. 160 GLOSSARY stode, n., stead, support, 3621. stomelyd, »., prêt., stumbled, 115. stound, n., time, moment, 1959; stounde, 114, 2549, 3066; stownd, 2865; stownde, 3515. stoure, n., battle, 655, 2288, 2741; stowre, 236, 1811. stournely, adv., sternly, 1601. [OE. styrne, IVIE. stem, stiirn.] stownd, stownde, see stound. stowre, see stoure. straught, v., prêt., stretched, i.e., strained, exerted himself, 2814. stronge, adj., hard, 3833. s.ryffe, adj., for styffe, strong (.''), 1829. styffe, see stiff. stynt, V., inf., stop, 3246, 3947; stente, prêt., 1844; pp. 3080. swayne, n., squire, 711. sweuenys, n., plu., dreams, 3170; sweyneys, 3226. [OE. swefn. In sweyneys the unaccented syllable ue{ve) has dropped eut. This suggests the probable prononciation.] sweyneys, see sweuenys. swith, adv., very, 246; swythe, 3536. See also swithe. swithe, adv., quickly (frequently preceded by as or also, q. v., with meaning as quickly as possible), 79, 394, 531, 634, 644; swythe, 642, 1481. swoughe, n., swoon, 903, 1634. [OE. swôgan.] swythe, see swith, and swithe. sye, V., prêt., saw, 2800, 3201. syghe, V., prêt., saw, 1169, 3105, 3618, 3749. syker, adj., sure, 2333, 2741. Cf. sekereste. syne, conj., since, 3684. synghand, pr. p., singing, 2371. sythe, n., time, 096, 1561; sithes, plu,, 774. sythe, conj., see sithe. syttes, see sitte. T tase, V., près., takes, 956. te, V., inf., draw, go, 965, 1015. [OE. tcon.] telde, n., plu., tcnts, 2624; teldys, 2725. tene, n., grief, anger, 1449. tene, v., inf., grieve, be vexed, 281. GLOSSARY 161 tent, V., prêt., attendcd, 3946. than, adv., then, 121, 621; thanne, 145. thar, V., près., needs (iuipersonal), 2028, 2338, 2426, thare. 328Ô. [OE. thurjan. The / often drops in ME. through confusion with the verb to darc] the, pron., they. 1893. thede, n., people, nation, 61, 141.5, 230.3, 2361. thedyr, adv., thither, 139, 37.51; thedir, 161. theighe, conj., though, 1985. there, conj., where, 194, 322, 777; ther, 2257, 3207; thereas. 356, 421. therle, the earl, 177; therle, therlis, therlys, gen., the earl's, 231, 626, 644. thewis, n., manners, 1081. tho, pron., those, 352, 448, 3079; thoo, 1151. tho, adv., then, 186, 2854; thoo. 313, 1112. thore, adv., there, 316, 1736, 2070. thorne, n., thorn tree, hawthorn, 3333, 3337. thou^th, conj., though, 2881. thought, V., prêt., intendcd, 1655. thrid, num., third, 504; thryd, 1512. [For metathcsis of r and i, cf. byrd, bride.] thro, adj., fierce, bold, 589, 2071, 2879, 3316; throo, 2389. throw, prep., through, 2704. thryd, see thrid. thrye, adv., thrice, 383. thryve, adj., fortunate, successful, 589. tidandis, see tithandis. tille, prep., to, for, 627, 637; tylle, 191, 817. tithandis, n., tidings, 542; tidandis, 710; tithings, 641 ; tithyngis 784; tydandes, 767; tydandis, 703; tythandis. 1787; tythan- dys, 1984; tythingis, 1966. to. C077J., until, 374, 3437. toforne, adv., l)cfore, 3329, 3608. tone, pron., one, 2797, 3253,' 3384, .3710. [Conorully prcccdod by the and followed by the tfdhcr, a wrong division of MI]. thct on, thet ailier, that ono, tliat olher; cf. edder.J totorne, pp., torn to pièces, 763. trewes, n., truce, 2012. [Treiocs is ctymologically tin- more correct spclling, for it is Ihc plural of trcw, n plcdge. For 162 GLOSSARY similar changed plurals, cf. dice (slag. die), pence (sing. -penny), bodice (sing. body).\ triade, n., an antidote to poison, particularly to the venom of wild beasts, 864. [Lat. therîaca, pertaining to wild beasts.] tronchon, n., lit., shaft, hcre, handle, 3071. trôna, n., throne, 3789. twight, V., prêt, twitched, took, 1038. twynne, adj., twain, two, 2211. [OE. twegen.] tydandes, tydandis, see tithandis. tylle, see tille, tyte, adv., quickly (generally preceded by as, q. v.),488, 3713. [Icelandic tltt, eager, fast; sometimes confused with tight; obsolète except in U. S.] vndyrtyme, «..morning, 2807. [Undern in OE. and IVIE. is the time from 9 a.m. to 12 m.] vnfayne, adj., unhappy, 2G91. Cf. fayne. vnhend, adj., ungentle, discourteous, 1081; vnhende, 1001. Cf. hend. vnkouth, adj., unknown, strange, 851. Cf. couth. vnneth, adv., hardly, 2820; vnnethe, 2857. [Un, not; eatJia, easily.] vnsad. adj., unsatisfied, 1508. Cf. sad. vnsaught, adj., disturbed, 3189. [un, not; saught, at peace; OE. sœht, agreement.] vnsond, adj., unwell, 3068; vnsound, 1599. vntylle, prep., to, 3858. Cf. tylle. voûte, n., vault, 972. vp, adv., open, 1839. W waites, v., près., watches, 1779; waytes, 74. wake, V., itif., watch, keep vigil, 2591, 2605, 3571; waykd, prêt, 3904. wan, V., prêt., won, redeemed, 2439. wanne, atlj., dark, black, 3465. wantyd, v., prêt., lacked, 2791. warne, v., inf., forbid, 3011, 3010. GLOSSARY 163 warynge, n., warfare, 2975. wawes, n., plu., waves, 3465. waytes, see waites. wede, 71., garments, apparel, armor, 83, 170, 489, 2655, 2709. wede, V., inj., go mad, 651, 787, 914; wedis, près., 1574. [OE. wëdan.\ wederes, see wedyr. wedyr, n., weather, 3805; wederes, plu., 2470. weld, V., inj., wield, control, rule, 101, 920, 3405; welde, 1928, 2917, 3263. wele, n., happiness, joy, 8, 530, 3026. weliney, adv., well nigh, 3062. well-a-wo, exclamation of sorrow, 652; well-a-way, 360, 740. [OE. wâ là îvà, wo! le! wo!] weluette, 7i., velvet, 2615. wend, V., inj., turn, 334, 2698; wente, prêt, 1349. wend, inj., go, 563; wendys, près., 65; wendys, imp., 2114; went, pp., 58. [Largely supplanted in Mod. E. by go, which in ME. signifies to walk. Went, prêt, of wend, bas supplanted eode, yode, the prêt, of go.\ wende, see wene, v. wene, n., doubt, 548, 1680, 1758. wene, v., près., tbink, suppose, 285, 371; wenys, près., 130, 686; wenystow, thinkcst thou, 2926; wende, prêt., 1160, 1792; wente, prêt., 271, 422. wenge, v., inj., avenge, 2217. wente, see wene and wend. wenys, wenystow, see wene. were, n., war, 2892; werre, 1695. , were, v., inj., wear, 2791; weryd, prêt., 3030. werrynge, n., warfare, 2932. Cf. warynge. weryd, see were, v. wete, V., inj., know, 1005, 1030; imp., 2303, 2853; wette, inj.. 1717. wette, see wete. wetterlye, see wytterly. wexe, V., prêt., grcw, 762, 951; wexid, prêt., 3777; wexyn. pp., 2207. where, wlietber, introducing a single cHrect question. 480. whethir, introducing an exclamation, 773. 164 GLOSSARY wight, n., person, 128, 577, G08, 915; wyght, 1377. wight, n., whit, bit, thing, 852, 1781; any wight, at ail, 107; no wight, not at ail, 472. [Wight and whit, variants of the same word, hâve survived with différent meaniags.] wight, adj., valiant, active, 460. wightely, adv., quickly, 513; mightily, 2822; wyghtely, quickly, 3289. wis, V., imp., guide, 3414. wiseliche, adv., see wisely. wisely, adv., surely, 1095; wiseliche, 1158. Cf. iwysse. vfiste,v.,pret., knew, 8, 119, 189; wist, 128; wyste, 1537, wist, pp., 1148. wite, V., inf., blâme, blâme for, 492, 501, 1153; wyte, 2880; witeste, près., 2398. witte, n., mind, 651, 787; wytte, 3354, 3930. wode, adj., mad, 275, 384, 662; wood, 3006. wokys, n. plu., weeks, 2111. wold, n., powei*, 745; wolde, 3233. Cf. weld. wone, n., quantity, store, 1083. [Variant of wan, wene, OE. wêna.] wone, V., inf., dwell, 2445, 2446; wonyd, prêt., 3636; wonnyd, prêt., 332; wounyd, prêt., 137. wonne, n., dwelling, 3377. wonnyng, n., dwelling, 3561. wonyd, wonnyd, see wone, v. wood, see wode. woodely, adv., madly, 3191. Cf. wode. worship, n., honor, réputation, 35; worshippe, 1152. worshippeth, v., près., honors, 1166; worshipped, prêt., 1413. worshippfuUy, adv., with honor, 1122. worthe, v., inf., become, 1817; worthis, près., gets, mounts, 782. [OE. weorthan, to be; survives only in such arehaic expressions as ivoe worth tlie day.] worthe, adj., worlliy, good, 2545; worthy, 2591. worthis, see worthe, v. woste, v., près., knowcst, 1158. wote, V., près., know, 690, 1381. wound, V., inf., wend, go, 2863. wound, V., inf., liesitate, 1070; wounde, 3558. [Variant of wan, wond, OE. wandian.] GLOSSARY 165 wount, adj., wont, 26. wounyd, see wone. wraks, n., rack, ruin, trouble, sorrow. 935, 948, 1092, 1181, 1451, 1675, 1695, 3567, SmH. wrathed, pp., angered, 3633. wyghtely, see wightly. wykke, adj., wicked, severe, 3305. wylanlyche, adv., villainously, 1156. wynne, v., inf., get to, rcaeh, 1830. wynne, n., joy, 3788. [OE. wynn; cf. Mod. E. winsome.] wyte, see wite. wytte, see witte. wytterly, adv., surely, 1381; wetterlye, 1452. Y and 3 ya, adv., yea, 79; ja, 1626. yafe, yaff, yaffe, see yeff. yare, adj., ready, prepared, 218, 253, 2048; jare, 1121, 2454; adv., quickly, soon, 983, 3536. yat, n., gâte, 2864; yates, plu., 2743. yche, adj., each, 117; yche a bone, ail lus bones; cf. iche and iche â syde. ychone, pron., each one, 2720, 3820. Cf. ichone. yede, v., prêt., went, 81, 288, 346; yode, 307, 962; yoode, 3108. [Obsolète prêt, of go, OE. gan, code, supplanted by went, prêt, of wend, q. v.] yeff, V., inf., give, 2728; yeffe, près, suhj., 3671; yeue, inf., 3267, 3275; yeve, pp., 88; yif, imp., 3554; yifif, près, suhj., 3669; yafe, prêt., 2963; yafif, prêt., 269. 2809; yafife. prêt., 2815; jeuyth, imp., 2188. jerae, v., inf., protect, 2512. [OE. gfmun.] yen, n., plu., cyes, 2419, 3935; yjen, 1349, 1557. 2083. 220;; [Plural in -en.] jendyr, adj., yondcr, ollier, 1.105. yeue, yeve, jeuyth, sec yefif. yif, yiff, v., see yeff. yif, conj., if, 21; yife, 2077; yiff, 31; yiffe. 2197. Siv bot yif. et.-, yiftis, n.. plu., gifis, .388. yit. udv., even, 2248. 166 GLOSSARY ylke, adj., sarae, 5i, 366, 696. See ilke. yode, see yede. yolde, V., prêt., yielded, 2308; yolden, pp., 2797. yuelle, adj., evil, harsh, sorrowfui, 2129; yvelle, hard, 619. yjen, see yen. PR Morte Arthure 2065 Le morte Arthur M3 1912 PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY