This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the information in books and make it universally accessible. Google' books https://books.google.com This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the information in books and make it universally accessible. Google' books https://books.google.com THE PENNSYLVANIA | ' STATE UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES Digitized by LnOOQle Digitized by <^.OOQLe Digitized by Google IParle Jirihurt, Digitized by DUBLIN: EDINBURGH : GLASGOW: BERLIN : NEW YORK: PHILADELPHIA WILLIAM M C GEE, 18, NASSAU STREET. T. G. STEVENSON, 22, SOUTH FREDERICK STREET. HUGH HOPKINS, ROYAL BANK PLACE. ASHER & CO., UNTER DEN LINDEN, 11. C. SCRIBNER & CO.; LEYPOLDT & HOLT. : J. B. LIPPINCOTT & CO. Digitized by GoogL ;pjnit£ or <§lut graft njf girthmi. EDITED FROM ROBERT THORNTON’S MS. IN THE LIBRARY OF LINCOLN CATHEDBAL, BY EDMUND BROCK. f [S IfrfD tfbiliatt, 1871.] v, LONDON: PUBLISHED FOR THE EARLY ENGLISH TEXT SOCIETY, BT N. TRUBNER & CO., 60 , PATERNOSTER ROW. MDCCCLXV. Digitized by ^.ooQle JOHN CHILDS AND SON, PRINTERS. I , t f Digitized by <^.OOQLe CONTENTS PREFACE ••• ... ••• ON THE METRE OP THE POEM NOTES . MORTE ARTHURS ... INDEX OP NAMES. GLOSS ARIAL INDEX PA&B vii ix xiv i 129 136 180 Q Digitized by vii PREFACE. £ The present version of the Morte Artliure or Death of Arthur is mainly an account of the great war with Lucius Iberius. Emperor of Borne , and its sequel, the war with t he traitoy Mod red , who, being left in charge of the kingdom, during Arthur’s absence usurped the throne and married Queen Gu inevere. In his combat with Modred, whom he slays, Arthur receives his death-wound, and shortly after dies. Among the incidents in the story not forming part of the wars, we may note the great feast at Ca^isle, the Mp&i..jke&BAjrf the drago n and bear, the slaught er of the great giant on Michael’s Mount, and Arthur’s dream of Fortune’s wheel-and the Hina Worthies. The l ove of Lancelot forJbh^gaeeq^fipds no plane in this woiL, / rf Morte Arthure was probably written in the latter part of thev * J fourteenth century, or early in the fifteenth. Of the author nothing whatever is known, not even his name. This is the more to be regretted as he must certainly be considered a poet of no mean order; the freshness of his descriptions of scenery 1 , the touching pathos of some of his passages 2 , and the rapid flow and thundering force of his diction in others 8 , mark him out as one of the greatest writers of his time. What, beside him, are Occleve, Lydgate, Awdelay, Hylton, Hawes, Lonelich, and like poetasters'? What even Chestre and Skelton? 1 See 11. 920—932, 2506—2512. 9 See 11. 3790—3808, 3874—3894, 3949-3971. 3 See 11. 2204—2217, 2541—2573, 2989-3000. Digitized by Google PREFACE. viii The poem is printed from the Thornton MS., in the library of Lincoln Cathedral ; no other copy is known. The MS. is a collection of poems and treatises on various subjects, some in English, some in Latin ; a list of the contents may be found in Sir Frederic Madden’s Syr Gawayne (Bannatyne Club, 1839), or in the Thornton Romances, ed. Halliwell (Camden Soc. 1844). The MS. is named after Robert Thornton, who penned a great part of it. At the end of Morte Arthure we find, “ R. Thornton dictus qui scripsit sit bene - dictus. Amen” Thornton was “a native of Oswaldkirk in Yorkshire, and Archdeacon of Bedford, in the Diocese of Lincoln, about the middle of the fifteenth century. The date of Archdeacon Thornton and his connection with Lincoln Cathedral can be ascertained pretty accurately, as among the archives of the Cathedral there is p reserved an instrument or deed of considerable importance, attested Ly him as Archdeacon, which bears date 1439.” 1 UMorte Arthure was first printed in 1847, by J. 0. Halliwell,^but can hardly be said to have been published, since the impression was limited to 75 copies. In 1865 it was edited by the Rev. George G. Perry, for the Early English Text Society. The present edition appears instead of a reprint of Mr Perry’s, but differs from it in several respects; the text has been carefully read throughout with the MS. at Lincoln, and corrections made, where needful; the sidenotes are greatly altered, often replaced with new; a new Glossary has been written, and an index of names and some notes added. I am greatly indebted to the Rev. W. W. Skeat for much valuable help, especially with the Glossary, also for kindly revising liis paper on the metre of the poem. E. B. 1 From Mr Perry’s Preface, p. yii. Digitized by VnOOQle IX ON THE METRE OF THE POEM. The metre in which the “ Morte Arthnre ” is written may best be understood by comparing it with “ Piers Plowman,” the accentuation and swing of the verse being much better marked in the last-mentioned poem. The principles which govern this peculiar metre may thus be more readily discerned, and, when once understood, may easily be applied to the present poem. For a similar reason, it will be the simplest method to consider, first of all, a few lines (of “ Piers Plowman ”) where the metre is most strongly marked, and, afterwards, some where it is, apparently, less regular. It should first, however, be observed that each complete line in an alliterative poem consists generally of \ct inaiA \ which were separated in old manuscripts by a dot, called the metrical point or pause , and which may conveniently be denoted by an inverted full stop, thus :— “ Schelde vs ffro schamesdede • and synfulle werkes ; ” or else by printing the lines thus:— “ Schelde va ffro schamesdede, And synfulle werkes.” In reading aloud a pause may conveniently be made between the sections. The two sections form, however, but one complete line; and, as the metrical point is more necessary when the poem is to be sung or recited than when it is merely to be read, it has not been thought necessary to insert it in this edition, since the reader, when he has Digitized by <^.OOQLe X ON THE METRE OF THE POEM. once caught tlie rhythm of the verse, may always he tolerably sure as to where it must occur. To begin, then ; consider the line— “ Ac Lucifer lowest * lith of hem alle.” Piers Plowman (ed Skeat), B. i. 124. If we use an asterisk to denote a strongly-accented 1 (or loud) syllable, the figure 1 to denote a single unaccented syllable, the figure 2 to mean two unaccented syllables immediately succeeding each other, and so on; we may represent the above line by the scheme, 1 * 2 * 1 : * 2 * 1 ; and this may be taken as a convenient type of alliterative lines, from which the scansion of very many others may be readily deduced. Some, however, as will be shewn presently, must be referred to a type somewhat different. Now, we here observe (1) that each section contains two strong accents; (2) that, of the strongly-accented syllables, three begin with a common letter, which has been called the rime-letter; and (3) of these three, two occur in the first section, and one in the second. Such is the usual and normal arrangement. The rime-letters may be either consonants or vowels, and may consist of single letters, or of such combinations as sc , hi, tr , etc. If vowels, it is sufficient that they are so ; they need not be the same vowels, and, in practice, are generally different . Again, the last strongly-accented syllable in the line does not begin with the rime-letter. This also is the usual and more correct arrangement. Having once this typical form to refer to, it is easy to enumerate most of the changes which may arise. Let us now take the line, « Here 2 messe and here matynes * and many of here oures.” Piers Plowman , B. Prol. 97. 1 I use the term strongly -accented advisedly, all accents not being equal. Thus, in the line— “ On the oat-grass and the sword-grass, and the bulrush in the pool,” the syllables marked are strongly- accented. 2 “ Hire [or here = their] is a monosyllable .”—Guest on English Phythms; ed. 1838, p. 34. Google ON THE METRE OF THE POEM. XI We have here the arrangement 1 * 2 * 1 : 1 * 3 * 1 which shews (1) that an unaccented syllable may be introduced at the beginning of the second section; and (2) that the number of intermediate unaccented syllables may be readily increased to three. Now herein lies the peculiar freedom and elasticity of alliterative verse; we shall soon find by observation that, under certain circumstances, as many as four short unaccented syllables (even if they contain among them one that is accented slightly) may be inserted at pleasure between the emphatic syllables without destroying the rhythm; for it is one addressed to the ear only, and not to the eye. The chief point which the poet has to take care of is that when he introduces a larger number of unaccented syllables, they should be capable of rapid enunciation, lest the verse seem clogged and unmusical. An example may be seen in the lines, “ Fayteden for here fode • fou^ten atte ale ; ” Fieri Plowman B. Prol. 42! which may be denoted by # 4 # 1 : # 3 # 1 It would take up too much space to explain here the true method of scanning the lines by division into feet; it may suffice to say that the general effect of the metre is dactylic , supposing the term dactyl to be capable of application to an English foot, which, to speak strictly, it is not. Indeed, the nomenclature of English prosody is in sore need of alteration. Neither is there space to explain, and to account for, the curious variations which may further be made in the alliterative metre. The view here given is only an approximate one, which will be found useful in practice. A longer passage may exemplify it better— “ I loked on my left half * as }>e lady me taughte, And was war of a womman * wortheli yclothed, Purfiled with pelure • }>e finest vpon erthe, Y-crounede with a corone * \>e kyng hath non better; Fetislich hir fyngres * were fretted with golde wyre.” Piers Plowman , B. ii. 7. Digitized by <^.OOQLe ON THE METRE 0 p THE POEM. xii Analysis : 1 * 3*1 2 * 2*1 * 3*1 1 * 3*1 * 3*1 2 * 2*1 * 3*1 1 * 3*1 1 * 2*1 1 * 2*1 One variation, however, found oftenest in the first section, is too important to be passed over. It is that we sometimes find in a section a third strongly-accented syllable, thus giving to the line a rather unwieldy length; as in, « The moste myschief on molde • is mountyng wel fdste.” Piers Plowman , B. Prol. 67. This third accent is often very awkwardly placed, as in the first line of “Morte Arthure,” “ Now grett glorious Godde • thurgh grace of hym seluene.” Other noticeable deviations from the strict type may be briefly indicated. (1) The syllable beginning with the rime-letter is sometimes unemphatic ; as in “ Morte Arthure,” 1. 59, “ In Glamorgane with glee * thare gladchipe was euere.” ( 2 ) Sometimes there are but two rime-letters, as in 1. 95, “ At pryme of the daye * in payne of ^our ly vys.” ( 3 ) Sometimes there is wo alliteration, as in 1. 70. (4) Sometimes there are four rime-letters, as 1. 32, where all belong to accented syllables, «< Scathylle Scottlande by skylle • he skyftys as hym lykys ; n or as in 1. 35, where one belongs to an'unaccented syllable, “ Holaund and Henawde • they helde of hyme bothen.” It will now be sufficient, perhaps, to indicate what is probably the correct accentuation of the first fourteen lines, as this will, enable the reader to perceive in them a certain vigorous swing (well suited for the ballad-reciter), which will suggest the scansion of most other lines, though there is always somewhat of difficulty in it, from the fact that we have now-a-days changed the accentuation of many words, and cannot be quite certain about the final e’s. Digitized by <^.OOQLe ON THE METRE OF THE POEM. xiii “ Now grett glorious Godde • thurgh grace of hym seluene, And the precyous prayere * of hys prys modyr Schelde vs ffro schamesdede * and synfulle werkes, And gyffe vs grace to gye * and goueme vs here 4 In this wrechyde werlde • thorowe vert[u]ous lywynge That we may kayre til hys courte • the kyngdome of hevyne, Whene oure saules schalle parte * and sundyre ffra the b6dy Ewyre to belde and to byde * in btysse wyth hyme seluene ; 8 And wysse me to werpe owte • some worde at this tyme, That nothyre voyde be ne vayne * bot wyrchip tille hyme selvyne ; Plesande and profitabille * to the popule that theme heres. 3© that liste has to lyth • or luifes for to here 12 Off Elders of aide tyme • and of theire awke dedys, How they were lele in theire lawe • and louede God Almyghty,” etc. The accentuation of the last two lines is a little doubtful. There may have been an accent on the second of in 1. 13, owing to its position and the fact of its beginning with a rime-letter; while in 1. 14 we have the rather unusual number of six accents, unless how was slurred over. After all, the best way of perceiving the rhythm is to read over some fifty lines several times till they seem quite familiar, and then to read them over once more out loud , with strong emphasis on the verbs, substantives, and adjectives, and with a natural and free pronunciation. One peculiarity in this poem should be particularly noticed, viz. that the same rime-letter is often continued throughout several successive lines. There is a remarkable instance of this in the passage beginning with L 1844, where we have in succession 4 lines founded on 8 f 2 on hard c, 2 on /, 6 on s, 6 on b, 4 on hard c, 2 on vowels, 2 on #, 2 on ch, 2 on /, and 2 on r. Other striking examples are 7 lines on vowels, 571—577, 8 on 8 , 3310—3317, 9 on j or soft g, 2889—2897, 10 on /, 3300—3309, and 11 on /, 2755—2765. Similar instances are rare in Piers the Plowman, though we find 5 successive lines founded upon^> in the B-text, Pass. xiv. 190—194. For further remarks, see the Essay on Alliterative Verse in the third volume of the Percy Folio MS., ed. Hales and Fumivall, and the introduction to Piers the Plowman, Text A. pp. xxii and xxx. Digitized by Google NOTES. Lines 212—215. Precious stones were supposed to keep off poison. Compare the following:—“ Jje earn de^ in his neste enne deorewurSe ^iinston fet hette achate. Vor non attri pine ne mei fene ston neihen, nc feo hwule fet he is in his neste hermen his briddes.- Jjes deorewUr^e ston, fet is lesu Crist, ase ston treowe and ful of alle mihten, oner alle ^iinstones. He is fe achate fet atter of sunne ne neihede neuere. Do Line iftine neste, fet is, rSine heorte. Jjenc hwuch pinen he f olede on his flesche wrSuten, and hu swete he was iheorted, and hu softe wiSSinnen; and so jm schalt driue ut euerich atter of fine heorte, and bittern esse of fine bodie.J^es ston, ase ich er seide, avleie^ attri finges. Ilabbe fu f esne ston wiSine fine heorte, fet is Godes nest, ne fer-tu nout dreden fe attrie neddre of helle. Jjine briddes, f et beo^S fine gode werkes, beo^ al sker of his atter.”— The Ancren Riwle, ed. Morton, p. 134—136. Compare also Piers the Plowman (ed. Skeat, Clarendon Press Series), note to Pass. ii. 1. 14. 450. Watlyng-strette, “the Roman road leading from Dover to Cardigan. Leland describes it thus: Secunda via principalis dicitufr Wateling8treate, tendens ab euro-austro in Zephyrum Septentrionalem. Incipit enim a Dovaria, tendens per medium Cantiae, juxta London, per S. Albanum, Dunstaplum, Stratfordiam, Towcestriam, Litleburue, , per montem Gilberti juxta Salopiam, deinde per Stratton, et per medium Walii©, usque Cardigan. . Itin. vol. vi. p. 120, edit . Oxon. 1744.”_Bos- worth’s Anglo-Saxon Dictionary, under Weetlinga street. 793. Brathelle is purposely omitted from the Glossary, because it ought to have been printed brayelle, as it stands in the MS. It seems to mean the fur of the bear s belly. Compare the following i— “ Brayeul: m. The parts, or feathers, about the Haukes fundament, called by our Faulconers the brayle in a short-wingd, and, the pannell in a long-wingd, Hauke.”— Cotgrave. “ The brayle , or pannell of a Hawke. Le brayer dun oiseau le brayeul .”— Sherwood. “ Braiel, brayette: Partie de la culotte qui tenoit lieu de celle qu’on appelle k present le pout.”— Roquefort . Digitized by ^.oocle NOTES. XV “ Braioel, brao'el : Le haut de la culotte.”— Roquefort. 966. Thow saynned the vnsekyrly. Thou blessedst thyself vnsafely, i. e. you did not cross yourself in a proper manner, so as to ensure your safety ; otherwise you would not be here, in this perilous place. If the sign of the cross was not made in the right way, it was considered of no avail. 1195. Read with [the] conquerour. 1270. Or many lyghte salle lawe. Or many shall light low, i. e. fall. 1286. “ Horns of elephants full loudly blown.” Our fathers wore remarkably ignorant of the nature and habits of foreign animals. 1293. Ewyne in the myddes. Right in the middle. 1315. That no mysse semes. Who deserve no ill. 1364. Fretted in salle. Read sable. 1414. Bretons. This is probably the verb, brittenes } not the substantive, Britons. 1425. Batiailles. Restore the reading of the MS.; it is right. 1474. He ryghttez theire brenez. More likely he rittez. 1485. The relative pronoun is omitted after Boyce. This is a frequent ellipsis. See line 1558, where that is omitted after Henry. 1548. Or sone delyuerde , i. e. soon to be delivered. 1572. The alliteration would be improved by reading bot [ser] Ewayne. 1588. With mangere to lengene . Qu. with maugree , ill-will. 1653. Lythe. The alliteration and sense require kythe. 1698. Borghte. A strange mistake for Brute , i. e. Brutus, the supposed founder of Britain. 1717. “ Whether we retire or appear (show ourselves), arrange as you please.” 1736. Wellyde alle qwyhe. Boiled alive. 1797. WyrJcez his ine wayfare. Qu. ine his wayfare. 1840. Lang ere. The MS. reads langere , which may be right. 1842. At = that = what. 1899. On lyfe should be of lyfe. 1911. The line is incomplete ; add [many]. 2070. Rev4rssede it redelye. Turned it, the eaglo, over quickly. 2108. Heyghe = heythe, heath. Compare trewghe for trewthe. 2128. Handsomere , not more handsome, but more handy or convenient. 2189. Jife the werlde happyne. Qu. welthe. 2197. This line recurs at 4155. 2245. “ Arthure /” askryes. Shouts “ Arthur;” but perhaps it should be simply Arthure askryes, Arthur shouts. Compare 1. 1412. 2250. Beblede at should certainly be Beblede al. 2280. Lyghte strandez. This should perhaps be lythe strandez, as at 1517. 2295. Heghle = heath. See note on 2108. Digitized by <^.OOQLe xvi notes. 2398. I kepe noghte to layne . I care not to concea.. 2408. Twrkayne (so in MS.) is certainly a mistake for Tuskayne , Tuscany. Correct the sidenote accordingly. 2506. Insert [ of] after myste , or else read my sty, 2519. With birenne ony borne. This is corrupt; no doubt the right reading is, With-out me my heme. 2565. Alet . “ Towards the close of the thirteenth century and not long after the commencement of the reign of Edward I., a new mode of protecting the neck was invented, which consisted of small plates of steel placed on the shoulders, sometimes called, from their resemblance to little standards, Gonfanons . They are likewise mentioned by the name of ailettes , or little wings, in that curious document of the sixth year of this monarch, relative to a tournament in Windsor Park, given in the XVIIIth volume of the Archaeologia ; and in the Statuta armorum in Tomiammtis , a few years after, by that of shoulder plates. They continued in fashion till the middle of the reign of Edward III. . .Their shape was . . . varied; they were square, round, pentagonal, and shieldlike; sometimes plain, but generally ornamented with the family arms, or the cross of St. George.”—Meyrick, in the Archaeologia , vol. xix, pp. 137, 138. 2577. It is well known that in early times barbers practised bloodletting ; they would therefore, of course, know how to stanch blood. 2578. Blyne schalle he neuer. He shall never cease [to bleed], 2586. Surgyone in Salame. Compare L 4311 and William of Paleme , ed. Skeat, 11. 964 and 1033. 2616. Cyrus witrye should be cyrqwitrye . The letter q is raised a little and looks very much like the usual contraction for us . Cyrqwitrye = surquidry, arrogance, pride. 2675. This line is misplaced; it ought to follow line 2677. 2771. Breste seems to be a mistake for brethe , breath. 2934. ffy a debles seems to be meant for French. Fie, (go) to the devil. 3061. Idene the. The alliteration, at first sight, would seem to be on the d of this idene and of dout ; but there is no reason why it may not be on the i of idene and the e of elles . Idene , if not a miswriting, may be the same as tymli, frequently, in the following lines :— “ Jpai Jjat war fild wit enst and hete )3at i\mli pair hertes ete, Jjar wormes sal Jjam underwrote In bale wituten hope and bote, And for-Jji Jjai her war wont to li In Jjair stincand licheri, Ne wald noght here bot fair delices Jjat drogh J>am until o]?er vices Jjai sal haf i]>en stinc iwiss Jjat Jjai sal never mar mis .”—Cursor Mundi , as quoted by Dr Morris in the preface to Hampole 8 Pricke of Conscience , pp. x, xi. Digitized by <^.OOQLe NOTES. XVII The may be the verb thee , to thrive ; it was most likely mistaken for the article by the scribe, who wrote it with y . The meaning of the line would be, “ He shall frequently thrive full well, fear nought else.” This accords with the statement, 1. 3056, that the king Rpoke to the duchess “myldly with fulle meke wordes.” 3257. The word With clearly belongs to the line before. With hruchez , &c. 3282. The two eyne . This is clearly an error for “ the tone eye ” = (the) one eye. “ One eye of the man was brighter than silver, the other was yellower than the yolk of an egg.” 3439. Nynne of the nobileste namede in erthe . These were the Nine Worthies. The list agrees with that given in Reliquiae Antique, vol. i, p. 287. Saraceni. Judaei. Ector, Alex., Julius; David, Josue, Machabaeus ; Cristiani. Artur cum Carolo, Galfridum linquere nolo: Isti sunt ter tres trini fidei ineliores. See Shakespere, Love's Labour Lost , Act 5, sc. 2. 3937. Guchede . I can make nothing of this word, the plain reading of the MS., unless it = gutted = goutti , dropped or spotted. At line 3759, we read that this king of Gothland “ bare of gowles fulle gaye with gowces of syluere.” Gowces I suppose to be miswritten for gowtes , drops, spots. MORTE ARTHUBE. b Digitized by <^.OOQLe Xviii LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THE GLOSSARIAL INDEX. adj % — adjective. O.Fr. = Old French. adv. = adverb. O.N. = Old Norse. A.S. = Anglo-Saxon, p. = page. b. = back. pi. = plural. col. = column. 2 pi. z= second person plural. comp. = comparative form. pp. = pages. Comp. = compare. p.p. = past or passive participle. cojij. = conjunction. prep. = preposition. ed. = edited by. press. = present. E.E.T. S. = Early English Text pret. = preterite. Society. Prompt. Parv. = Promptorium Par- Er. = Erench. vulorum. fut. = future. pron. zzz pronoun. gen . = genitive case. Qu. = Query. Germ. = German. ref. = reflexive. Her. = Heraldry. s. = substantive. imp. = imperative. 1 s. = first person singular. impers. v. — impersonal verb. i 2 s. z=z second person singular. ind. = indicative. 3 s. = third person singular inf. = infinitive. Sc. = Scotch. ini. = interjection. sg. =z singular. i. p. zzz imperfect participle. Span. = Spanish. 1. = line. subj. = subjunctive. Lat. = Latin, superl. = superlative form. 11. = lines. tom. = tomo. M.Goth. = Moeso-Gothic. v. = verb. O.E. = Old EngUsh. vol. = volume. The following works are indicated in the Index by their authors’ names:— Boswortk’s Anglo-Saxon and English Dictionary. Brockett’s Glossary of North Country Words. Burguy’s Glossary to his Grammaire de la Langue d'Oil. Ducange’s Glossarium Mediae et Infimse Latinitatis, ed. 1840. Halliwell’s Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial Words. Jamieson’s Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish Language. Roquefort’s Glossaire de la Langue Romane. Stratmann’s Dictionary of the Old English Language. Verelius’s Index linguae veteris Scytho-Scandicae sive Gothicae, 1691. Digitized by Google XIX CORRECTIONS. Page a a a if if a a if 2 , sidenotes, for Tours read Touraine. 2 „ „ Aniana read Aniane. 2 „ „ Naveme read Navarre. 3 „ for the 2nd Caerleon read Carlisle. 7 „ „ hams read shoulders . 7 „ „ bustards read bitterns. 28, line 913, for grayuez read gmynez. 33, sidenotes, for smoke read foam. 78, strike out the footnote. „ 134, col. 1, line 23, for Apulia read Poland. Digitized by <^.OOQLe Jttflrte ^rthurf Eere begynnes Morte Arthur©, In nomine Fatris et Filij et SpmYwc Sawed. Amen p ur charite. Amen. N ow grett glorious Godde, thurgh grace of hym seluene, And the precyous prayere of hys prys modyr, Schelde vs ffro schamesdede and synfulle werkes, And gyffe vs grace to gye, and gouerne vs here, 4 In this wrechyde werlde thorowe vertous lywynge, That we may kayre til hys courte, the kyngdome of h evy ne, When© oure saules schalle parte and sundyreffra the body, Ewyreto belde andtobydeinblyssewythhymeseluene; 8 And wysse me to werpe owte some worde at this tyme, That nothyre voyde be ne vayne, bot wyrchip tille hyme seivyne, Plesande and profitabille to the popnle that theme heres. 3 e that liste has to lyth, or luffes for to here, 12 Off elders of aide tyme and of theire awke dedys, How they were lele in theire lawe, and louede God Almyghty, Herkynes me heyndly and holdys 30 W stylle, And I salle telle jow a tale, ^at trewe es and nobylle, 16 Off the ryealle renkys of the Rownnde Table, That chefe ware of cheualrye and cheftans nobylle, Bathe ware in thire werkes and wyse mene of armes, Doughty in theire doyngs, and dredde ay schame, 20 MORTE ARTHURK. 1 [leaf 53J The roefc prays for grace. and for power to write something profitable. Ye that list to hear of elders of old time, hearken to a tale of the Round Table. These knights were noble, wise, and brave, Digitized by ^.ooQle THE GREAT D^Eds OF Arthur. Kynde mene and co Ur tays, and couthe of courte thewes shipfui. How they whanne wyth were wyrcliippis many SSSSS* SloUghe Lucyus the J ythyre, that lorde was of Eome a” And con 1 ue ryd that kyngryke thorowe craftys of armes • story nowthe Herkenesnow hedyrwarde, and herys this storye 25 JSSTbS^' /A' n ^® ne that thekynge Arthur by conqueste hade wonnyne SSSESfir CasteUes and kyngdoms, and contreez many, And he had conerede the coroune bf the kytfi ryche, 28 Of alle that Yter in erthe aughte in his tyme «w£ ey ' 9 £S 5 I le “ d Orkenay, and alle this owte-iles,’ Irelande vttirly, as Occyane rynnys ; I fn .ana ana Soot- Scathylle Scottlande by skyll, he skyftysas hvm Wales. Flanders. .Anri WqIdq _ , J y They slew Lucias, lord of Rome, and won his kingdom. Hear now the story. When King Aithur had won many kingdoms and countries, Argyle, Orkney, and the isles. land, ** J ^ ^Jityaashyml And Wales of were he wane at hyswi lie, Bathe fflaundrez and ffraunce fre til hym’seluvne • had madft trihn- TTr^loii-nrl it ___i ** _ J } -V** jlxj m oUiuyllg * wSSa. Holaund and Henawde they helde of hym e bother guridy”and^itra- l 3Ur goyne and Brahane, and Bretayne the les«e <ii SS, ^ yane and Gotheland e, and Grece the ryche; ’ Bayonne'and Bayone and Burdeux he beldytt fulle faire ffal” Tur °y ne and Tholus wit A toures fulle hye • wHEST ° f ^ ° f Pr ° Uynce he was Piynce holdyne 4C Provence;ofVa- OfVelenee and Vyenne, off value so nohl. ’ Of Germany, of Austria, and many other lands. He conquered all Denmark with SS. Of Valence Vyenn, off ^ * ^ and Any ° ne > thos erledon is ryche’; £ra„r*r ;° nqueste fulle Cruell « «ey knewe hym fore lorde :: y ' 0f ^ aUerne and Norwa y e > Normaimdye eke, 4. Of Almayne, of Estriche, and ether ynowe • KK otte Danmarke he dryssede alle by drede of livm « P 1 i>en“S with aU ffra Swynne vnto Swetherwyke witA his ^ j . 7 *’ telfobbed Q^nnehethesdedeshaddone h’ e r bi i7 er f e ' ! ins knights and „ , , ^esnaa clone, he doubbyd hys knvirhtez save them lands. Dyuysyde dowchervs and rlnit^ • ,, J Jg ’ saa- -*•*-c ‘ 9 ' dn T1 kytfi there they couaitte crounes to here rew ““ 26? «*< tie ?“ ^ th *‘ -a Md,«. T , b “■ r TT”" T h »»« **!««., himself m Bu. In Bretayne the braddere, as hym beste lykes • ‘ MS - SWrede - ! Or thcs. anointed. After solacing himself in Bxi- A MESSAGE COMES FROM ROME* 3 Sythyne wente in-to Wales with his wyes alle, 56 taints goes into Sweys in-to Swaldye with his snelle houndes, to hunt the hart with his swift For to hunt at the hartes in thas hye lanndes, hounds, In Glamorgan^ with glee, thare gladchipe was euere. and in Glamorgan - founds Caerleon And thare a citee he sette, be assentte of his lordys, 60 u P° n Usk - That Caerlyone was callid, with eurius walles, On the riche reuare that rynnys so faire, 4 ' 1 ^ There he myghte semble his sorte to see whenne hym / • lykyde; Thane aftyre at Carlelele a Cristynmese he haldes, 64 At caerleon he ( J -- - 1 holds high festi- l j? This ilke kyde cowquerowr, and helde hym for lorde 1 tidetShhisZTd^ Wyth dukez and duspereg of dyuers rewmes, „ and bishops, - — v > u<) ; r t; - A-.'V ■ Erles and ercheuesqes, And other ynowe, Byschopes and bachelers, and banerettes nobille, 68 ^* ■ - * That bowes to his banere, buske whene hym lykys : Bot on the Cristynmesday e, whene they were alle sembly de, That comlyche conquevour co/wmaundez hym seluyne That ylke a lorde sulde lenge, and no lefe take, 72 and bids none depart from the To the tende day fully ware takyne to the ende. JrTexpiredl days Thus one ryalle araye he helde his Rounde Table, ‘With semblawt and solace and selcouthe metes ; Whas neuer syche 1 noblay, in no manys tyme, Mad in mydwynter in the, weste marchys ! 7 6 Never was so noble a feast known. B ot on the new$ere daye, at the none euyne, Aa the bolde at the borde was of brede seruyde, So come in sodanly a senator?’ of Rome, 80 Wyth sextene knyghtes in a soyte, sewande hym one. He salted the souerayne and the sale aftyr, l ike a kynge aftyre kynge, and mad his enclines; Gaynowr in hir degr6 he grette as hym lykyde, 84 And syne agayne to the gome he gaffe vp his nedys: But on New Year’s day, as the knights were feasting, there came in suddenly a Senator of Rome, [leaf 54] attended by sixteen knights. He salutes King Arthur and his knights, and Guinevere the Queen. “ Sir Luciws Iberia*, the Emperowr of Rome, Saluz the as sugett, vndyre his sele ryche; It es credens, air kynge, with cruelle wordez, 88 Then, in the name of Sir Lucius Iberiu8, the Emperor of Rome, Trow it for no trades, his targe es to schewe! Now in this newjers daye with notaries sygne, 1 swyche struck out, and syche written instead. Digitized by Google 4 THE EMPEROR DEMANDS tribote. he summons Arthur to appear at Borne on Lammas day, to answer why he occupies his lands instead of paying homage to him, and how he dare rebel against him. But if Arthur will not come, the Emperor will invade nis land and take him captive. and destroy him wherever he may fly. The Register of Rome declares that Arthur’s father paid tribute, wliicn was won by Julius Caesar and his gentle knights. Then did King Arthur look with ferocious glance on the Senator. [leaf 54, back] So terrible was his face that the Romans quailed before him. X make the somouns in sale to sue for tin landys, That on Laramesse daye thare be no lette ffouwdene, 92 That thow bee redy at Home with alle thi Rounde Table, Appere in his presens writh thy price knyghtez, At pryme of the daye, in payne of 30 ur lyvys, In the kydde Capytoile before the kyng selvyne, 96 Whene he and his senators bez sette as them lykes, To ansuere anely why thow ocupyes the lanndez, That awe homage of aide tille hym and his eldyrs; Why thow has redyne and raymede, and raunsound the pople, 100 And kyllyde doune his cosyns ? kyngys ennoynttyde; Thare schalle thow gyfie rekkynynge for alle thy Round Table, Why thow arte rebelle to Rome, and rentez theme wytlioldez! 3 ilf thow theis somouns wythsytte, he sendes thie thies wordes, 104 He salle the seke ouer the see wyth sextene kynges, Bryne Bretayne the brade, and bryttynethy knyghtys, And brynge the bouxsomly as a beste with brethe whare hym lykes, That thow ne schalle rowte ne ryste vndyr the heuene ryc.he, 108 Thofe thow for reddoz*?* of Rome ryne to the erthe ! ffor if thow flee in-to Fraunce or ffreselannd owther, Thou salle be fechede with force, and oiiersette fore euer! Thy fadyr mad fewtee, we fynde in oure rollez, 112 In the regestre of Rome, who so ryghte lukez : ’ _ Wit/i-owttyne more trouflynge the trebute we aske, That Iuliwe Cesar wane wyth his ientille knyghttes !” rFHe kynge blyschitone thebery ne with his brodeeghne,. That fulle brymly for breth brynte as the gledys; Keste colours as kynge with crouelle lates, 118 Lnked as a lyone, and on his lyppe bytes ! The Romaynes for radnesse ruschte to the erthe, ffore ferdnesse of hys face, as they fey were; Digitized by Google THE ROMANS QUAIL BEFORE THE KING. 5 Cowchide as kenetez be-fore the kynge seluyne, & *' Be-cause of his contenaunce confusede theme semede ! Thene couerd vp a knyghte, and criede ful lowde, 1 124 “ Kynge corouwede of kynd, curtays and noble, Then one of them Misdoo no messangere for menske of thi seluyne, mercy. Sen we are in thy manrede, and mercy the besekes; We lenge 'with air Lucias, that lorde es of Rome, 128 That es the meruelyous teste mane that on molde lengez; It es lefulle tille vs his likynge tille wyrche ; 2 We come at his commauadment; haue vs excusede.” Then carpys the cowquerowr crewelle wordez,— 132 “ Haa 1 crauaunde knyghte ! a cowarde the semez ! upon which Ar- I _ " r- 1 . n • 1 thur upbraids Thare [is] some segge in this sale, and he ware sare him as a coward, greuede, Thow durste noghte for 3 alle Lumberdye luke one hym ones.” “ Sir,” sais the senato ur, “ so Crist mott me helpe, 136 But the senator __ . a ,i . i ii ii . excuses him on The voute of thi vesage has woundyde vs alle ! the ground that Thow arte the lordlyeste lede that eu er I one lukyde ; ver 7 terrlble - By lukynge, wtt^-owttyne lesse, a lyone the semys! ” “ Thow has me somonde,” quod the kynge, “ and said what the lykes ; 4 140 ffore sake of thy soueraynge I suffre the the more ; Sen I corounde in kyth wyth crysume enoyntede, Was neuer creature to me that carpede so large ! Bot I salle tak concelle at kynges enoyntede, 144 The King tells J o J > him that he will Off dukes and duspers and doctowrs noble, take counsel of Offe peres of the parlement, prelates and other, k^hST 8 * and Off the richeste renkys of the Rounde Table; Thus schalle 1 take avisemente of valiant 1 beryns, 148 Wyrke aftyre the wytte of my wyes knyghttes : To warpe wordez in waste no wyrchipe it were, Re wilfully in thi s wrethe to wrekene my seluene. 151 ffor-^i salle thow lenge here, and lugge wyth thise lordes, whll e the Ro- n>An fl stfty & wools 1 hyghe struck out, and lowde written instead. * schewe struck out, and wyrche written instead. * MS. full*. 4 Likyde struck out, and lykes written instead. Digitized by ^.ooQle 6 ARTHUR ENTERTAINS THE MESSENGERS. to refresh them- This seuenyghte in solace, to suggowme 30 ur horses, To see whatte lyfe that wee leede in thees lawe lanndi ffor by the realtee of Eome, that recheste was euere, sir Cayous is bid He co?7imande s&V Cayows, “ take kepe to thoos lordez, ] to entertain the ^-- 7 lords, ^ I To styghtylle tha steryne mene as theire statte askys Then were they quickly harboured within the high walls. In chambers with chimneys they changed their weeds. That they bee herberde in haste in thoos heghe cliamb] [leaf 55] Sythine sittandly in sale sernyde ther-aftyr; and their horses. That they fynd na fawte of fude to thiere horsez, ] Nowthire weyne, ne waxe, ne welthe in this erthe; HewaSjnotto Spare for no spycerye, bot spende what the lykys, feast them liber- That there be largesce one lofte, and no lake founde: If thou my wyrchipe wayte, wy, be my trouthe, ] Thou salle haue gersoms fulle grett, that gayne salle euere ! 99 Then were they "\Tow er they herberde in hey, and in oste holdene, quickly harboured \ __ _ _ _ _ waHs in the high X1 Hastyly wy tn hende mene wzt/t-in thees heghe wall in^chambers In chambyrs with chy mpnes they chaungen e the ire wee they channel And sythyne the chauncelere the me fecchede with c ualrye 1 noble. ] ^senator^at Sone the senatowr was sett, as hyme wele semyde, serred^ike'him- At kyngez ownne horde; twa knyghtes hym seme Singulere sothely, as Arthure hym seluyne, 1 Richely on the ryghte hannde at the Rounde Table; are of* h^most* -^ e resoune the Romaynes whare so ryche holde earth. blood oa As of the realeste blode that reynede in erthe. 1 There come in at ^efyrste course, be-fortf/iekyngeselue uiere 8 were d served Bareheuedys ^at ware bryghte, bumyste with sylue numerous gaily- Alle mene and towne in togers fulle rycl .aits! 6481161141 ' Of saunke realle in suyte, sexty at ones; ami wild wHh ^ esc ^ fluriste of fermysone with frumentee noble, 1 choice birds, Ther-to wylde to wale, and wynlyche bryddes, 2 venufou^oiden’ ^ >aco ^ :es an d plouers in platers of golde, plates, Pygges of porke despyne, that pasturede neuer ; Sythene herons in Redoyne, hyled fulle faire; 1 uver chareera Grett sw annes fulle swytRe in silueryne chargeowrs, The Senator sat at the King’s table, and was served like himself. for the Romans are of the most royal blood on earth. Boars’-heads there were served upon silver by numerous gailydressed attendants. vers upon plates, great swans in silver chargers. 1 MS. chelualrye . bredes struck out, and bryddes written instead. Digitized by Google THE DISHES AND DRINKS. 7 Tartes of TWky, taste whame theme lykjs ; Gumbaldes graythely, fulle gracious to taste ; Seyne bowes of wylde bores with the braune lechyde, Bemakes and botwres in baterde dysebes, 189 Tftareby braunebers in brede, betty r was neuer, With brestez of barowes, that bryghte ware to schewe ; Seyne come ther sewes sere, with solace ther-after, 192 Ownde of azure alle ou er and ardant them semyde, Of ilke a leche the lowe lauwschide fulle hye, That alle ledes myghte lyke that lukyde theme apone; Thame cranes and curlues craftyly rosted, 196 Connygez in cretoyne colourede fulle faire, ffesauntez enflureschit in flammande siluer, With darielles endordide, and daynteez ynewe; Thame claTett and Creette, clergyally rennene, 200 With condethes fulle curio?A? alle of clene siluyre; Osay a[n]d algarde, and other ynewe, '[ Byniscb wyne and Rochelle, rich ere was neuer; Yernage of Yenyce vertuouse and Crete ; # 204 In faucetez of fyne golde, fonode who so lykes; The kyngez cope-borde was closed in siluer, In grete goblettez ouergylte glorious of hewe ; There was a cheeffe buttlere, a cheualere noble, 208 Sir Cayotte the curtaise, that of the cowpe seruede ; Sexty cowpes of suyte fore the kyng seluyne, Crafty and curious, coruene fulle faire, In euer-ilk a party pyghte with precyous stones, 212 That nane enpoysone sulde goo preuely ther-v ndyre, Bot the bryght golde for brethe sulde briste al to peces, Or ells the venyme sulde voyde thurghe vertue of the stones; And the conquerowr hymseluene, so clenly arayede, 216 In colours of clene golde cleede, wyth his knyghttys, Drissid with his dyademe one his deesse ryche, fforehe was demyde the doughtyeste th at duellyde in erthe. Thane the conquero&r kyndly carpede to those lordes, Rehetede the Romaylies with realle sneche, 221 tarts of turkey, hams and brawn in slices, geese and bustards. Then came ‘ sewes sere,* then cranes and curlews craftily roasted. pheasants upon flashing silver, * dariels * and many other dainties. Wine caused to [leaf 55, back] * run skilfully in silver conduits. Rare sorts served in cups of fine gold. The King’s cupboard was glorious with plate. The chief butler was Sir Cayous, who served the wine in goblets decked with precious stones, which hinder the deadly effects of poison. Arthur was clad in cloth of gold with his crown on; the doughtiest knight that dwelt on earth. Then he spake courteous words to those lords. Digitized by ^.ooQle 8 ARTHUR HOLDS A COUNCIL. “ Sirs, be of good “ Sirs, bez knyghtly of contenaunce, and comfurthes cheer, we give - 1/0 J Ken'o" 1 0Ur seluyne, dS but lch m " We knowe noghte in this couwtre of curious metez; In thees barayne landez, bredes none other , 224 ffore-thy wythowttyne feynynge, enforce 30W the 1 more To feede 30 w with syche feble as 3 e be-fore fyntje.” « sir,” savs the “ Sir/’ sais the senatowr, “ so Criste motte me helpe ! Senator, “ Rome itself can show There ry wgnede neuer syche realtee w/t/i-in Rome walles! nothing equal to J ° J feast!'* Xur0U8 There ne es prelatte, ne pape, ne prynce in this erthe, That he ne 2 myghte be wele payedeof thee s pryce metes ! 99 Then they wash- A ftyre theyre welthe they wesche, and went vn-to ed and withdrew to the chamber. -A-l_ chambyre, This ilke kydde conquerowr with knyghtes ynewe; 232 1 sir Gawain leads Sir Gay wayne the worth ye Dame Waynow he ledys ; Guinevere. Sir Owghtreth on the to ther syde, of Turry was lorde. Spiced drinks Thane spyces vn-sparyly thay spendyde there-aftyre, were served to ail- Maluesye and muskadelle, those menielyous drynkes, Raykede fulle rathely in rossete cowpes, 237 Title alle the riche on rawe, Romaynes and other. certain lords Bot the souerakgne sothely, for solauce of hym seluene, were assigned to . attend^ upon the Assiwgnyde to the senato ur certaygne lordes, To lede to his leuere, whene he leue askes, 241 'With myrthe and with melodye of mynstralsy noble. Arthur goes to Thane the conqueror to concelle cayres there-aftyre, Giant’s tower, Wytfr lordes of his lygeaunce that to hym selfe langys; with his lords, To the geauntes toure iolily he wendes, 245 justices, judges, knfgfits tle Wyth justicez and iuggez, and gentille knyghtes. 1 First »Sak 6 si ^ a( ^ or Comewayle to the kynge carppes, i w*n° r ° f Corn ‘ Dughe one hyme luffly with lykande lates,— 248 “I thanke Gode of that thraa that vs thus thretys! jow moste be traylede, I trowe, bot 3 ife 3 e trett bettyre: Kciis! 1 h7«yf ,r T ^ e ^ res of sir Lucks lyghttys myne herte ! lighten’his heart. We iafe as losels liffyde many l ong e daye, 252 Wyth delyttes in this lande wit/i lordchipez many, .TXW 00 * Ani1 forelytenede the loos th&t we are layttede:/ Inglorious peace. I was abalschite, he oure Lorde, of oure beste bernes, 1 MS. the y>\i. s MS. ne be. Then they washed and withdrew to the chamber. Spiced drinks were served to all. Certain lords were assigned to attend upon the Senator. Arthur goes to council in the Giant’s tower, with his lords, justices, judges, and gentle knights. [leaf 56] First speaks Sir Cador of Cornwall. lighten his heart. Digitized by Google THE KING’S SPEECH. 9 fibre gret dule of deffuse of dedez of armes ! 256 Now wakkenyse the were ! wyrchipide be Cryste ! And we salle wynne it ag[a]yne be wyghtnesse and strenghe! ” “ Sir Cadowr,” quod the kynge, “ thy concelle es noble, Bot thou arte a memailo&s mane with thi mery wordez! ffor thow countez no caas, ne castes no forthire, 261 Bot buries furthe appone heuede, as thi herte thynkes; I moste trette of a trew towchande thiae nedes, Talke of thies tythdands that tenes myne herte; 264 Thou, sees that the emperowr es angerde a lyttille; Yt semes be his sandismene that he es sore greuede; - His senator* has sommonde 1 me, and said what hym lykyde, Hethely in my halle, wyth heyn^owe wordes, 268 In speche disspyszede me, and sparede me lyttille ; I myght noghte speke for spytte, so my herte trymblyde ! He askyde me tyrauntly tribute of Rome, That tenefullxtynt was in tyme of myne elders; 272 There alyenes, in absence of alle mene of armes, Couerde it of commons, asjjronicles telles ; I haue title to take tribute of Rome, Myne ancestres ware emperours, and aughte it the me seluene, 276 He rejoices to return again to deeds of arms. The king praises Sir Cador for his bold words. spoken from his heart without thought or care. He himself is grieved at these tidings. He has been insulted in his own hall by heinous words, and insolently summoned to pay tribute to the Emperor of Rome, of whom he ought rather to demand tribute. v. Belyne and Bremyne, and Bawdewyne the thyrde, They ocupyede the empyre augh te score wynnttyrs, i His ancestors oc- Ilkane ayere aftvre other , os awlde mene telles : I p»re of Rome —^ *-- — 1 eight score Thei couerde the Capitoile, and keste doune the walles ;i wint€w * Hyngede of ^eire heddys-mene by hundrethes at ones; Seyne Cowstantyne, our kynsmane, conquerid it aftyre, gajdnsman, That ayere was of Ynglande, and emperowr of Rome, S^'it^ 8 8Ub " He that conquerid the crosse be craftez of armes, 284/i> e who gained That Criste was on crucifiede, that kyng es of heuene; J fcrue Cro88, Thus hafe we euydens to aske the emperour the same, That thus regnez at Rome, whate ryghte that he claymes.” 1 Or somouwde. Digitized by ^.ooQle THE SPEECHES OP ARTHURS KNIGHTS. T han answarde kyng Aungers to Arthurs hj “Thow aughte to he ouerlynge ouer kynges, ffore wyseste, and worthyeste, and wyghteste of counsaile that euer core fore Seottlande, that we the Then answered King Aungers and said that Arthur ought to be supreme over all kings. [leaf 56 , back] The knyghtlyeste I dare saye lympyde, had When ette Romaynes regnede, May raunsounde on vil t- eldyrs, And rade in theire ryotte, and rauyschett oure wyfes, ’ WM-owttyne resone or ryghte refte vs oure gudes , And I salle make myne avowe deuotly to Cnste, 2 And to the haly vemacle, vertuus and nohle, Of this grett velany I salle he vengede ones On 3 one venemus mene, wyth valiant knyglites! ^ I salle the forthire of defence fosterde ynewe, fifty thowsande mene, wyth-in two eldes, 'Of my wage for to wende, whare so the lykes, To fyghte wyth thy ftaa mene, Mat vs unfaire ledea mhane the burelyehe beryne of Bretayne Me lyttyl 1 Counsayles sir Arthure, and of hyme besekys To ansuere the alyenes wyth austerene wordes, To entyce the emperowr to take ouere the mounttes. He said, “ I make myne avowe verreilly to Cryste, And to the haly vemacle, that voide schalle I neue ffor radnesse of na Romayne that regnes in erthe; Bot ay be redye in araye, and at areste ffoundene, No more dowtte the dynte of theire derfe wapyns, 77jan the dewe that es dannke, whene that it doune ffa Ne no more schoune 1 fore the swape of theire sell suerddes, Then fore the faireste flo ur th att on the folde grow I salle to batelle the brynge, of brenyede knyghtes Thyrtty thosannde be tale, thryftye in armes, Wyth-in a monetbe daye in-to whatte marche, That Mow -wylle sotbelye assygne, whene thy selfelj i Or achonne. for which he would have revenge. He promises to bring 50,000 men to aid Arthur. The king of little Britain would have Arthur return a fierce answer. He fears the Homans no whit. He promises to bring SO,000 knights within a month. ARTHUR VOWS VENGEANCE AGAINST ftOftE. a “ A! A ! ” Bais the Walsche kynge, “ wirchipid be Criste l Now schalle we wreke fuUe wele the wrethe of oure elders! 321 In West Walys i-wysse syche wonndyrs thay wroghte, ITi&t alia for wandrethe may wepe, that one that were tbynkee. I salle haue the avanttwarde wytterly my seluene, 324 Tylle that I haue venquiste the Yicounte of Rome, That wroghte me at Viterbe a velanye ones, As I paste in pylgremage by the Pounte Tremble; 327 He wasinTuskaynetfAattyme, and tukeof oureknyghttes, Areste theme vnryghttwyslye, and raunsounde thame aftyre; I salle hym surelye ensure, that saghetylle sails we neuer, Are w e sadlye assemble by oure selfene ones, And dele dynttys of detfce with oure derfe wapyns ! 332 And I salle wagge to that were of wyrchipfulle knyghtes, Of Wyghte and of Walschelande, and of the Weste Marches, Twa thosande in tale, horsede one stedys, Of the wyghtes^e wyes in alls 3 one weste landys!” 336 S yre Ewans fyta Yryenee 1 7/tane egerly fraynez, Was cosyne to the conquerowr, corageows hymselfens, “ Sir, and we wyste 30 w wylle, we walde wirke theraftyre; 336 Jif this jowraee sulde halde, or be ajowrnede forthyre, To ryde one 3 one Romaynes and ryott theire landez, We walde schape vs there-fore to schippe whene 30W lykys.” “ Cosyne,” quod the conqueror, * kyndly thow asches 5 Jife my concelle accorde to conquere 3 one landez, 344 By the kalendez of Iuny we schalle encountre ones, Wytfc fulls crenelle knyghtez, so Cryste mot me helpe 1 There-to make I myne avowe devottly to Cryste, And to the holy vernacle, vertuous and noble, 348 I salle at Lammesse take leue, to lenge at my large 1 itewf Yryence. Then Arthur exclaims Ah!ah! Now shall we have revenge. «** f* ? i ^ / V .... He himself would fight at the head of hie army till he had revenged himself on the Viscount of Home for a villany he once wrought him at Viterbo. He would take two thousand worohipftil knights. [W57] Then spoke Sir fSwayne and said that they would all follow his command gladly. Then said Arthur, « We will be ready by the lea* lends of June, and at Lammas will enjoy our- Digitized by <^.OOQLe Digitized by ARTHUR PRAISES HIS KNIGHTS. 13 I salle be seene on the see, saile whene the lykes.” T hane laughes Bir Lottez, and alle one lowde meles, “ Me likez that sir Luciwe lanwges aftyre sorowe; Now he wylnez the were, hys wanedrethe begynnys, 384 It es owre weredes to wreke the wrethe of oure elders ! I make myne a-vowe to Gode, and to the holy vemacle, And I may se the Romaynes, that are so ryche haldene, Arayede in tfAeire riotes on a ronnde felde, 388 I saile at the reuerence of the Rounde Table Ryde thrughte alle the rowtte, rerewarde and other , Redy wayes to make, and renkkes fulle rowme, Rynnande on rede blode, as my stede ruschez! 392 He that folowes my fare, and fyrste commes aftyre, Salle fynde in my fare-waye manye flfay leuyde ! ” Thane ^econquercwr kyndly comforthes ^Aeseknyghtes, Alowes J^aime gretly theire lordly a-vowcs,— 396 w Alweldande Gode wyrchipe 30 W alle ! And latte me neuere wanntte 30W, whylls I in werlde regne; My menske and my manhede 30 mayntene in erthe, Myne honowr alle vtterly ini other kyngys landes; 400 My wele and my wyrchipe, of alle tfAis werlde ryche, 3 o hane knyghtly conqueryde, that to my coroune langes; Hym tharebeferde for no faees, that swylke a folke ledes, Bot euer firesche for to fyghte, in felde whene hym lykes. I acounte no kynge that vndyr Criste lyffes, 405 Whilles I see 3 owe alle sounde, I sette be no more.” Q whene they tristily had tretyd, th&y trumppedo yp aftyre, Descendyd doune with a daunce of dukes and erles ; 408 Thane they semblede to sale, and sowpped als swythe, Alle £^is semly sorte, wyth semblante fulle noble. Thene the roy realle rehetes thes knyghttys, Wyth reuerence and ryotte of alle his Rounde Table, 412 Tille seuen dayes was gone : the senatowr askes A ns were to the emperowr with austeryne wordez. Aftyre the Epiphanye, whene the purpos was takyne Sir Lottez laughs for joy, and hopes to see the rich Romans in their pomp, that he may cut his way through them and shed their blood. Then Arthur praises his knights for upholding his honour. While they remain true to him he fears no king on earth. Then the Council breaks up. Music and dancing succeed. and they are all feasted in the hall. After seven days the Senator demands his answer for the Emperor. Digitized by ^.ooQle 14 Arthur’s answer to the emperor. Of peris of the parlement, prelates and other, 416 The kyng in his concelle, curtaise and noblee, Vtters the alienes, and ansuers hyme seluene :—- Then Arthur bids “ Gret wele Luciz^, thi lorde, and lavne noghte tf/dse him greet Lucius 7 7 * o , and tell him that -orrkWlQa • he shall quickly WOraes , sroh^m in his jf e ^/ i0W lygmane 1 lele, late hyme wiet sone 420 I salle at Lammese take leue, and loge at my large In delitte in his lanndez, wyth lordes ynewe, * Regne in my realtee, and ryste whene me lykes, By the reynere of Reone halde my Rounde Table, 424 ffannge the fermes in faithe 2 of alle the. faire rewmes, ffor alle the manaoe of hys myghte, and mawgree his eghne! And merke sythene ouer the monnttez in-to his mayne londez, 427 To Meloyne the meruaylo?ze, and myne doune the walles; In Lorrayne ne in Lumberdye lefe schalle I nowthire Nokyne lede appone liffe, that there his lawes 3 emes ; And twrne in-to Tuschayne, whene me tyme thynkys, Ryde alle tlies rowme landes wyth ryotowe knyghttes; Byde hy[m] make reschewes foremenskeof hymeseluene, And mette me fore his manhede in these mayne landes ! I salle be foundyne in Fraunce, fraiste whene hym lykes, The fyrste daye of Feuer^ere, in thas faire marches ! 436 Are I be fechyde wyth force, or forfette my landes, The flo ur of his faire folke fulle fay salle be lenyde ! I salle hym sekyrly ensure, vndyre my seele ryche, To seege the cetee of Rome wyth-in seuene wyntyre, 440 And that so sekerly ensege apone sere halfes, r That many a senatottr salle syghe for sake of me one ! My somwions er certifiede and Mow arte fulle seruyde Of cundit and credense, kayre where the lykes : 444 I salle thi journeye engyste, enjoyne theme my seluene, ffro this place to the porte, there thou salle passe ouer; Seuene dayea to Sandewyche, I sette at the large, Sexty niylo on a daye, the somme es bott lyttille! 448 1 Or leygmane. * Or fatthe. that he will hold his Round Table by the river Rhone, [leaf 58] and mine down the walls of Milan, ravage Tuscany with his knights. lie will be found in France on the first of February, and before seven winters are gone besiege Rome, any a ator shall n wrath. The messenger inay depart as soon as he pleases. He must travel to Sandwich in Seven days, Digitized by Google DISMISSAL OF THE MESSENGERS. 15 Thowe moste spedeat the spurs, andspare noghte thi foie, Thowweyndezby Watlyng-strette, and by no w ay e elles : gotagb^watThare thownyghttes one nyghte, nedez moste thou lenge, stopping at night — 07 W herever he may — f Be it foreste or felde, found thou no forthire : 452 chance to be, * Bynde thy blonke by a buske with thy brydille euene, &idie!“ hby the Lugg$ thi selfe vndyre lynde, as the leefe thyn kes, There awes none alyenes to ay ere appone nyghttys, - *■ £ • ' ' 1 ’ With syche a rebawdous rowtte to ryot thy seluene. 456 Thy lycence es lemete in presence of lordys, Be now lathe or lette, ryghte as the thynkes, For bothe tfii lyffe and thi lyme lygges ther- appone, TAofe sir Luciw* had laide the lordchipe of Rome ; 460 £for be thow foundene a fute witA-owte ^eflode merkes, if after undem Aftyr the aughtende day, whene vndroune es rungene, he^ 00 ^ 1^0 Thou salle be heuedede in hye, and- with horsse draweneJ 5® ha ? ged u p for And seyne heylybe hangede, houndes to gnawene ! 464) The rente ne rede golde, that vrnto Rome langes, Salle noghte redily, renke, raunsone thyne one ! ” “ Sir,** sais the senatour, “ so Crist mot me helpe ! Might I with wirchipe wyne awaye ones, > 468 I sulde neuer fore emperowr, that on erthe lenges, Efte vnto Arthure ayere one syche nedys; ^ - Bot I am sengilly here, with sex sum of knyghtes; I be-seke $ow, sir, that we may sounde passe : 472 If any vnlawefulle lede lette vs by the waye, WitA-in thy lycence, lorde, thy loosse es enpeyrede.” Then the Senator declares that if he could only get well away once, he would never again go on such an errand. He prays that hia retinue may be protected ou their way. “Care noghte,” quod the kynge, “thy coundyte es 68,hack;) knawene Afro Carlelele to the coste, there thy cogge lengges ; 476 T/ioghe thy cofers ware fulle, cramede with syluer, Thow myghte be sekyre of my sele sexty myle forthire.” They enclined to the kynge, and counge t?i&y askede, Cayers owtt of Carelele, catchez one theire horsez ; 480 Sir Cadore the curtayes kende theme the wayes, To Catrike theme cunvayede, and to Crist theme bekennyde. So the y spede at the spoures, they sprangene tf^eire horses, Then Arthur telly him that if his coffers were crammed full of silver he would be safe with his passport. Then the Romans depart with all speed. Digitized by ^.ooQle 16 THE EMBASSY RETURNS TO ROME. * v / Hyres theme hakenayes hastyly f/zere-aftyre ; 484 and never rest tm So fore reddow the y redene, and risted theme nemsr, piwrid! 6 tirae ^ot 3^ they luggede vndire lynd, whills theme lyghte failede ; Bot euere the senato ur for-sothe ^oghte at the gayneste. / Never were they By the seuende day was gone the cetee thai rechide; 488 so glad of any * soundhe sea Of a ^e the glee vndire Gode so glade ware they neue?*e, and^sandwich As 0 £ scmn( j e 0 f fj ie 8ee an( j Sandwyche belles! Wythowttyne more stownntynge they schippide theire horsez, r/ . Wery to the wane see they wentalle att ones; 492 #' ' ' With the mene of the walle they weyde vp theire ankyrs, crMsjh^ And fleede at the fore flude, in Flaundrez they rowede, And thorughe Flaundres they founde, as theme faire thoghte, 1 ^ f Title Akyne in Almayne, in Arthur A landes; 496 and over Mount Gosse by the Mount Goddarde fullc greuous wayes, Lombardy, And so in-to Lu/wberddye, lykande to schewe • j toR^me Tu8cai17 The y tnrne thurghe Tuskayne, with towres fulle heghe, In pris appairelles theme in precio^ wedez; 500 The Sonondaye in suters thay suggowme theire horsez, And sekes the Seyntez of Rome, be assente of knyghtes; Then the Senator Sythyne prekes to the pales with portes so ryche, ^ Liidu^ 6 Eraperor Thare sir Luciws lenges with lordes enowe; 504 Lowttes to hym lufly, and lettres hym bedes Of credence enclosyde, with knyghtlyche wordez. for Arthur^i r,y ^ ene emperowr was egree, and enkerly fraynes, groinThe^dsto* answere of Arthure he askes hyme sone, 508 thepowerof How he arayes the rewme, and rewlys the pople; Jif he be rebelle to Rome, whate ryghte that he claymes: His ambassador ought to have seized his sceptre and sat above him. Arthur, he says, ought himself to Itave served the Senator. “ Thow sulde his ceptre haue sesede, and syttyne aboune, fibre reuerence and realtee of Rome the noble : 512 By series thow was my sandes, and senatowr of Rome, He sulde fore solempnitee hafe seruede the hym seluene.” 1 likyde struck out, and thoghte written instead by the same band. Digitized by AnOOQle THE GREATNESS OF ARTHUR. 17 T hat wille he neuer for no wave 1 of alle this werlde Then answers the ‘ Senator, that Ar- 515 thur is t 00 f?reat to do that for ryche, Bot who may wynne hym of werre, by wyghtnesse of &ny one * handes; Many fey schalle be fyrste appone the felde leuyde, Are he appere in this place, profre whene the likes. I saye the, sir , Arthure es thyne enmye fore euer, 519 He claims no less And ettelles to bee oucrlynge of the empyre of Rome, on?ome. Empl ‘° That alle his ancestres aughte, bot Ytere hym selfe. [leaf 59 ] T hy nedes this newe 3 ere, I notifiede my selfenc, Be-fore that noble of name and neynesome of kynges ; 2 [he tells the Em- — - p er()r In the moste reale place of the Rounde Table, 524 ™ I somounde hymc solempnylye, one-seeandehis knyghtez; Sene I was fomyde in faythe so ferde was I neuere, In alle the placez ther I passede of pryncez in erthe ! I wolde fore-sake alle my suyte of segnowrry of Rome, Or I efte to that soueraygne whare sente one suyche nedes! He may be chosyne cheftayne, cheefe of alle other. 530 Arthur is worthy’ / / / to be king of men Bathe be chauncez of armes and cheuallrye noble, InVvaiour* 0111 ffor whyeseste, and worthyeste, and wyghteste of hanndez: Of alle the wyes thoXe I watte in this werlde ryche, The knyghtlyeste creato ure in Cristyndome haldene, Of kynge or of conquerowr, crownede in erthe, Of countenaunce, of corage, of crewelle lates, 536 The comlyeste of knyghtehode that vndyre Cryste lyffes! He maye be spokene in dyspens, despysere of syluere, That no more of golde gyffes th&ne of grette stones, iad delivered his message, and that he was never so frightened since he was born. He is the most famous knight in Christendom. To him gold and silver are as nothing, Ho more of wyne th&ne of watyre, th&t of the welle rynnys, and^wine^no more He of welthe of this werlde bot wyrchipe allone. 541 Syche contenawnce was neuer knowene in no kythe ryche, As was with that conwquerowr in his courte haldene; I countede at this Crystynmesse, of kyngez enoynttede, Ten kings anoint. Hole tene at his table, that tyme with hyme selfene ; He wylle werraye i-wysse, be ware 3 if the lykes, 546 Wage many wyghtemene, and wache thy marches, 1 ? wye. 2 Substituted for knyghtez. MORTE ARTHURE. 2 table. Digitized by Google 18 LUCIUS PREPARES FOR THE WAR. Good need is That they be redye in araye, and at areste foundyne : preparation, ff or ^ife he re che vn-to Home, he raunsouws it for euere ! and that soldiers I rede thow dresce the ther- fore, and draweno lyttelangere, should be dispatched to the Be sekyre of thi sowdeours, and sende to the mowntes : mountains forth- " -- • — witb * Be the qwartere of this $exe, and hym qwarte stannde, He wylle wyghtlye in a qwhyle one his wayes hye.” 553 « By Easter,” “ T)ee Estyre,” sais the emperowr, “I ettylle my selfene, says the Emperor, || . , --—— be 1 ^Germany 0 ^ T° hostaye in Almayne with armed e knyghtez; with an army, Sende freklye in-to Fraunce, that flo ur es of rewmes, ffande to fette that frekc, and forfette his landez; 557 and will send ffor I salle sette kepers, fulle couaunde and noble, many giants and meet hip 1 hi the Maii y geaunte of geene, justers fulle gude, mountains. To mete hym in the mountes, and martyre hys knyghtes, Stryke theme douneinstrates, andstruye theme fore euere, a watch-tower There salle appone Godarde a garette be rerede, 562 shall be reared on ar^witha^beacon -^at sc ^ ia ^ e garneschte and kepyde with gude mene ready to light, of armeS, And a bekyne abouewn to brynne whene theme lykys, That nane enmye with hoste salle entre the mouwtes; and another on There schalle one Mounte Bernarde be beyldede ano/'Aere, Mount St. ' ' ~ [leaf 59 ,back] Buschede with banerettes and bachelers noble: 567 Bernard. He shall not be In at the portes of Pavye schalle no prynce passe, suffered to enter r J . Pavia.” Thurghe the perelows places, for my pris knyghtes.” Then Lucius fTlhane sir Luciws lordlyche letties he sendys the East, _L Onone in-to the Oryente, with austeryne knyghtez, Tille Ambyganye and Orcage, and Alysaundyre eke, 5 72 To Inde and to Ennonye, as Ewfrates rynnys, To Asye, and to Aftrike, and Ewrope the large, To Irritayne, and Elamet, and alle t Aase owte ilez; To Arraby and Egipt, tille erles and other, 576 That any erthe ocupyes in fAase este marches to demand aid of Of Damaske and Damvat, and dukes and erles : all the kings and Quickly the aii ffo1 ' drede of his daungere they dresside theme sone; Of Crete and of Capados the honowable kyngys 580 Come at his commandmente, clenly at onesj To Tartary and Turhy, whene tytliynngez es comene, They tie?-z\e in by Thehay, terauntez fulle liugge, “ By Easter,” says the Emperor, “ I undertake to be in Germany with an army, and will send many giants and mighty men to meet him in the mountains. A watch-tower shall be reared on Mount St. Gothard, with a beacon ready to light. and another on Mount St. [leaf 59, back] Bernard. He shall not be suffered to enter Pavia.” Then Lucius sends letters into the East, Digitized by Google THE ROMAN ARMY SETS FORTH. 19 The floMr of the faire folke, of Amazonnes landes ; 584 A lie that© flaiUez on the felde be forfette fore euere ! Of Babyloyne and Baldake the burlyche knyghtes, Bayous with the ire baronage bydez no langere ; Of Perce, and of Pamphile, and Prefer Iohne landes, 588 Iche prynce with Ills power© appertlyche graythede; The Sowdane of Surrye assemblez his knyghtes, ffra Nylus to Nazarethe, nommers fulle huge; To Garyere and to Galele they gedyre alle at ones ; 592 The Sowdanes that ware sekyre sowdeours to Pome, They gadyrede ouere the Grekkes See witT&greuows wapyns, In theire grete galays, wyth gleterande scheldez; The kynge of Cyprys one the see the Sowdane habydes, With alle the realles of Roodes, arayede with hyme one; They sailede with a syde wynde oure the salte strandez : Sodanly the Sarezenes, as theme selfe lykede, Craftyly at Cornett the kynges are aryefede, 600 ffra the cete of Rome sexti myle large. Be that the Grekes ware graythede, a fulle gret nombyre, The myghtyeste of Macedone, with mene of the, marches, Pulle and Pruyslande presses with other , 604 The lege-mene of Lettow with legyons ynewe: Thus they semble in sortes, surames fulle huge, Sowdanes and Sarezenes owt of sere landes, The Sowdane of Surry and sextene kynges, 608 At the cetee of Rome assemblede at ones. fTlhane yschewes the emperowr armede at ryghtys, Arayede with his Romaynes appone ryche stedys; Sexty geauntes be-fore, engenderide with fendez, 612 With weches and warlaws to wacchene his tentys, Ay-ware whare he wendes, wyntrez and 3 eras. Myghte no blonkes theme here, thos bustowe churlles, Bot couerde camellez of towrse, enclosyde in maylez; He ayerez oute with alyenez, ostes fulle huge, 617 Ewyne in-to Almayne, that Arthure hade wonnyne; Rydes in by the ryuere, and ryottez hyme seluene, And ayerez with a huge wylle alle thus hye landez j 620 All that fail are to forfeit their lands. From all the East they come sailing across the Greek Sea in their mighty ships armed for war. and assembled at Corneto, sixty miles from Rome. There were of Greeks a vast number, and men of Italy, with Saracens from SSByTShds. Then goes forth the emperor with his knights, headed by sixty giants. Witches and warlocks watch his tents. [leaf 60] No horse might carry those churls. They ride upon camels bearing towers. The emperor marches into Germany. Digitized by ^.ooQle 20 ARTHUR GATHERS HIS FLEET, Meanwhile Arthur commands his knights to gather their forces, and to bo ready to meet him. A* The fleet assembles at Sandwich. He holds a parliament at York, Ade West wale of werre lie wynnys as hym lykes, Drawes in by Danuby, and dubbez hys knyghtez; In the contre of Colome 1 castedes enseggez, 023 And suggeoi/mez that sesone wyth Sarazenes ynewe. t the vtas of Hillary, Syr Arthure hym seluene In his kydde courccede commande the lordes,— “ Kayere to 30 ur cnntrez, and semble 30 W 7 - knyghtes, And kepys me at Cbwstan tyne clenlyche arayede; 628 Byddez me at Bareflete apone the, blythe stremes, Baldly w/t/i-in borde 'with $owre beste beryns; I schade menskfully 3 owe mete in thos faire marches.” He sendez furthe eodaynly sergeantes of annes, 632 To ade hys mariners on rawe, to areste hym schippys; Wyth-in sextene dayes hys fleet whas assemblede, At Sandwyche on the see, saile whene hym lykes. In the palez of Jorke a parlement he haldez, 636 With ade the perez of the rewme, prelates and other ; And aftyre the prechynge in presence of lordes, The kyng in his concede carpys the s wordes,— “I am in pwrpos to passe perilous wayes, 640 To kaire with my kene mene, to conquere 3 one landes, To owttraye myne enmy, 3 if auenture it schewe, That ocupyes myne heritage, the empyre of Borne. I sett 30 W” here a soueraynge, ascente 3 if 30 we lykys, That es me sybb, my syster sone, SirMordredehym seluene, Salle be my leuetenauwte, with lordchipez ynewe, 646 Of alle my lele lege-mene, that my landez 3 emes. ,, He carpes tille his cosy ne ^ane,in counsailehym seluene,— “ I make the kepare, sir knyghte, of kyngrykes manye, Wardayne wyrchipfulle, to weilde al my landes, 650 That I haue wonnene of werre, in alle this werlde ryche; I wylle that Wayno ur, my weife, in wyrchipe be holdene, That hire wannte noo wele, ne welthe that hire lykes; Luke my kydde castells be clenlyche arrayede, 654 I m"d for5il s r “' e3 There clio maye suggowrne hire selfe, wytfc semlycho and appoints as vicerov Sir Mordred, his nephew. He bids him take 1 care of Queen Guincver, berynes. 1 Or Coloine. Digitized by Google AND MAKES MORDRED VICEROY. 21 ffannde my fTorestez be ffrythede, o frenchepe for euere, That nane werreye my wylde, botte Way now?* hir seluene, The queen alone And th&t in the sesone whene grees^es assignyde, 658 in wsabinc^ 11114 That cho take hir solauce in certayne tymms. Chauncelere and chambyrleyne chaunge as the lykes, Audytowrs and offycers ordayne thy seluene,— , Bathe jnreez, and jnggez, and justicez of landes, Luke thow justyfye theme wele that injurye wyrkes : If me be destaynede to dye at Dryghtyns wylle, 664 I charge the my sektowr, cheffe of alle other, To mynystre my mobles, fore mede of my saule, To mendynantez 1 and mysese in myschefe fallene : Take here my testament of tresowre fulle huge, 668 661 All officers are to be completely under his command. Deaf 60, back] \ Arthur makes \ \ Mordred his \ j executor. V C He bids him _ i faithfUl to his |_trust, As I trayste appone the, be-traye thowe me neuer ! As thow wille answere be-fore the austeryne jugge, , That alle tf/iis werlde wynly wysse as hyme lykes, Luke that my laste wylle be lelely perfonrnede! 672 Thow has clenly the cure that to my coroune lan gez, Of alle my werdez wele, and my weyffe eke; Luke thowe kepe the so clere, there be no cause fondene, Whene I to contr 6 come, if Cryste wille it thole; 676 And thow haue grace gudly to gouerne thy seluene, I salle coroune the, knyghte, kyng with my handez.” T han sir Modrede fulle myldly meles hym seluene, Knolyd to the conqueronr, and carpes ^ise wordez,— “ I be-seke 30W, sir, as my sybbe lorde, That 36 wille for chary t 6 cheese 30W a-no ther; ffor if 3 e putte me in this plytte, 30 wre poplees dyssauyde; To presente a prynce astate my powere es symple. 684 Whene other of werre wysse are wyrchipide here-aftyre, Thane may I for-sothe be sette bott at lyttille. To passe in 30 ur presance my pwr^os es takyne, And alle my pnrueaunce apperte fore my pris knyghtez. ,, “ Thowe arte my neuewe fulle nere, my nnrrree of olde, But Arthur bids him, as his near- That I ‘ ' ‘ ' . . and promises to crown him king if he remain so. 681 But Mordred de- I ~ sires to be ex- i cused. and would rather go to the war. haue chastyede and chosene, a childe of my chambyre; 690 office * 1 MS. mcndvnawantez. Digitized by Google 22 ARTHUR TAKES LEAVE OF GUINEVERE. Then Arthur takes leave of his queen. 1 696 700 703 ffor the sybredyne of me, fore-sake noglite this offyce That thow ne wyrk my wille, thow watte whatte 1 it menes.” N o we he takez hys leue, and lengez no langere, 693 At lordez, at lege-mene, tf/iatleues hyme by-hynden<?. And seyne that worthilyche wy went vn-to ehainbyre, ffor to comfurthe the qwene, that in care lenges; Waynowr waykly wepande hyin kyssiz, Talkez to hym tenderly with teres ynewe,— his* departure ents “ ^ ma Y wer y w y e > thatt tliis werre mouede, That warnes me wyrchippe of my wedde lorde ; Alle my lykynge of lyfe owte of lande wendez, And I in langoztr am lefte, leue $e for eu ere ! dufin hu d arms er ^hy ne m yghte dere lufe, dye in 302 ^ armes, Are I this destanye of dule sulde drye by myne one ! ” “ Grefe the noghte, Gaynowr, fore Goddes lufe of hewene, Ne gruche noghte my ganggynge, it salle to gude turne ! Thy wonrydez and thy wepynge woundez myne herte, I may noghte wit of this woo, for alle this werlde ryche ; I haue made a kepare, a knyghte of thyne awene, 709 Ouerlynge of Ynglande vndyre thy seluene, And thates sirMordrede, thatthowhas mekyllepraysede, Salle be thy dictowr, my dere, to doo whatte the lykes.” Thane he takes hys leue at ladys in chambyre, 713 Kysside them kyndlyche, and to Criste be-tcohes; And then cho swounes fulle swythe, whe[n] he hys swerde aschede, Twys in a swounywg, swelte as cho walde ! 716 He pressed to his palfray, in presance of lordes, Prekys of the palez with his prys knyghtes, Wyth a realle rowte of the Eounde Table; 719 Souglite to-warde Sandwyche, cho sees hyme no more ! Thare tHe g re te ware gederyde, wyth galyarde knyghtes, GarnesciLit one the grene felde and graythelyche arayede; Dukkes £t:nd duzseperez daynttehely rydes, Erlez op Ynglande wit h archers ynewe : 724 \ "MS. yfoatte ’watte. Put Arthur bids her not to grieve. and tells her that he has made Mordred, a knight of her own, his deputy. [leaf 61] Then he kisses the ladies, and takes leave of them. [ But Guinever swoons when he asks for his sword. The king then departs hastily with his knights. At Sandwich all the lords and their followers assemble. Digitized by <^.OOQLe Arthur’s fleet sets sail. 23 Schirreues scharply schiftys the comouns, Rewlys be-fore the ryche of the Rounde Table, Assiwgnez ilke a contree to certayne lordes > 727 In the southe one the see banke saile whene theme lykes. Thane bargez theme buskez, and to the bannke rowes, Bryngez blonkez one bourde, and burlyche helmes; T russez in tristly trappyde stedes, Tentez, 1 and othire toylez, and targez fulle ryche, 732 Cabanes, and clathe-sekkes, and coferez fulle noble, Hukes, and haknays, and horsez of armez; Thus _they stowe ine the stufFe of fulle steryne knyghtez. Q wene alle was schyppede that scholde, they schounte no lengere, 736 Bot ventelde theme tyte, as the tyde rynnez; -t Coggez and crayers than crossez £Aaire mastez, At the commandment of the kynge, vncouerde at ones. Wyghtly one the wale they wye vp ^aire ankers, 740 By wytt of the watyre-mene of the wale ythez, ffrekes one the forestayne fakene theiie coblez, In floynes, and fercostez, and Flemesche schyppes, Tytt saillez to the toppe, and tumez the lufe, 744 Standez appone stere-bourde, sterynly they songene, The pryce schippez of the porte prouene theire depnesse, And fondez wyth fulle saile ower the fawe ythez; Holly w»tA-owttyne harme they hale in bottes, 748 Schipe-mene scharply schotene thaire portez, Launchez lede apone lufe, lacchene ther depez, Lukkes to the lade-sterne, whene the lyghte faillez; Castez coursez be crafte, whene the clowde rysez, 752 With the nedylle and the stone one the nyghte tydez; ffor drede of the derke nyghte thay drecchede a lyttille, And alle the steryne of the streme strekyne at onez. The kynge was in a gret cogge, w ith knyghtez fulle many, In a cabane enclosede, clenlyche arayede; 757 WztA-in on a ryche bedde rystys a li tty lie, And with the swoghe of the see in swefnynge he felle. 1 Or teiwttez. Horses, arms, tents, and other things are shipped. Then the ships at the word of command cross their yards, weigh their anchors; the well-skilled sailors hoist the sails and steer the vessels. Then they haul in the boats, shut the ports, heave the lead, look well to the guiding star, and skilfully shape their course with the needle and the stone. After a little delay on account of darkness, they all sail at once. The king is in a large vessel with many knights. Resting himself in his cabin, he fails asleep. Digitized by ^.ooQle 24 Arthur’s dream op the dragon and bear. an<l dreams of a dreadful dragon. [leaf 61 , back] ) His head and Vjioek are blue; liia shoulders cored with silver i his belly and ! wings of various I hues; 1 liis feet are I ilack, and out of I I is mouth comes fire. Hym dremyd of a dragone, dredfulle to be-holde, 760 Come dryfande oner the depe to drenschene hys pople, Ewene walkande owte of the weste landez, Wanderande vnworthyly ouere the wale ythez; - Bothe his hede and hys hals ware halely alle ouer 764 Oundyde of azure, enamelde fulle faire : His scoulders ware schalyde alle in clene syluere, Schreede oner alle the schrywpe with schrinkande poyntez; Hys wombe and hys wenges of wondyrfulle hewes, 768 In meruaykms maylys he mouwtede fulle hye; Whayme that he towchede he was tynt for ener ! Hys feete ware floreschede alle in fyne sabylle, And syche a venTzymows flayre flowe fro his lyppez, That the flode of the flawez alle one fyre semyde! 773 TiSnsTthe^ra- Thane come of the Oryente, ewyne hyme agaynez, be?r, a flerce bluck A blake bustowe bere abwene in the clowdes, wjthjiuge^paws Wit h yche a pa we as a poste, and paumes fulle huge, daws, “With pykes fulle perilous, alle plyande tfzame semyde, Lothene and lothely, lokkes and other, Alle with lutterde legges, lokerde ynfaire, ffiltyrde vnfrely, wyth fomannde lyppez, 780 The foulleste of fegure that fowrmede was euer! He baltyrde, he bleryde, he bmundyschte ther-a,iter; To bataile he bounnez hym with bustows clowez: He romede, he rarede, that roggede alle the erthe ! 784 So ruydly he rappyd at to ryot hym seluene! Thane the dragone on dreghe dressede hyme agaynez, And with hys duttez hym drafe one dreghe by the walkyne: He fares as a fawcone, frekly he strykez; 788 Bothe with feete and with fyre he feghttys at ones ! The bere in the bataile the bygger hym semyde, And byttes hyme holdlye wyth balefulle tuskez ; Syche buffetez he hym rechez with hys brode klokes, Hys brest and his brafTzelle whas blodye alle ouer ! 793 He rawmpyde so ruydly that alle the erthe ryfez, Bynnande one reede blode as rayne of the heuene ! dragon but for He hade weryede the worme by wyghtnesse of strenghte, mis-shapen legs, and foaming lips. He prepares to light, roaring and raging for the strife. Then the dragon vssails him, fighting like a falcon with beak and claws. The bear bites him with baleful teeth, and causes the blood to flow. Digitized by Google INTERPRETATION OP THE DREAM. 25 He ware it fore the wylde fyre that hehymewyth defendez. Thane wandyrs the worme awaye to hys heghttez, Commes glydande fro the clowddez, and cowpez fulle euene; 799 Towchez hym wyth his talounez, and terez hys rigg e, Be-twyx the taile and the toppe tene fote large ! Thus he brittenyde the here, and broghte hyme olyfe, Lette hyme falle in the flode, fleete whare hyme lykes : So they brynge the bolde kyng bynne the schippe-burde, That nere he bristez for bale, one bede whare he lyggez. Thane waknez the wyese kynge, wery fore-trauaillede, Takes hyme two phylozophirs, that folowede hyme euer, In the seuyne scyence the suteleste fondene, 808 The cony[n]geste of clergye vndyre Criste knowene; He tolde theme of hys tourmente, that tyme that he slepede, “ Drechede with a dragone, and syche a derfe beste, Has mad me faille wery; je telle me my swefene, 812 Ore I mone swelte as swythe, as wysse me onre Lorde ! ” “Sir,” saide they sone thane, thies sagge philosopherse, “ The dragone that thow dremyde of, so dredfulle to schewe, That come dryfande oner the deepe, to drynchene thy pople, Sothely and certayne thy seluene it es, 817 That thus saillez ouer the see with thy sekyre knyghtez: tlie fire which he breathes. Then the dragon flies aloft, and comes swooping down. tearing a vast rent in the back of the bear, and lets him drop into the water. Then Arthur awaking is [leaf 621 troubled at the dream, and sends for his two philosophers, men very learned in the seven sciences. These wise men tell him that by the dragon is meant himself. V.' V The colurez that ware castyne appone his clere wengez, Maybe thy kyngrykez alle, that thow has ryghte wonnyne ; And the tachesesede taile, with tonges so huge, 821 Be-takyns this faire folke, that in thy fleet wendez. The here that bryttenede was abowene in the clowdez, Be-takyns the tyraamtez that towrmentez thy pople; Or elles with somrae gyaunt some jowmee salle happyne, In syngulere batelle by joure selfe one; And thow salle hafe the victorye thurghe helpe of oure The bear signi-"““\ flea the tyrants \ who torment his \ people, or else A some giant whom Arthur is destined to overthrow in battle. Lorde, As thow in thy vision© was opynly schewede ! 828 Of this dredfulle dreme ne drede the no more, Arthur ift oxhort He kare noghte, air conquerowr,bot comforth thy seluene; SJurage. ° f B00d Digitized by Google 26 ARTHUR- ARRIVES IN NORMANDY, I And this© that saillez ouer the see, with thy sekyre knyghtez.” With trumppez thene trystly, they trisene vpe thaire They speed on their way, and arrive on tne coast of Xormandy. At Barflete they find a fleet of friends. the flower of fifteen realms. When they had disembarked and pitched their tents, a Templar comes to the king, and tells him of a ferocious giant who feeds upon , men and children. and who had that tiny captured the [leaf 62 , back] Duchess of Brittany, and carried lier to the mountain. She was the flower of all France, and the fairest lady on earth, saillez, 832 And rowes ou er the ryche see, this rowtte alle at onez; The comely coste of Normandye they cachene fulle euene, And blythely at Barflete theis bolde are arryfede, And fyndys a flete there of frendez ynewe, 836 The floure and the faire folke of fyftene rewmez; ffore kyngez and capytaynez kepyde hyme fayre, As he at Carelele commaundyde at Cristymesse hym seluene. 839 Be they had takene the lande, and tentez vpe rerede, Comez 1 a templere tyte, and towchide to the kynge— " Here es a teraunt be-syde that towmentez thi pople,. A grett geaunte of geene, engenderde of fendez ; He has fretyne of folke mo thane fyfe hondrethe, 844 And als fele fawntekyns of freebome childyre ! This has bene his sustynaunce alle this seuene wyntteres, And 3 itt es that sotte noghte sadde,so wele hyme it lykez! In the contree of Co/zstantyne no kynde has he leuede, Wzt/z-owttyne kydd castelles enclosid wyth walles, 849 That he ne has clenly dystroyede alle the knaue chil dyre, And theme caryede to the cragge, and clenly deworyde ! The duchez of Bretayne to daye has he takyne, 852 Be*side Reynes as scho rade with hire ryche knyghttes; Ledd hyre to the movmtayne, thare that lede lengez, To lye by that lady, aye whyls hir lyfe lastez. We folowede o ferrome moo thene fyfe hundrethe, 856 Of beryns, and of burgeys, and bachelers noble, Bot he couerde the cragge; cho cryede so lowde, The care of that creato ure couer salle I neuer ! Scho was flo ur of alle Fraunce, or of fyfe rewmes, 860 And one of the fayreste that fowrmede was euere, The gentileste jowelle a-juggede with lordes, ffro Geene vn-to Gerone, by Them of heuene ! 1 Or Ccttimez. Digitized by AnOOQle AND HEARS OF A DREADFUL GIANT. Scho was thy wyfes cosyne, know© it if the lykez, 864 Comene of the rycheste, that rengnez in erthe : As thow arte ryghtwise kynge rewe on thy pople, And fande for to venge theme, that thus are. rebuykyde!” “ Allas!” sais sir Arthure, “ so lange haue I lyffede, Hade I wytene of this, wele had me chefede ; 869 Me es noghte fallene faire, bot me es foule happynede, That thus this faire ladye this fende has dystroyede ! I had leuere thane alle Fraunce, this fyftene wynter, I hade bene be-fore thate freke, a furlange of waye, 873 Whene he that ladye had laghte and ledde to the montez: I hadde lefte my lyfe are cho hade harme lymppyde ! Bot walde fAowkenime to the crage, thare that kenelengez, I walde cayre to that coste, andcarpe wythe hyme seluene, To trette with that tyraunt fore tresone of londes , 1 And take trewe for a tyme, tille it may tyde bettyre.” “ Sire, see $e jone farlande, with 3 one two fyrez, 880 Th ar filsnez 2 th&t fende, fraiste whene the lykes, Appone the creste of the cragge, by a colde welle, That enclosez the clyfe with the clere strandez, Ther may thow fynde folke fay wyth-owttyne nowmer, Mo florenez in faythe thane Fraunce es in aftyre; 885 And more tresowr vn-trewely that trayto ur has getyne, Thane inTroye was,as I tro we, th&t tyme thstit was wonne.” Thane romyez the ryche kynge for rewthe of the pople, Baykez ryghte to a tente, and restez no lengere ! 889 He welterys, he wristeles, he wryngez hys handez ! Thare was no wy of th is werlde, tfAat wyste whatt he mene de ! He calles sir Cayo tis that of the cowpe serfede, 892 And sir Bedyere the bolde, tha.t bare hys brande ryche,— “ Luke $e aftyre euensange be armyde at ryghttez, On blonkez by 3 one buscayle, by 3 one blythe stremez, ffore I wille passe in pilgremage preuely here-aftyre, In the tyme of suppere, whene lordez are served©, 897 ffor to sekene a saynte be 3 one salte stremes, 1 Originally lordez. 2 Or filsoez. 27 cousin of Ar- \ thur’s queen. 1 tA> Then Sir Arthur bitterly laments her fate. and wishes he had been there to aid her. He desires to know where the giant lives. 1 and is directed by the Templar how to find his abode. where there are many captives. and vast treasure stored up. Then Arthur is greatly excited. and bids Sir Cayous and Sir Bedevere attend him at evening. pretending that ne is going on a pilgrimage. [leaf 63] Digitized by ^.ooQle 23 ARTHUR GOES TO SEEK THE GIANT, In seynt Mighelle mount, there myraclez are schewede.” Then Arthur pro- ^Aftyre euesange, sir Arthurs hyme se[l]fene 900 and arm himself, 'W'ente to hys wardrope, and warpe of hys wedez, Armede hym in a actone with orfraeez fulle ryche, Abouew one Mat a jeryne of Acres owte ouer, ■ Abouen Mat a jesseraunt of jentylle maylez, 904 A jupone of Ierodyne jaggede in schredez; He brayedez one a bacenett bumeschte of syluer, o The beste th at was in Basille, wyth bordurs ryche; *V The creste and Me coronalle, enclosed so faire 908 ^ Wyth clasppis of clere golde, couched wyth stones; The vesare, the aventaile, enarmede so faire, Yoyde wtM-owttyne vice, w ith wyndowes of syluer; V v His gloues gaylyche gilte, and grauene at the hemmez, With g?Ytyuez and gobelets, gloriole of hewe; 913 He bracez a brade schelde, and his brande aschez, and mounting a Bounede hyme a broune stede, and one the bente houys; brown steed, rides * 1 11 i8 'ki i ighte^await He sterte tille his sterepe and stridez one lofte, 916 Streynez hyme stowttly, and sterys hyme faire, Brochez the baye stede, and to the buske rydez, And there hys knyghtes j hyme kepede fulle clenlyche arayede.^ ^ Thane theyroode by that ryuer,Mat rynnyd so swythe, Those the ryndez ouerrechez with realle bowghez; 921 The roo and the rayne-dere reklesse thare ronnene, In ranez and in rosers to ryotte Marne seluene ; The frithez ware floreschte with flourez fulle many, Wyth fawcoufts and fesantez of ferlyche hewez; 925 Alle the feulez thare fleschez, that flyez with wengez, fFore thare galede the gowke one greuez fulle lowde, Wyth alkyne gladchipe May gladdene the me seluene : Of the nyghtgale notez the noisez was swette, 929 They threpide wyth the throstilles, thre hundreth at ones! Th&t whate swowynge of watyre, and syngynge of byrdez, It myghte salue hyme of sore, th at sounde was neuere ! Thane ferkez this folke, and one fotte lyghttez, 933 ffestenez theire faire stedez o ferrome by-twene ; Til ere Is a grove by tbe side of the river full of game and decked with flowers. Here all birds abound. and nightingales make sweet music. Here they leave their horses, and Digitized by AnOOQle AND FINDS A WOEFUL WIDOW. 29 And thene the kynge kenely comandyde hys knyghtez ffor to byde with theireblonkez, andbowne no fortliyre,— “ ffore I wille seke this seynte by my selfe one, 937 And melle with this mayster mane, that this monte jemez; And seyne sails je offyre, aythyre aftyre other, Menskfully at SayntMighells fulls myghtty with Criste!” The kyng coueris the cragge wyth cloughes fulls hye, To the creste of the clyffe he clymbez one lofte; Keste vpe hys vmbrers, and kenly he lukes, 943 Caughte of the colde wynde to comforthe hym seluene; Two fyrez he fyndez fflawmande fulle hye, The fourtedele a furlangs be-twene thus he walkes; The waye by the weHe strandez he wandyrde hyme one, To wette of the warlawe, whare that he lengez; 948 He ferkez to the fyrste fyre, and euene there he fyndez Awery wafulle wedowe, wryngande hire handez, And gretande on a graue grysely teres, How merkyde one molde, sene myddaye it semede: 952 He salujede that sorowfulle with sittande wordez, And fraynez aftyre the fende fairely there-aftyre. Thane this wafulle wyfe yn-wynly hym gretez, Couerde vp on hire kneesse, and clappyde hire handez; Said, “ carefnlle caremane, thow carpez to lowde ! 957 May 3 one warlawe wyt, he worows vs alle ! Weryd worthe the wyghte ay, that the thy wytt refede, That mase the to wayfe here in #nse wylde lakes ! 960 I wame the fore wyrchipe, thou, wylnez aftyr sorowe ! Whedyre buskes thou beme 1 vnblysside thow semes ! Wenez thow to brittene hyme with thy brande ryche 1 Ware thow wyghttere thane Wade or Wawayne owthire, Thow wynnys no wyrchipe, I warne the be-fore ! 965 Thow saynned the vnsekyrly to seke to these mouwtez, Siche sex ware to symple to semble with hyme one; ffor and thow see hyme with syghte, the seruez no herte, To sayne the sekerly, so semez hym huge ! 969 Thow arte frely and faire, and in thy fyrste flourez, Bot thow arte fay be my fay the, and that me for-thynkkys! the king bids his knights to await his return. The king alone ascends the [leaf 63, back] mountain. and going to a fire which he sees he finds a woeful widow wringing her hands. He asks her concerning the giaut. She answers with terror, and warns him that he cannot hope to contend with so terrible a monster. Digitized by Google 30 THE TALE OF TUe WOEFUL WIDOW. Fifty such as Ar- Ware syche fyfty one a felde, or one a faire erthe, 972 tlmr he could fell with his fist. The freke walde with hys ivste telle tow at ones ! with his fist. The freke walde with hys fyste felle 30W at ones ! The poor duciiess Loo ! here the ducliez dere,—to daye was cho takyne,— anti murdered by Depe doluene and dede, dyked in moldez ; 975 and will remain there till death to bewail her. [leaf 64] Then Arthur says that he comes from the great King Arthur on a mission to treat with the giant. ami murdered by Depe doluene and dede, dyked in moldez : 975 him, and the dole- r J ’ * 1 u fo'ter?mother r Be bade mortbirede this mylde be myddaye war rongene, h is buned her, Wtt/i-owtfcyne mercy one molde, I not watte it ment: He has forsede hir and fylede, and cho es fay leuede; He slewe hir vn-slely, and slitt hir to the nauylle ! And here haue I bawmede hir, and heryede ther-aftyr; ffor bale of the botelesse, blythe be I neu er 1 981 Of alle the frendez cho hade, there folowede none aftyre, Bot T, hir foster modyr of fyftene wynter ! there tii/dS 1 to ^ er ^ e °f this farlande, fande salle I neuer, 984 inwall her. Bot here be fonndene on felde, tille I be fay leuede !” [leaf 64] Thane answers sir Arthure to that aide wyf : Then Arthur says - _«-—■ l f!om^the°great “ * am c o m yne fra the conquerow, curtaise and gentille, a mfssto?to r<m As 0DLe of the hathelest of Arthur knyghtez, 988 gfcmt. wl 6 Messenger to this myx, for mendemente of the pople, To mele with this maister mane, that here this mourcte 3emez; To trete with this tyraunt for treso ur of landez, And take trew for a tyme, to bettyr may worthe.” 992 The old wife tells “ Ja, thire wordis are bot waste,” quod this wif thane, orlreatiS' thS “ ffor hothe landez and lythes ffulle lyttille by he settes; y'oid'or'treaaure; Of rentez ne of rede golde rekkez he neuer, 995 ffor he wille lenge o*wt of lawe, as hym selfe thynkes, WitA-owtene licence of lede, as lorde in his awene j ?"mon»kirtie Bot h® h fts a kyrtille one, kepide for hyme seluene, covered with hair, That was sponene in Spayne with specyalle byrdez, And sythyne gamescht in Grece fulle graythly to-gedirs It es hydede alle with hare hally al ouere, 1001 wiSuShSJdT* And hordyTde ™ th the berdez of burlyche kyngez, of mighty king.. Crispid and kombide, that kempis may knawe Iche kynge by his colow?*, in kythe there he lengez j Here the fermez he fangez of fyftene rewmez, ‘1005 hti^nreahn 0 /!, ffor hke Esteme ewyne, how-euer that it falle, each Easter-eve. They send it hyme sothely for saughte of the pople,- nothing for laws or treaties; that In- regards not gold or treasure; only he has a famous kirtle covered with hair. The tribute of ti fteen realms is sent to him on each Easter-eve. Digitized by Google THE GIANT SUPS ON SEVEN MALE CHILDREN. 31 Sekerly at that sesone with certayne knyghtez, 1008 And he has aschede Arthure alle this seuene wywntter. ffor-thy hurdez he here, to owttraye hys pople, Tille the Bretones kynge haue bumeschte his lyppys, And sent his berde to that bolde wytfi. his beste berynes; Bot thowe hafe broghte that berde, bowne the no forthire, ffor it es buteless^ bale, thowe biddez oghte elles; 1014 ffor he has more tresowr to take wbene hyme lykez, Thane euere anghte Arthure, or any of hys elders; If thowe hafe broghte the berde, he bese more blythe Thane thowe gafe hym Burgoyne, or Bretayne the more; Bot hike nowe for charitee, thow chasty thy lyppes, That the no wordez eschape, whate so be-tydez; 1020 Luke thi presante be priste, and presse hym bott lytille, ffor he es at his sowper, he wille be sone greuyde. And thow my concelle doo, thow dosse of thy clothjs, And knele in thy kyrtylle, and calle hym thy lorde. He sowppes alle this sesone wztA seuene knaue childre, Choppid in a chargowr of chalke whytt syluer, 1026 Wit A pekille and powdyre of precious spycez, And pyment fulle plenteuous of Portywgale wynes ; Thre balefulle birdez his brochez they twme, 1029 Thai byddez his bedgatt, his byddynge to wyrche; Siche foure scholde be fay w/tA-in foure hourez, Are his fylth ware fillede, that his flesch 3 emes.” “ 3a, I haue broghte the berde,” quod he, “ the bettyre me lykez; 1033 ffor-thi wille I bonne me, and bere it my seluene; Bot, lefe, walde ^Aow lere me whare that lede lengez, I salle alowe the and I liffe, oure Lorde so me helpe! ” “fferke fast to the fyre,” quod cho, “that flawmez so hye; Thare fillis that fende hyme, fraist whene the lykez; Bot thow moste seke more southe, sydlyngs a lyttille, ffor he wille hafe sent hym selfo sex myle large.” 1040 To^Ae sowre of the reke he soghte at the gayneste, Sayned hyme sekerly with certeyne wordez, And sydlyngs of the segge the syghte had he rechide, He has Ion? wished for the beard of Arthur. t If he has brought the beard, the giant will be blithe. But he must ap- S roach him with ue caution. and had better doff his clothes and kneel to him. He sups at this \ season on seven \ male children 1 chopped in a charger of chalkwhite silver. I Three wretched women turn his spits for him. [leaf 64, back] ** Yes,” says Arthur, “ I nave indeed brought this beard; but show me where I shall find him.” Then she directs him to approach the great fire. Digitized by <^.OOQLe 32 abthur finds the giant. Roasts of the flesh of men and cattle are spitted together. Arthur goes to ^ How vn-semly £/iat sott satt sowpande hym one; 1044 the Sant lying He lay lenand one lange, lugande vn-faire, extended with 0 0 Are picking the T7ie thee of a marais lymme lyfte vp by the haunche; tinih of a man.,; Hig bakke, an d bis bewschers, and his brode lendez, /. He bekez by the bale-fyre, and breklesse hyme semede ; Thaxe ware rostez falle ruyde, and rewfulle bredez, 1049 Beerynes and bestaile brochede to-geders; Cowlefulle cramede of crysmede childyre. Sum as brede brochede, and bierdez thame towmede. Then Arthur’s An d thane this comlych kynge, by-cause of his pople, heart bleeds for " by thifwreiS^ 4 His herte bledez for bale, one bent ware he standez ! hil Sd and Thane he dressede one his schelde, schuntes no lengere, bright sword, Braundesche his hryghte swerde by the bryghte hiltez,^ Kaykez to-warde the renke reghte 'with a ruyde wille, And hyely hailsez ^at hulke with hawtayne wordez,— “Now, alle-weldand Gode, that wyrscheppez vs alle, Giff the sorowe and syte, sotte, there thow lygges, 1060 ffor the fulsomeste freke that fowrmede was euere I ffoully thow fedys the, the fende hane thi saule ! Here es cury vn-clene, carle, be my trowthe, Caffe of creatowrs alle, thow curssede wriche ! 1064 Be-cause that thow killide has tfftise cresmede childyre, Thow has marters made, and hroghte oute of lyfe, That here are brochede one bente, and brittenede with thi handez, 1067 I salle merke the thy mede, as thou has myche serfede, Thurghe myghteof seynt Mighelle, that thi s monte 3 emes! And for this faire ladye, that thow has fey leuyde, And thus forcede one foulde, for fylth of thi selfene! Dresse the now, dogge-sone, the deuelle haue thi saule! ffor thow salle dye this day, thurghe dynt of my handez!” Thane glopnede the glotone and glorede vn-faire; He grewnede as a grewhounde, with grysly tuskes; He gapede, he groned faste, with grucchande latez, 1076 ffor grefe of the gude kynge, that hyme with grame gretez! His fax and his foretoppe was filterede to-geders, and right boldly addresses the giant. He upbraids him with his vile crimes and his unclean meat. For his horrible murders of Christian children, he would now take vengeance on him, by the aid of St MichaeL Then the giant stared with amazement, and gnashed his teeth with fury. Digitized by Google •DESCRIPTION OF THE GIANT. 33 And owte of his face fome ane halfe fote large ; His frouwt and his forheuede, alle was it ouer, 1080 As the felle of a froske, and fraknede it semede, Huke-nebbyde as a bawke, and a hore herde, And herede to the hole eyghne with hyngande browes; Harske as a hunde-fisch, hardly who so lukez, 1084 So was the hyde of that hulke hally al oner ! Erne had he fulle huge, and vgly to schewe, With eghne fulle horreble, and ardawunt for so the; fflatt-mowthede as a fluke, with fleryande lyppys, 1088 And the flesche in his fortethe fowly as a here. His berde was brothy and blake, that tille his brest rechede, Grassede as a mereswyne with corkes fulle huge, And alle falterde the flesche in his foule lippys, 1092 like wrethe as a wolfe-heuede, it wraythe owtt at ones! Bull^nekkyde was that bieme,and brade in the scholders, Brok-brestede as a brawne, with brustils fulle large, Ruyd armes as an ake with rusclede sydes, 1096 Lyme and leskes fulle lothyne, leue $e for sothe : Schouelle-fotede was that schalke, and schaylande hyme semyde, With schankez vn-schaply, schowande to-gedyrs; Thykke theese as a thursse, and thikkere in the hanche, Greesse growene as a galte, fulle grylych he lukez! 1101 Who the lenghe of the lede lelly accountes, ffro the face to the fote, was fyfe fadome lange ! Thane stertez he yp sturdely one two styfle schankez, And sone he caughte hyme a clubb alle of clene vryne*! He walde hafe kyllede the kynge with his kene wapene, Bot thurghe the crafte of Cryste jit the carle failede ; The creest and the coronalle, the claspes of syluer, 1108 Clenly with his clubb he crasschede doune at onez ! The kynge castes yp his schelde, and couers hym faire, And with his burlyche brande a box he hyme reches ; ffulle butt in the frunt the fromonde he liittez, 1112 MOBTK ARTHUBE. 3 Out of his mouth came smoke. His forehead was like the fell of a frog. He was hooknosed like a [leaf 65] hawk, with hair up to his eyes, and beetle hrows. His skin was hard as that of a dogfish ; his ears huge and ugly; his eyes horrible and burning. Flat-mouthed, with grinning lips, and jaws like a bear. A black beard reached to his breast, with mighty bristles. \ The flesh of his lips was in uneven folds, each fold, like an out* law, twisted itself out. He was bullnecked and broad in the shoulders; breasted like a boar, with huge bristles; his arms like an oak; his limbs and flanks loathly; shovelfooted and scaly, with unshapely shanks; of gigantic thickness in his haunches. In height, full five fathoms. Up starts this fell giant, and seizing an iron club, aims a blow at Arthur. i The king catches it on his shield, and returns the blow with his sword right upon the forehead. Digitized by ^.ooQle THE FIGHT BETWEEN" ARTHUR AND THE GIANT. 31 The bright blade pierces to the brain. The giant wipes his face with his hands, and strikes fiercely at the king. Arthur draws back, • and then drives his sword into the giant’s haunch. The monster roars and strikes at random. So mighty is his stroke, that it penetrates a sword's length into the ground. The king nearly swoons at the noise of the blow, but quickly strikes him with his sword, liis entrails and blool gush out. [leaf 65, back] Then throwing away his club, the giant seizes Arinur in his arms. The baleful birds pray for the success of Arthur. They have a fearful wrestling match, and fall from the top of the cliff down to the shore. That the burnysclit blade to the brayne rynnez ; He feyede his fysnamye with his foule hondez, And frappez faste at hys face fersely ther- aftyre ! The kyng chaungez his fote, eschewes a lyttille, 1116 He had he eschapede that choppe, cheuede had euylle; He folowes in fersly, and festenesse a dynte Hye ype one the hanche, with his harde wapyne, That he hillid the swerde halfe a fote large ; 1120 The hott blode of the hulke vn-to the hilte rynnez, Ewyne in-to jumette the gyaunt he hyttez, lust to the genitales, 1 and jaggede thame in sondre ! Thane he romyede and rarede, and ruydly he strykez ffulle egerly at Arthurs, and one the erthe hittez 1125 A swerde lenghe wM-in the swarthe, he swappez at ones, That nere swounes the kynge for swoughe of his dynttez ! Bot jit the kynge sweperly fulle swythe he by-swenkez, Swappez in with the swerde that it the swange brystedde; Bo the the guttez and the gorre guschez owte at ones, That alie englaymez the grease, one grouwde ther he standez! 1131 Thane he castez the clubb, and the kynge hentez, On the creeste of the cragg he caughte hyme in arxnez, And enclosez hyme clenly, to cruschene hys rybbez ; So harde haldez he that hende, tfAatnere hisherte brystez! Thane the balefulle hierdez bownez to the erthe, 1136 Kneland and cryande, and clappide tfAeire handez,— “ Criste comforthe jone knyghte, and kepe hym fro sorowe. And latte neuer jone fende felle hyme olyfe ! ” Jitt es the warlow so wyghte, he welters hyme vndere, Wrothely thai wrythyne and wrystille to-gederz, 1141 Welters and walowes ouer wit^-in thase buskez, Tumhellez and twmes faste, and terez tf^aire wedez, Vn-tenderly fro the toppe thai tiltine to-gederz ; 1144 Whilome Arthure ouer, and other- while vndyre, ffro the heghe of the hylle yn-to the harde roche; 1 MS. genitates. Digitized by Google V ARTHUR KILLS THE GIANT. 35 They feyne neuer are they falle at the flode merkes; Bot Arthur with ane anlace egerly smyttez, 1148 And hittez euer in the hulke yp to the hiltez. The theeffe at the dede-thrawe so throly hyme thryngez, Thai three rybbys in his syde he thrystez in sundere ! Thene air Kayow* the kene vn-to the kynge styrtez,— Said, “ alias! we are lome, my lorde es corcfundede, Ouer-fallene with a fende ! vs es fulle hapnede ! 1154 We mone be forfetede in faith, and flemyde for euer ! ” Thay hafe vp hys hawberke thane, and handilez thervndyre, His hyde and his haunche eke, one heghte to the schuldrez, His flawnke and his feletez, and his faire sydez, 1158 Bothe his bakke and his breste, and his bryghte armez. Thay ware fayne that they fande no flesche entamede, And for that jowmee made joye, (Mr gentille knyghttez. “ How, certez,” saise Sir Bedwere, “ it semez, be my Lorde! . 1162 He sekez seyntez bot seldene, the sorere he grypes. That thna clekys this corsauwt owte of thii heghe clyffez, To carye forth© siche a carle at close hym in siluere; Be Myghelle, of syche a makk I hafe myche wondyre That euerowre soueraygne Lorde suffers hyme in heuene; And alle seyntez be syche, that seruezoure Lorde, 1168 I salle neuer no seynt bee, be my fadyre sawle ! ” Thane bouredez the bolde kynge at Bedvere wordez,— “ This seynt haue I soghte, so helpe me owre Lorde ! ffor-thy brayd owtte thi brande, and broche hyme to the herte; 1172 Be sekere of this sergeaunt, he has me sore greuede ! I faghte noghte wyth syche a freke this fyftene wyntyrs, Bot in the montez of Araby I mett syche another ; He was the forcyere be ferre that had I nere fundene, He had my fortune bene faire, fey had I leuede ! 1177 Onone stryke of his heuede, and stake it there-aftyre, Gife it to thy sqwyere, fore he es wele horsede; Arthur stabs the giant, who in his deathstruggle breaks three of Arthur’s ribs. His knights find him lying exhausted. They examine him and find no wound. Sir Bederer speaks facetiously of this saint whom Arthur had sought. If all saints are like him no saint would he be. Arthur bids him stab the monster to the heart, to make sure of him, for only once before had he met with such a terrible foe. He bids them cut off his head. Digitized by ^.ooQle 3 $ ARTHUR SENDS FOR THE GIANl’s CLUB AND KIRTLE. and bear it first to Sir Hoei* [leaf 66] then to Barflete, and set it on the barbican. His sword and shield and the giant’s club are to be fetched from the hill. They may take what treasure they will; all Arthur desires is the kirtle and the dub. The affair was kept a secret till break of day. Then the people kneel before Arthur, and thank and praise him for slaying the giant. f Arthur ascribes all to God. He bids his followers distribute Bere it to sir Howelle, that es in harde bandez, 1180 And byd hyme herte hym wele, bis enmy es destriiede! Syne bere it to Bareflete, and brace it in yryne, And sett it on tbe barbycane, biemes to schewe. My brande and my brode scbelde apone the bent lyggez, On the creeste of the cragge, thare fyrste we encontrede, And the clubb taar-by, alle of clene irene, That many Cristene has kyllyde in Ccmstantyne landez; fferke to tbe farlande, and fetcbe me that wapene, 1188 And late founde tills oure flete, in flode thare it lengez. If tbow wylle any tresowr, take wbate tbe lykez; Haue I thekyrtylle and £Ae clubb, I coueitenogbte elks!” Now the y caire to the cragge, tfhse comlycbe knygbtez, And brogbte byme the brade scbelde, and bis brygbte wapene, H93 The clubb and the cotte aHs, Syr Kayows bym seluene, And kayres with cowquerowr, the kyngez to schewe; That in couerte the kynge belde closse to hym seluene, Whilles clene day fro the clowde clymbyd on lofte. Be that to courte was comene clamour fulle huge, And be-fore the comlyche kynge they knelyd alle at ones,— “ Welcome, oure liege lorde, to lang has tbow duellyde ! Gouemowr vndyr Gode, graytheste and noble, To wbame grace es graunted, and gyffene at bis wille ! Now tby comly come has comforthede vs alle ! Tbow has in tby realtee reuengyde thy pople! 1204 Tburgbe helpe of tby hande, tbyne enmyse are struyede, That has tby renkes ouer-ronne, and refte theme theire child yre! Wbas neuer rewme owte of araye so redyly releuede! ’ Thane the conquerowr cristenly carpez to bis pople, Tbankes Gode,” quod be, “ of this grace, and no gome elles, 1209 ffor it was neuer manns dede, hot mygbte of Hym selfene, Or myracle of bys modyre, that mylde es tille alle! ” He somond than the scbippemene scbarpely ^er-aftyre, Digitized by ^.ooQle THE EMPEROR RAVAGES FRANCE. To schake fur the with the schyre mene to schifte the gudez; “ Alle ^e.myche tresowr that traytowr had wonnene, To comouws of the contre, clergye and other, Luke it be done and delte to my dere pople, 1216 That none pleyne of theire parte, o peyne of your lyfez.” He comande hys cosyne, 'with knyghtlyche wordez, To make a kyrke on the cragg, ther the corse lengez, And a couent there-in, Criste for to serfe, 1220 In mynde of that martyre, that in the monte rystez. Q wen Sir Arthur the kynge had kylled the gyauwt, Than blythely fro Bareflete he buskes one //temome, 1 With his batelle one brede, by £Aa blythe stremes; 1224 To-warde Castelle Blanke he chesez hym the waye, Thurghe a faire champayne, vndyr schalke hyllis ; The kyng fraystez a furth ouer the fresche strandez, £fou?idez with his faire folke ouer as hym lykez: 1228 ffurthe stepes that steryne, and strekez his tentis One a strenghe by a streme, in thas straytt landez. Onone aftyre myddaye, in the mene while, Thaie comez two messangers of tha fere marchez, 1232 ffra the marschalleof Fraunce, andmenskfully hym gretes, Be-soghte hyme of sucowr, and saide hyme thiae wordez,— “ Sir, thi marschalle, thi mynistre, thy mercy be-sekez, Of thy mekille magestee, fore mendement of thi pople, Of Mise marchez-mene, that thus are myskaryede, And thus merrede amange, maugree theire eghne j I witter the the emperow es entirde in-to Fraunce, With ostes of enmyse, orrible and huge; 1240 Brynnez in Burgoyne thy burghes so ryche, And brittenes thi baronage, that bieldez ^are-in; He encrochez kenely by craftez of armez, Cou?itrese and castelles that to thy corou/i langez; 1244 Confoundez thy comouws, clergy and other ; Bot thow comfurth theme, air kynge, couer salle they the giant's treasure among the clergy and people. A church and convent are to be built on the cliff. When the giant is slain, Arthur moves from. Barflete to Castle Blanc. [leaf 66, back} Then come two messengers from the Marshal of France, who acquaint Arthur with the mischief which the Emperor Lucius is . working in France, seizing castles, confounding the commons. He fellez forestez fele, forrayse thi landez, felling forests, Digitized by Google 38 ARTHUR BIDS LUCIUS QUIT THE LAND. taking goods, til killing dukes and douze-peers. Therefore they desire Arthur’s help. He sends some of his knights to the emperor. to bid him depart out of his kingdom, or meet him in battle. [leaf 67] The knights go on their errand glittering in gold upon great steeds. ffrysthez no frauncliez, hot fraisez the pople; 12 Thus he fellez thi folke, and fatfgez theire gudez ! ffremedly the Tranche tunge fey es be-lefede. He drawes in-to donee Fraurcce, as Duche-men tellez, Dresside wit^ his dragouzzs, dredfulle to schewe ; 121 Alle to dede they dyghte with dynttys of swerddez, Dukez and dusperes, that dreches thare-ine; ffor-thy the lordez of the lande, ladys and other, Prayes the for Petyr luffe, the apostylle of Rome, Sen thow arte presant in place, that tho w wille profy make To that perilous prynce, be processe of tyme. 12i He ayers by $one hilles, 3 one heghe holtez vndyr, Hufes thare with hale strenghe of haythene kyngez; Ilelpe nowe for His lufe, that heghe in heuene sittez, And talke tristly to theme, that thus vs destroyes ! ” The kynge biddis air Boice, “ buske the be-lyfe ! Take with the air Berille, and Bed were the ryche, 12 1 Sir Gawayne and air Gryme, these galyarde knyghte* And graythe 3 owe to 3 one grene wode, and gose on ther nedes; Saise to syr Luciwe, to vn-lordly he wyrkez, Thus letherly agaynes law to lede my pople; 12< I lette hyme or oghte lange, 3 if me the lyffe happene, Or many lyghte salle lawe, that hyme ouere lande folow< Comande hym kenely wyth crewelle wordez, Cay re owte of my kyngryke with his kydd knyghtez In caase that he wille noghte, that cursede wreche, Come for his curtaisie, and couzztere me ones! 12' Thane salle we rekkene fulle rathe, whatt ryghte that claymes, Thus to ryot this rewme and rauwsone the pople ! Thare salle it derely be delte with dynttez of handez The Dryghttene at Domesdaye dele as hyme lykes! ” FTow thei graythe theme to goo, theis galyarde knyghtti Alle gleterande in golde, appone grete stedes, 12 To-warde the grene wode, Mat with growndene wapyi Digitized by Google SIR GAWAYN DELIVERS ARTHUR’S MESSAGE. 39 To grete wele the grett lorde, that wolde be grefede sone. This© hende houez on a hille by the holte eynes, Be-helde the howsynge fulle hye of hathene kynges— They herde in theire herbergage hundrethez fulle many, Homez of olyfantez fulle helych blawene— Palaisez proudliche pyghte, that palyd ware ryche, Of palle and of pwrpure, wyth precyous stones; 1288 Pensels and pomelle of ryche prynce armez, Pighte in the playne mede, the pople to schewe. And thane the Romayns so ryche had arayede their tentez, On rawe by the ryuere, vndyr the round hillez, 1292 The emperour for honour ewyne in the myddes, Wyth egles al oner ennelled so fair©: And saw hyme and the sowdane, and senatowrs many, Seke to-warde a sale.wzt7i sextene kyngez, 1296 Syland softely in, swettly by theme selfene, To sowpe withe that soueraygne, ffulle selcouthe metez. No we they wende ouer the watyre, £Aise wyrchipfulle knyghttez, Thurghe the wode to the wone, there the wyese rystez; Reght as they hade weschene, and went to the table, Sir Wawayne the worthethy vn-wynly he spekes,— “ The myghte and the maiestee, that menskes vs alle, That was merked and made thurghe the myghte of Hym seluene, 1304 Gyfife jow sytte in jo ur sette, Sowdane and other y That here are semblede in sale, vn-sawghte mott $e worth© ! And the fals heretyke, that emperowr hym callez, That ocupyes in erroure the empyre of Rome, 1308 Sir Arthure herytage, that honourable kynge, That alle his auncestres aughte bot Ytere hyme one, That ilke cursynge that Cayme kaghte for his brothyre, Cleffe one the , cukewalde, with croune ther thow lengez, ffor the vnlordlyeste lede that I on lukede euer ! 1313 My lorde meruaiHes hym mekylle, mane, be my trouthe. They see the luxurious camp of the heathen kings. and the rich tents of the Romans. The Roman emperor and the sultan are going to banquet together, ' The knights present themselves. Sir Gawaine delivers the message, and upbraids with haughty words the Roman emperor; Digitized by ^.ooQle 40 THE EMPEROR’S ANSWER. bids him depart, or do battle with [leaf 67, back] the king. Then he asks for an answer. The emperor replies, f threatening the knights for their audacity. I He will stay in Arthur’s land as long as he pleases, f and destroy his cities and castles. r Whereupon Sir Gawaine desires himself to fight with him, i bnt Sir Gayous, unde to tlie Roman emperor, answers and charges the British knights with being braggarts. Why thow morthires his mene, that no mysse serues, Comouws of the courctre, clergye and other, 1316 That are noghte coupable Mer-in, ne knawes noght in armez. ffor-thi the comelyche kynge, cnrtays and noble, Comandez the kenely to kaire of his landes, Ore elles for thy knyghthede encontre hyme ones ; 1320 Sen thow eouettes the coroune, latte it be declarede ! I hafe dyschargide me here, chalange whoo lykez, Be-fore alle thy cheualrye, cheftaynes and other. Schape vs an ansuere, and schunte thow no lengere, That we may schifte at the schorte, and schewe to my lorde.” 1325 The emperour ansuerde wytli austeryne wordez, “ 3e are with myne enmy, sir Arthurs hyme seluene! It es none lionowr to me to owttray liys knyghttez, TVzoghe 3 e bee irows mene, that ayres one his nedez; Bot say to thy soueraygne, I send liyme thes wordez, He ware it for reuerence of my ryche table, Thou sulde repent fulle rathe of thi ruyde wordez ! 1332 Siehe a rebawde as thowe rebuke any lordez, Wyth theire retenuz arrayede, fulle realle and noble ! Here wille I suggowrne, whilles me lefe thynkes, And sythene seke in by Sayne with solace ther -aftere ; Ensegge all tha cetese be the salte strandez, 1337 And seyne ryde in by Bone, that rynnez so faire, And of alle his ryche castelles rusche doune the wallez ; I salle noghte lefe in Paresche, by processe of tyme. His parte of a pechelyne, proue whene hyme lykes ! ” “ How, certez,” sais sir Wawayne, “ myche wondyre haue I, 1342 That syche an alfyne as thow dare speke syche wordez! I had leuer thene alle Eraunce, that heuede es of rewmes, ffyghte with the faythefully one felde be oure one.” Thane answers sir Gayo us fulle gobbede wordes,— Was erne to the emperowr, and erle hyme selfene,— “ Euere ware thes Bretouws braggers of olde ! 1348 Digitized by GAWAYN SMITES OFF THE HEAD OF GAYOUS. 41 Loo ! how lie brawles hyme for hys bryghte wedes, As he myghte bryttyne vs alle witA his brande ryche! $itt he berkes myche boste, ^one boy there he standes 1 ” Thane greuyde air Gawayneat liis grett wordes, 1352 Graythes to-warde the gome with grucchande herte; With hys stelyne brande he strykes of hys heuede, And sterttes owtte to hys stede, and 'with his stale wendes I Thurghe the wacches the y wente, thes wirchipfulle knyghtez, 1356 And fyndez in theire fare-waye wondyrlyche many; Ouer the watyre thej wente by wyghtnesse of horses, And tuke wynde as the y walde by the wodde herames. Thane folous frekly one fote frekkes ynewe, 1360 And of the Romayns arrayed appone ryche stedes,* Chasede thurghe a champayne oure cheualrowe knyghtez, Tille a cheefe forest, one schalke whitte horses. Bot a freke alle in fyne golde, and fretted in salle, 1364 Come forfAermaste on a fresone, in flawmande wedes; A faire floreschte spere in fewtyre he castes, And folowes faste one owre folke, and freschelye ascryez, Thane air Gawayne the gude appone a grave stede, He gryppes hym a grete spere, and graythelyhyme hittez; Thurghe thejrattez in-to the gorre he gyrdes hyme ewyne, •That the groundene stele glydez to his herte ! 1371 The gome and the grette horse at the grounde lyggez, ffulle gryselyche gronande, for grefe of his woundez. Thane presez a preker ine, fulle proudely arayede, That beres alle of powrpowr, palyde with syluer : Byggly on a broune stede he prefers fulle large. 1376 He was a paynyme of Perse £Aat ^Aus hyme persuede. Sir Boys vn-abaiste alle he buskes hyme a-gaynes, With a busto?/s lauwce he berez hyme thurghe, Thai the breme and the brade schelde appone the bente lyggez! 1380 And he bryngez furthe the blade, and bownez to his felowez. On this Sir Gawuine ruslies at him and strikes off his head. Then the British knights fly with all speed. The Romans give chase. Tleaf 68] The foremost of tl»e pursuers is slain by Sir Gawaine. Another knight, a paynim of Persia, is thrust through by Sir Bois. Digitized by ^.ooQle 42 GAWAYNS TURSUERS RETURN. Sir Feltemour seeks to avenge Sir Gayous, but Sir Gawaine cleaves him i asunder. Then a rich man of Rome suggests a retreat. The rich Romans return. but five thousand horsemen still pursue the knights, and fall upon an ambush of Britons, who break out suddenly on them, with shouts of “ Arthur.” [leaf 68, back] / The Romans are defeated and driven back, Thane sir Feltemo wr of myghte, a man mekylle praysed Was mouede one his manere, and manacede fulle fast( He graythes to sir Gawayne graythely to wyrche, 138 ffor grefe of sir Gayows, that es one grounde leuede. Thane sir Gawayne was glade ; agayne hyme he ryde 2 Wyth Galuth his gude swerde graythely hyme hyttez The knyghte one the cowrsere he cleuede insondyre, 138 Clenlyche fro the croune his corse he dyuysyde, ^ And thus he killez the knyghte with his kydd wapern Than a ryche mane of Eome relyede to his byems,- “ It salle repent ys fulle sore and we ryde forthire ! 3one are holde bosturs, that syche bale wyrkez; 139 It be-felle hym fnlle foule, that thame so fyrste namede. Thane the riche Eomayns reto?mies tf/mire brydilles To thaire tentis in tene, telles theire lordez How sir Marschalle de Mowne es on the monte lefede ffore-justyde at that jowrnee, for his grett japez. Bot thare chasez one oure mene cheuallrows knyghtez, ffyfe thosande folke appone faire stedes, 140 ifaste to a foreste ouer a felle watyr, That fillez fro the falow see fyfty myle large. Thare ware Bretons enbuschide, and banarettez noble, Of the cheualrye cheefe of the kyngez chambyre, 140 Seese theme chase oure mene, and changene the ire horse; And choppe doune cheftaynes, that they moste chargyde Thane the enbuschement of Bretons brake owteatonef Brothely at banere, and Bedwyne knyghtez, 140< Arrestede of the Eomayns, that by the fyrthe rydez, Alle the realeste renkes that to Eome lengez; Thay iche on the enmyse and egerly strykkys, Erles of Inglande, and “ Arthure! ” ascryes, 141! Thrughebrenesand bryghte scheldez, brestez they thyrle Bretons of the boldeste with theire bryghte swerdez. Thare was Eomayns ouer-redyne, and ruydly wondyde Arrestede as rebawdez, with rjotous knyghttez ! 1411 The Eomaynes owte of araye remouede at ones, And rydes awaye in a rowtte, for reddoure it semys ! THE BRITONS FORCED TO FLEE. 43 To the senator* Petyr a sandes-mane es commyne, And saide, “ sir, sekyrly, 30 ur seggez are supprysside !” Than tene thowsande mene he semblede at ones, And sett sodanly one oure seggez, by the salte strandez; Than ware Bretons abaiste, and greuede a lyttille, Bot 3 it the banerettez bolde, and bachellers noble, 1424 Brekes that battailles 1 with brestez of stedes; Sir Boice and his bolde mene myche bale wyrkes ! The Romaynes redyes thane, arrayez thame better, And al to-ruscheez oure mene withe theire ryste horsez, Arestede of the richeste of the Rounde Table, Ouer-rydez oure rerewarde, and grette rewthe wyrkes f Thane the Bretons on the bente habyddez no lengere, Bot fleede to the foreste, and the feelde leuede; 1432 Sir Berylle es borne downe and sir Boice takene, The beste of oure bolde mene vnblythely wondyde; Bot ptt oure stale one a strenghe stotais a lyttille, Alle to-stonayede with the stokes 2 of the steryneknyghtez; Made sorowe fore theire soueraygne, that so fh are was nomene, * J Be-soughte Gode of socure, sende whene hym lykyde ! Than commez sir Idrus, armede vp at alle ryghttez, Wyth fyue hundrethe mene appone faire stedes, 1440 ffraynez fasto at oure folke freschely ^Aare-aftyre, 3 if ther frendez ware ferre, that one the felde fouwdide. Thane sais sir Gawayne, “ so me God helpe! We hafe bene chased to daye, and chullede as hares, Rebuyked 'with Romaynes appone fAeire ryche stedez, And we lurkede vndyr lee as lowrande wreches ! 1446 I luke neuer one my lorde the dayes of my lyfe, And we so lytherly hyme helpe, ^Aattyme so welelykede!” Thane the Bretons brothely brochez theire stedez, And boldly in batelle appone the bent rydes; 1450 Alle the ferse mene be-fore frekly ascryes, fferkand in the foreste, to freschene thame selfene. The Romaynes thane redyly arrayes theme bettyre, 1 MS. baitailles. 2 ? strokes. ?> but the Senator Peter sends ten thousand men. The Britons are repulsed, and fly to the forest. Sir Beryll is borne down and Sir Boice taken, but again they make a little stand. grieving for the loss of their leader, and pray for succour. Sir Idrus comes to their aid with five hundred men. Sir Gawalne laments the check which Arthur’s men had received. The British return to the fray. The Romans prepare themselves against them. Digitized by ^.ooQle 44 GAWAYN FIGHTS VALIANTLY. 7 A fierce battle ensues. [leaf 69] » Sir Gawaine does mighty deeds of valour. The Senator Peter comes against him, but in spite of him Sir Gawaine rescues Sir Boice. Rejoiced at this the British press on more boldly. One rawe on a rowm felde, reghttez theire W'apyns, By the ryche reuare, and rewles the pople; And witfi reddowr sir Boice es in areste haldene. 1456 Now thei semblede vnsaughte by the salte strandez; Saddly tkeis sekere menu settys theiie dynttez, With lufly launcez one lofte they luyschene to-gedyres, In Lorayne so lordlye on leppande stedes. 1460 Thare ware gomes thurghe-girde with grim dyne wapynes, Grisely gayspande with grucchande lotes ! Grete lordes of Greke greffede so hye ; Swyftly with swerdes, they swappene there-aftyre, 1464 Swappez doune ffulle sweperlye swelltande knyglitez, 1 That alle swellttez one swarthe, that they ouer-swyngene, So many sweys in swoghe swounande att ones ! Syr Gaweayne the gracyous fulle graythelye he wyrkkes, The gretteste he gretez wytk gryeslye wondes ; Wyth Galuth he gyrdez doune fulle galyarde knyghtez, ffore greefe of the grett lorde so grymlye he strykez ! He rydez furthe ryallye and redely there-aftyre, 1472 Thare this realle renke was in areste haldene; He ryfez the rannke stele, he ryghttez the ire brenez, And refte theme the ryche mane,andradeto his strenghes. The senatowr Peter thane persewede hyme aftyre, 1476 Thurghe/^epresseof the pople, wyth his pryce knyghttes; Appertly fore the prysonere proues his strenghes, Wyth prekers the proudeste that to the presse lengez; Wrothelyonethewrange handeszr Gawayne he strykkes, Wyth a wapene of were vnwywnly hyme hittez ; 1481 The breny one the bakhalfe he brystez in sondyre! Eot 3 it he broghte forthe sir Boyce, for alle theiie bale biemez! Thane the Bretones boldely braggene //mire tromppez, And fore blysse of sir Boyce was broghte owtte of bandez, Boldely in batelle they here doune knyghtes; 1486 With brandes of broune stele the y brettened maylez; Th ay stekede stedys in stoure with stelene wapynes, 1 MS. knynghtez. Digitized by Google . IDRUS TAKES SENATOR PETER PRISONER. 45 And alle stewede wyth strenghe, that stode theme agaynes! Sir Idrus fitz Ewayne thene “Arthurs ! ” ascryeez, Assemblez one the senatowr wyth sextene knyghttez, Of the sekereste mens that to oure syde lengede. 1492 Sodanly in a soppe they sett in att ones, ffoynes faste att the fore breste with flawmande swerdez, And feghttes faste att the fronte freschely tfAare-aftyre; ffelles fele on the felde appone the ferrere syde, 1496 ffey on the faire felde by the, fresche strandez. Bot sir Idrus fytz Ewayne anters hyme seluene, And enters in anly, and egyrly strykez, Sekez to the senatowr and sesez his brydille, 1500 Vnsaughtely he saide hyme these sittande wordez,— “ 3elde the , sir, $apely, ^ife thon thi lyfe ^emez, ffore gyftez that thow gy ffe may, thon $eme now the selfene; ffore dredlez dreche thow, or droppe any wylez, 1504 Thow salle dy this daye thorowe dyntt of my handez!” “I ascente,” quod the senatowr, “some Criste helpe ! So that I be safe broghte be-fore the kynge seluene; Raunsone me resonabillye, as I may ouer-reche, 1508 Aftyre my renttez in Rome may redyly forthire. ,, Thane answers sir Idrus with austeryne wordez, “ Thow salle hafe condycyone, as the kynge lykes, Whene thow comes to the kyth there the eourte haldez; In caase his concelle bee to kepe the no langere, 1513 To be killydeat his commandment his knyghttez be-fore.” They ledde hyme furthe in the rowte, and lached ofe his wedes, Lefte hym wyth Lyonelle and Lowelle hys brothire. O-lawe in the launde theme, by the lythe strandez, Sir Luciwe lygge-mene 1 loste are fore euer! The senatowr Peter es prysoner takyne! 1519 Of Perce and of Porte Iaffe fulle many price knyghtez, And myche pople wyth alle perischede theme selfene ! ffor presse of the passage, they plungede 2 at onez ! Thare myghte mene see Romaynez rewfully wondyde, 1 Or legge-men*. 2 MS. repeats they plungede. Sir Idrus, with sixteen knights, attacks the senator. and takes him prisoner. The senator desires to be brought to the king. Sir Idrus answers him roughly. Peaf 69, back] He gives the senator into the charge of Sir Lionel and Sir Lowell. Many of the Romans are slain. Digitized by ^.ooQle 46 A KNIGHT BRINGS THE KING THE NEWS OF THE FIGHT. The knights ride back towards the king, and send him the news of their success. They tell him that they have slain fifty thousand men, and taken prisoners the chief chancellor and the senator Peter, as well as many paynims. Arthur may demand sixty horse-loads of silver for the senator, and for the chancellor, chariots full of gold. The other prisoners may be kept until their rents are known. Ouer-redyne w ith renkes of the Round Table ! 1524 In the raike of the furthe they rightene theive brenys, Th at rane alle one reede blode redylye alle ouer ; They raughte in the rerewarde fulle ryotows knyghtez, ffor rauwsone 1 of rede golde and realle stedys ; 1528 Radiy relayes, and restez theire horsez, In rowtte to the ryche kynge they rade al at onez. A knyghte cayrez be-fore, and to the kynge telles,— “ Sir, here coramez thy messangerez with myrthez fro the mouwtez, 1532 TJislj hafe bene machede to daye wzt/imeneof Memarchez, ffore-maglede in the marras with meruailowe knyghtez ! We hafe foughtene in faithe, by 3 one fresehe strandez, With the frekkeste folke that to thi foo langez; 1536 ffyfty thosannde one felde of ferse mene of armez, Wyth-in a furlange of waye, fay ere by-lefede ! We hafe eschewede this chekke, thurghe chance of oure Lorde, Of tha cheualrows mene that chargede thy pople ! 1540 The cheefe chaunchelereof Rome, a cheftayne fulle noble, Wille aske the chartyre of pesse for charitee hym selfene; And the senatowr Petire to presoner es takyne. Of Perse and of Porte IafFe paynymmez ynewe 1544 Coramez prekande in the presse, with thy prysse knyghttez, With pouerte in thi presone theire paynez to drye. I be-seke 30W, sir, say whate 30we lykes, Whethire 3 e suffyre theme saughte, or sone delyuerde. Je may haue fore the senatowr sextie horse chargede Of siluer be Seterdaye, fulle sekyrly payede, And for the cheefe chauncelere, the cheualere noble, Charottez chokkefulle charegyde with golde; 1552 The remencmnt of the Romaynez be in areste haldene, Tille thiere renttez in Rome be rightewissly knawene. I be-seke 30W, sir, ccrtyfye 3one lordez, Jif 36 wille send thame ouer the see, or kepe thame 30 ur selfene. 1556 1 MS. raoiHsone. Digitized by ^.ooQle ARTHUR REJOICES AT THE TIDINGS* 47 Alle jo ur sekyre mens for sothe sound© are by-leuyde, Saue sir Ewayne fytz Henry es in the side wonddede.” “ Crist be thankyde,” quod the kynge, “ and hys clere modyre, That jowe comforthede and helpede be crafte of byme selfene; 1560 Skilfulle skomfyture he skiftez as hym lykez, Is none so skathlye may skape, ne skew© fro his handez; Desteny and doughtynes of dedys of armes, Alle es demyd and delte at Dryghtynez wille ! 1564 I kwne the thanke for thy come, it comforter vs alle ! Sir knyghte,” sais the conquerowr, “so me Criste helpe ! I jif the for thy thyjandez Tolouse the riche, The tolle and the tachementez, tauemez and other, 1568 The towne and the tenementez with towrez so hye, That towchez to the temporaltee, whilles my tyme lastez. Bot say to the senatowr I sende hyme thea wordez, Thare salle no siluer hym sane, bot Ewayne recouere; • I had leuer see hym synke one the salte strandez, Than the seegge ware seke, that es so sore wouwdede; I salle disseuere that sorte, so me Criste helpe ! 1575 And sett theme fulle solytarie, in sere kyngez ]andez : Salle he neuer sownde see his seynowres in Home, He sitt in the assemble, in syghte wyth his feris ; ffor it comes to no kynge that conqnero ur es holdene, To comone with his captifis fore couatys of siluer: 1580 It come neuer of knyghthede, knawe it jif hyme lyke, To carpe of coseri, whene captyfis ere takyne; It aughte to no presoners to prese no lordez, Ne come in presens of pryncez, whene partyes are mouede. Comaunde jone constable, the castelle that jemes, That he be clenlyche kepede, and in close haldene ; He salle haue maundement to-mome or myddaye be roungene, 1587 To whatmarche^ay sallemerke, wit^ mangere to lengen e. Tit ay cowuaye this captyfe with clene mene of armez, And kend hyme to the constable, alls the kynge byddez; All Arthur’s men have escaped, save Sir Ewaine, who is wounded. [leaf 70] The king rejoices* The fate of battle* he says, is in the hands of God. 1 He thanks the knight for his tidings, and gives him for reward the city of Tolouse. The senator shall not be ransomed save Sir Ewaine recovers. The others shall be divided into different countries. Arthur holds that to accept ransom becomes not a king. 1 They are to take the senator to the constable and bid him keep him safe. The knights obey* and then Digitized by Google 48 ARTHUR ORDERS THE PRISONERS TO BE TAKEN TO PARIS. return to Arthur to give him the emperor's message. Arthur greatly commends his knights for their boldness, and promises them rewards. In the morning Sir Cador and his knights are bid to take the prisoners [leaf 70, back] to Paris, and to give them into the care of the provost. f The British knights depart towards Chartres. But the emperor had dispatched a chosen Dand to intercept them. And seyne to Artliure the y ayre, and egerly hym towel; The answere of the emperoz/r, irows of dedez. 15 Thane sir Arthurs, one erthe atheliste of o there, At euene at his awene horde auantid his lordez,— “ Me aughte to honowr theme in erthe oner alle oth thyngez, That thus in myne absens awnters theme selfene ; 15! I salle theme luffe whylez I lyffe, so me our Lorde help And gyfe theme landy s fulle large, whare themebeste lyke Thay salle noghte losse, one tli is layke, 3 if me lyfe happei That thus are lamede for my lufe be this lythe strande; Bot in the clere daweyng, the dere kynge hym selfern Comaundyd sir Cadore with his dere knyghttes, Sir Cleremzzs, sir Cleremonde, with clene mene of armc Sir Clowdmz/r, sir Clegis, to cozzuaye theis lordez; 161 Sir Boyce and sir Berelle with baners displayede, Sir Bawdwyne, sir Bryane, and sir Bed were the rycl Sir Raynalde and sir Richere, Rawlaunde childyre, To ryde with the Romaynes in rowtte wyth theire fer< “ Prekez now preualye to Parys the ryche, Wyth Petir the pryssonere and his price knyghttez ; Be-teche tham the proueste, in presens of lordez, 0 payne and o perelle that pendes there-too, 16i That they be weisely wachede and in warde holdene, Wardede of warantizdz with wyrcliipfulle knyghttez; Wagge hyme wyghte mene, and woonde for no siluyr I haffe warnede that wy, be ware 3 ife hyme lykes!” N ow bownes the Bretones, als the kynge byddez, 16] Buskez theire batelles, theire baners displayez; To-wardez Chartris theychese,thescheualrozzsknyghtt€ And in the champayne lande fulle faire thay eschewed* ffor the emperozzr of myghte had ordande hym selfem Sir Ytolfe and sir Ewandyre, two honourable kyngez Erles of the Oriente, with austeryne knyghttez, Of the awntrouseste mene that to his oste lengede, 161 Sir Sextynozzr of Lyby and senatowrs many, Digitized by Google THE BRITONS FIND THE ENEMY BESIDE A WOOD. 49 The kynge of Surrye hym selfe with Sarzynes ynowe, The senatowr of Sutere wyth sowmes fulle huge, 1627 Whas assygnede to that courte be sent.of his peres, Traise to-warde Troys the tresone 1 to wyrke, To hafe be-trappede with a trayne oure t?*auelande knyghttez, That hade persayfede that Peter at Parys sulde lenge, In presonwe with the prouoste, his paynez to drye. 1632 ffor-thi they buskede theme bownne with baners displayede, In the buskayle of his waye, on blonkkes fulle hugge; Planttez theme in the pathe with powere arrayede, To pyke vp the presoners fro oure pryse knyghttez. S yr Cadore of Cornewalle comaundez his peris, 1637 Sir Clegis, sir Cleremwe, sir Cleremownnde the noble, “ Here es the close of Clyme with clewes so hye ; Lokez the con tree be clere, the comers are large ; 1640 Discoueres now sekerly skrogges and other , That no skathelle in the skroggez skorne vs here-aftyre; Loke 3 e skyfte it so that vs no skathe lympe, ffor na skomfitowre in skoulkery is skomfite euer.” 1644 N ow they hye to the holte, thes harageous knyghttez, To herkene of the hye mene to helpene theis lordez; ffyndez theme helmede hole and horsesyde on stedys, Houande one the hye waye by the holte hemmes. 1648 With knyghttly contenawnce Sir Clegis hym selfene Kryes to the companye, and carpes thees wordez,— “ Es there any kyde knyghte, kaysere or other, Wille kyth for his kynge lufe craftes of armes 1652 We are comene fro the kyng of this lythe tyche, That knawene es for conquerow, corownde in ertlie, His ryche retenuz here alle of his Round Table, To ryde with that realle in rowtt where hyme lykes; We seke justynge of werre, yii any wille happyne, 1657 Of the jolyeste mene ajuggede be lordes; 1 MS. the trex ne the tresone. MORTE ARTHURE. 4 l l/ tf V They take up a position in the path of Arthur’s men. Sir Cad or keeps a sharp look out. and discovers the enemy, armed and mounted, waiting by the skirts of a wood. Sir £legis challenges any knight among them to the combat. Digitized by AnOOQle 50 SIR CLEGI8S CHALLENGE. [leaf 71] An earl of the Roman party upbraids Arthur and his knights. I Sir Clegis answers him, and boasts that he will punish well the Romans. He desires three courses of war witli any knights whom they will send. The king of Syria insinuates that Sir Clegis may not be of noble ancestry. Sir Clegis replies scornfully If here he any hathelle mane, erle or other, That for the emperowr lufe wille awntere hym selfene.” And ane erle thane in angere answeres hym sone,— “ Me angers at Arthure, and att his hathelle hiems, That thus in his erro ur ocupyes theis rewmes; And owtrayes the emperowr, his erthely lorde ! 1664 The araye and the ryalltez of the Eounde Table Es wyth rankowr rehersede in rewmes fulle many; Of oure renttez of Borne syche reuelle he haldys, He 1 salle 3 ife resoune fulle rathe, ^if ys reghte happens, That many salle repente that in his rowtte rydez, 1669 fFor the reklesse roy so rewlez hym selfene"! ” il A 1 ” sais sir Clegis thane, “ so me Criste helpe ! I knawe be thi carpynge a cowntere the semes! Bot be thou auditowre, or erle, or enrpermir thi selfene, Appone Arthurez by-halue I answere the sone : 1674 The renke so realle, that rewllez vs alle, The Tjotous mene and the ryche of the Eounde Table, He has araysede his accownte, and redde alle his rollez, ffor he wylle gyfe a rekenyng that rewe salle aftyre, That alle the ryche salle repente that to Eome langez, Or the rereage be requit 2 of rentez that he claymez ! We crafe of 30 ur curtaisie three coursez of werre, 1681 And claymez of knyghthode, take kepe to 30 ?/?* selfene ! Je do bott trayne vs to daye wyth trofelande wordez! Of syche trauaylande mene treclierye me thynkes ! 1684 Sende owte sadly certayne knyghttez, Or say me sekerly sothe, for-sake 3 if 30 we tykes.” T /iane sais the kynge of Surry, “Alls saue me oure Lorde! ?if thow hufe alle the daye, thon bees noghte delyuerede, Bot thow sekerly ensure with certeyne knyghtez, 1689 That thi cote and thi breste be knawene with lordez, Of armes of ancestrye, entyrde with londez.” “ Sir kyng,” sais sir Clegys, “fulle knyghttly thow askez: I trowe it be for cowardys thow carpes thes wordez : 1 MS. Ne. 2 Looks like requiter in MS. / Digitized by Google SIR CLEGIS INFORMS SIR CADOR OF THE ENEMY. 51 Myne armez are of ancestry© enueryde with lordez, And has in banere bene borne sene sir Brut tyme; At the cite of Troye that tymme was ensegede, 1696 Ofte seene in asawtte with certayne knyghttez, Afro the Borgbte broghte vs and alle oure bolde elders, To Bretayne the braddere, witb-in chippe-burdez.” “ Sir,” sais sir Sextenowr, “ saye what the lykez, And we salle suflfyre the, als vs beste semes; 1701 Luke thi troumppez be trussede, and trofulle no lengere, flfor tf/ioghe thou tarye all? the daye, the tyddesno bettyr! ffor there salle neuer Romayne, that in my rowtt rydez, Be with rebawdez rebuykyde, whills I in werlde regne ! ” Thane sir Clegis to the kynge a lyttille enclinede, Kayres to sir Cadore, and knyghtly hym tellez,— 1707 “We hafe foundene in $one firthe, floreschede with leues, The flo ur of the faireste folke that to thi foo langez, ffifty thosandez of folke of ferse mene of armez, That faire are fewteride on frounte vndyr jone fre bowes; They are enbuschede one blonkkes, with baners displayed©, 1712 In jone bechene wode appone the waye sydes. Thay hafe the furthe for-sette alle of the faire watyre, That fayfully of force feghte vs byhowys ; flfor thus vs schappes to daye, schortly to telle, 1716 Whedyre we schone or schewe, schyft as the lykes.” “ Nay,” quod Cador, “ so me Criste helpe ! It ware schame that we scholde schone for so lytylle! Sir Lancelott salle neuer laughe, that with the kyng lengez, 1720 That I sulde lette my waye for lede appone erthe; I salle be dede and vndone ar I here dreche, flfor drede of any doggesone in 3 one dyme schawes ! ” S yr Cador thane knyghtly comforthes his pople, 1724 And with corage kene he karpes the s wordes,— “ Thynk one the valyaunt prynce ^at vesettez vs euer, With landez and lordcheppez, whare vs beste lykes; That has vs ducheres delte, and dubbyde vs knyghttez, that his ancestors were at the siege of Troy. 't' ■ ■ ’ Sir Sextenour declares that the Romans are ready for the fray. Sir Clegis tells Sir Caaor that a vast number of the enemy are drawn up in tho wood. [leaf 71, back] and suggests a retreat. Sir Cador scorns' to retreat. Never shall Sir Lancelot laugh at him. 1 He will die before he turn back for any dog’s son of them all. Sir Cador exhorts his men, and tells them of the good deeds of Arthur. Digitized by ^.ooQle 52 SIR CADOR ENCOURAGE3 HIS MEN. He dubs* some of them knights. To certain of them lie gives the prisoner in charge. If he is defeated, they are to convey him to some castle, or to Arthur. The British prepare for the fight. [leaf 72] The fight begins. Gifene vs gersoms and golde, and gardwynes many, Grewlioiwdez and grett horse, and alkyne gamnes, That gaynez tille any gome, that vndyre God leuez ; Thynke one riche renoune of the Eounde Table, 1732 And late it neuer be refte vs fore Eomayne in erthe; ffeyne 30W noghte feyntly, ne frythes no wapyns, Bot luke $e fyghte faythefully, frekes $our selfene; I walde be wellyde alle qwyke, and quarterde in sondre, Bot I wyrke my dede, whils I in wrethe lenge.” 1737 fTlhan this dough tty duke dubbyd his knyghttez, -*■ Ioneke and Askanere, Aladuke and other, That ayerez were of Esexe, and alle tha.se este marchez; Howelle and Hardelfe, happy in armez, 1741 Sir Herylle and sir Herygalle, thi se harageouse knyghttez. Than the souerayne assignede certayne lordez, Sir Wawayne, sir Yryelle, sir Bedwere the ryche, 1744 Eaynallde and Eicheere, and Eowlandez childyre,— ‘‘ Takez kepe one this prynce with 30 ure price knyghtez, And 3 ife we in the sto nr withstondene the better, Standez here in this stede, andstirrezno forthire ; 1748 And 3 if the chaunce falle that we bee ouer-charggede, Eschewes to some castelle, and chewyse 30 ur selfene ; Or ryde to the riche kynge 3if 30W roo happyne, 1751 And bidde hym come redily to rescewe hys biernez.” And than the Bretons brothely enbrassez theue scheldez, Braydez one bacenetez, and buskes theire launcez. Thus he fittez his folke, and to the felde rydez, ffif hundreth one a frounte fewtrede at onez ! 1756 With trompes th&y trine, and trappede stedes, With cornettes and clarions, and clergialle notes ; Schokkes in with a schakke, and schontez no langere, There schawes ware scheene vndyr the schire eynez. And thane the Eomaynez rowtte remowes a lyttille, Eaykes with a rerewarde thus realle knyghttez; 1762 So raply thay ryde thare, that alle the rowte ryngez, Of ryues and rannke stele, and ryche golde maylez. Digitized by Google THE KING OF LEBE SLAYS SIR BERILL. 53 Thane schotte owtte of the schawe schiltrounis many, With seharpe wapyrcns of were schotande at ones : The kynge of Lebe be-fore the wawarde he ledez, And alle his lele lige mene o laundona ascriez. 1768 Thane this cruelle kynge castis in fewtire, Kaghte hym a couerde horse, and his course haldez, Beris to sir Berille, and bratkely hym hittes, Throwghe golet and gorge re he hurtez hym ewyne ! The gome and the grette horse at the grounde liggez, And gretez graythely to Gode, and gyffes hym the saule ! Thus e3 Berelle the bolde broghte owtte of lyue, And byddez aftyre beryelle, tho,t hym beste lykez. 1776 And thane sir Cador of Cornewayle es carefulle in herte, Be-cause of bis kynyse-mane, that thus es myscaryede; Ymbeclappes the cors, and kyssez hyme ofte, Gerte kepe hym coue?*te with his clere knyghttez. 1780 Thane laugh es the Lebe kynge, and alleon lowdemeles,— “ Jone lorde es lyghttede ! me lykes the bettyre ! He salle noghte dere vs to daye, the deuvlle haue [his] bones ! ” “Jone kynge/* said Cador, “karpes fulle large, 1784 Be-cause he killyd this kene; Criste hafe thi saule ! He salle hafe come bote, so me Criste helpe! Or I kaire of this coste, we salle encontre ones ! So may the wynde weile turwne, I quytte hym or ewyne, Sothely hym selfene, or summ of his ferez ! ” 1789 Thane sir Cador the kene knyghttly he wyrkez, Cryez, “ A ! Comewale,’* and castez in fewtere, Girdez streke thourghe the stowr on a stede ryche! Many steryne mane he steride by strenghe of hyme one ! Whene his spere was sprongene, he spede hym fulle ^erue, Swappede owtte with a swerde, that swykede hym neucr, Wroghte wayes fulle wyde, and wounded knyghttez ; Wyrkez his ine wayfare fulle werkand sydez, 1797 And hewes of the hardieste halsez in sondyre, That alle blendcz with blode thare his blanke rynnez! So many biemez the bolde broughte owt of lyfe, 1800 The king of Lebe leads on the enemy. He attacks Sir Berill and slays him. Sir Cador is overwhelmed with grief for his loss. The king of Lebe ridicules him. Sir Cador vows vengeance. 1 He performs great deeds of valour. 'D When his lance is broken he fights with his sword. Digitized by <^.ooQ|e 54 THE KING OF LEBE THREATENS SIR CADOR. Then the king of Lebe ironically praises his deeds. [leaf 72, back] The new-made knights, with sound of trumpets and spears in rest, rush to the fray. Tittez tirauntez doune, and temez 1 theire saddles, And twrnezowte of the toile, whene hym tymethynkkez ! Thane the Lebe kynge criez fulle lowde One sir Cador the kene, with cruelle wordez, 1804 “ Thowe hase wyrchipe wonne, and wondyde knyghttez ! Thowe wenes fore thi wightenez the werlde es thy nowene ! I salle wayte at thyne hon?zde, wy, be my trowthe! I haue warnede the wele, be ware $if the lykez ! ” 1808 With cornuse and clariones tf/teis newe made knyghttez Lythes vn-to the crye, and castez in fewtire; fferkes in one a ffrounte one fferaunte stedez, ffellede at the fyrste come fyfty att ones ! 1812 Sehotte thorowe the schiltrouns, and scheuerede lauiicez, Laid doune in the lumppe lordly biemez! And thus nobilly oure newe mene notez i^Zteire strenghez. Bot new notte es onone that noyes me sore. 1816 The kynge of Lebe has laughte a stede that hym lykede, And comes in lordely in lyonez of siluere, Ymbelappez the lumpe, and lattes in sondre; Many lede with his launce the liffe has herefede ! 1820 Thus he chaces the childire of the kyngez chambire, And killez in the champanyse cheualrous knyghttez ! With a chasynge spere he choppes doune many ! 1823 Thare was sir Alyduke slayne, and Achinowwondyde, Sir Origge and sir Ermyngalle hewene al to pecez ! And ther was Lewlyne laughte, and Lewlyns brothire, With lordez of Lebe, and lede to Meire strenghez : No hade sir Clegis comene, and Clemente the noble, Oure newe mene hade gone to noghto, and many ma other . /Jlhane sir Cador the kene castez in fewtire 1830 A cruelle launce and a kene, and to the kynge rydez, Hittez hym heghe one the helme with his harde wapene, That alle the hotte blode of hym to his hande rynnez ! a!fa?o7h'r klng The kethcne harageous kynge appone the hetlie lyggez, 1 MS. repeats and temez. The king of Lebe comes against them. He makes great havoc among the new men. Had not Sir Clegis and Sir Clement come, the new men had gone to nought. Then Sir Cador puts his lance in rest, and strikes the king of Lebe fair on the helmet. Digitized by Google SIB CADOR SLAYS THE KING OF LEBE* S5 And of his hertly hiirte helyde he neuer ! Thane sir Cador the kene cryez fulle lowde,— 1836 “ Thow has come botte, s ir kynge, Mare God gyfe the sorowe, Thow killyde my cosyne, my kare es the lesse ! Kele the nowe in the claye, and comforthe thi selfene! Thow skomede vs lang ere with thi skornefulle wordez, And nowe has thow cheuede soo; it es thyne awene skathe! Holde at thow hente has, it harmez hot lyttille, ffor hethynge es hame holde, vse it who so wills.” T he kyng of Burry Mane es sorowfulle in lierte, 1844 ffor sake of thissoueraygne, Mat Mus was supprissede; Semblede his Sarazenes, and senatoars manye : Vnsaughtyly Meysette thane apponeoure sere knyghttez; Sir Cador of Comewaile hecownterez theme sone, 1848 With his kydde companye clenlyche arrayede; In the frount of the fyrthe, as the waye forthis, ffyfty thosande of folke was fellide at ones ! Thare was at the assemble certayne knyghttez, 1852 Sore wondede sone appone sere halfes ; The sekereste Sarzanez that to Mat sorte lengede, Be-hynde the sadylles ware sette sex fotte large ; They scherde in the schiltrone scheldyde knyghttez, Schalkes they schotte thrughe schrenkande maylez, Thurghe brenys browdene brestez they thirllede, Brasers bumyste bristez in sondyre ; Blasons blode and blankes they hewene, 1860 With brandez of browne stele brankkand stedez ! The Bretons brothely brittenez so many, The bente and the brode felde alle one blode rynnys ! Be thane s ir Cayous Me kene a capitayne has wonnene, Sir Clegis clynges in, and clekes another; 1865 The capitayne of Cordewa, yndire the kynge selfene, That was keye of the kythe of alle Mat coste ryche, Ytolfe and Ewandre, Ioneke had nommene, 1868 With the erle of Affryke and other grette lordes. ground mortally wounded. Sir Cador triumphs over him. The king of _^) Syria, full of grief, assembles his Saracens for vengeance. V r Sir Cador and his I f men slay* fifty > > thousand of them at onoe. 1 Certain knights are sorely wound- [leaf 78] ed by the Saracens. The fight rages furiously. The field runs blood. Sir Clegis takes prisoner the captain of Cordova. Digitized by ^.ooQle 56 THE BRITONS PUT THE ENEMY TO FLIGHT. Sir Cador take? the king of Syria. The Romans fly into the forest. Arthur’s men slay many of them there. A few escape to a castle. mhe kynge of Surry the kene to sir Cador es jeldene, 1 The synechalle of Sotere to Segramoure hym selfene. When the cheualrye saw theire cheftanes were no?rcmene, To a cheefe foreste they chesene theire wayes, 1873 And felede theme so feynte, they falle in the greues, In the ferynne of the fyrthe, fore ferde of oure pople. Thare myght mene see the ryche ryde in the schawes, To rype vpe the Eomaynez ruydlyche wondyde, 1877 Schowttes aftyre mene, harageous knyghttez, Be hunradrethez they hewede doune be the holte eynys ! Thus oure cheualro?/6* mene chasez the pople; 1880 To a castelle they eschewede a fewe that eschappede. Thane relyez the renkez of the Eounde Table, ffor to ryotte the wode, tlier the duke restez ; Arthur’s knights seek for their companions who are slain. Sir Cador bids them carry them to the king. He goes to Paris with the prisoners, and « returns ur. Eansakes the ryndez alle, raughte vp theire feres, 1884 That in the fightynge be-fore fay ware by-leuyde. Sir Cador garte chare theym, and couere theme faire, Kariede theme to the kynge with his beste knyghttez ; And passez vn-to Paresche with presoners hym selfene, Be-toke theyme the pj'oueste, pryncez and other) 1889 Tase a sope in the toure, and taryez no langere, Bot towmes tytte to the kynge, and hymwythtunge telles. Then he tells him “ Olyr,” sais s ir Cador, “ a caas es be-fallene : 1892 of the case that 3 has befallen. We hafe cownterede to day, in 3one coste ryche With kyngez and kayseres, krouelle and noble, And knyghtes and kene men clenlych arayede! Thay hade at 3 one foreste forsette vs the wayes, 1896 At the furthe in the fyrthe, with ferse mene of armes ; Theyhavejrought Thare faughtte we in faythe, and foynede with sperys, [leaf 78, back] Divers or their beet knights are taken prisoners, One felde with thy foo-mene, and fellyd theme on lyfe. The kynge of Lebe es laide, and in the felde leuyde, And manye of his lege mene th&t yare to hym langede ! Other lordez are laughte of vncouthe ledes ; 1902 We hafe lede them at lenge, to lyf whiHes the lykez. Sir Vtore and sir Ewaynedyre, theis honourable knyghttez, i r3oldcne. Digitized by ^.ooQle ARTHUR IS GRIEVED AT THE LOSS OF HIS MEN. 57 Be a nawntere of armes Ioneke has nommene, - With erlez of the Oryentte, and austerene knyglittez, Of awncestrye the beste mene that to the oste langede ; The senatowr Barourcs es kaughte with a knyghtte, The capitayne of Comette, that crewelle es haldene, The syneschalle of Sutere vnsaughte wyth the s other , Tlie kynge of Surry hym selfene, and Sarazenes. 1911 B ot fay of ours in the felde a fourtene knyghttez, I willenoghte feynene forbere, bot fayth fully tellene; Sir Berelle es one, a banerette noble, Was killyde at the fyrste come with a kynge ryche ; Sir Alidoyke of Towelle, with his tende knyghtez, 1916 Emange the Twrkys was tynte, and in tyme fondene; Gude sir Mawrelle of Maurccez, and Mawrene his bro ther, Sir Meneduke of Mentoche, with meruailoz^ knyghttez.” T hane the worthy kynge wrythes, and wepede with hiseghne 1 , 1920 Karpes to his cosyne sir Cador theis wordez,— “ Sir Cador, tlii coiage cowfundez vs alle ! Kowardely thow castez owtte alle my beste knyghttez! To putte mene in pe?ille, it es no pryce holdene, 1924 Bot the partyes ware pwruayede, and powere arayede; When they ware stade on a strenghe, thou sulde hafe wtt/t-stondene, Bot $if thowe wolde alle my steryne stroye fore the nonys! ” “ Sir,” sai8 sir Cador, “ $e knowe wele your selfene ; 3e are kynge in this kythe, karpe whatte jow lykys ! Salle neuer vpbrayde me, that to thi burde langes, 1930 That I sulde blyne fore theire boste, thi hyddynge to wyrche; Whene any stirttez to stale, stuffe thame the bettere, Ore thei wille be stonayede, and stroyede in 3 one strayte londez. 1933 I dide my delygens to daye, I doo me one lordez, And in daungere of dede fore dyuerse knyghttez, I hafe no grace to thi gree, bot syche grett wordez; 1936 1 MS. eughne. the senator Baroung, the king of Syria, the seneschal of Suter. But of Arthur’s knights fourteen are slain. Sir Berill was killed at the beginning of the fray. Then Arthur is grieved. and speaks to his cousin Sir Cador bitter words. Sir Cador replies with dignity. He has only done his duty, but is ill repaid by such hard wqrds. Digitized by ^.ooQ^e 58 THE EMPEROR IS ANGRY AT THE DEFEAT. Then Arthur retracts. He acknowledges Cador has done his duty. He is one of the bravest of the brave, and heir apparent to the throne. [leaf 74] Then he makes a noble feast in his own tent for the knights who were engaged in the fight. But the senators of Rome tell the emperor of the defeat of his men. He has been betrayed by t hose he trusted most. Then the emperor is very wroth. He assembles a council of war. 3if I heuew my herte, my hape es no bettyre.” 3ofe sir Artbure ware angerde, be ansuers faire, “ Thow has doughttily donne, sir duke, with thi kandez, And has donne thy deuer with my dere knyghttez ; ffor-thy thow arte demyde, with dukes and erlez, 1941 ffor one of the doughtyeste that dubbede was euer! Thare es none ischewe of vs, on this erthe sprongene ; Thow arte apparant to be ayere, are one of thi childyre; Thow arte my sister sone, for-sake salle I neuer! ” 1945 T hane gerte he in his awene tente a table be sette, And tryede in with tromppez trauaillede biernez; Serfede them solempnely with selkouthe metez, 1948 Swythe semly in syghte with syluerene dischees. Whene the senatoitrs harde saye that it so liappenede, They saide to the emperowr, “thiseggez are suppryssede I Sir Arthure, thyne enmy has owterayede thi lordez, That rode for the rescowe of 3 one riche knyghttez ! 1953 Thowdosse hot tyranez thi tyme,and turmenttez tf/apople; Thow arte be-trayede of thi mene, that moste thow on traystede. That schalle turne the to tene and torfere for euer.” 1956 Than the emperowr irus was angerde at his herte, ffor oure valyant biernez siche prowesche had wonnene. With kynge and with kaysere to consayle they wende, Souerayngez of Sarazenez, and senatowrs manye; 1960 Thus he semblez fulle sone certayne lordez, And in the assemble thane he sais them theis wordez,— He tens them his “ My herte sothely es sette, assente 3 if 30 we lykes, |)urpose go 5 Saxony, and enter into Augusta, to riot and revel till the arrival of Sir Leo and the lords of Lombardy. To seke in-to Sexone, with my sekyre knyghttez, 1964 To fyghte with my foo-mene, if .fortune me happens, 3if I may fynde the freke with-in the foure haluez; Or entire in-to Awguste awnters to seke, 1967 And byde with my balde mene with-in the burghe ryche; Riste vs and reuelle, and ryotte oure selfene, Lende thave in delytte in lordechippez ynewe, To sir Leo be comene with alle his lele knyglitez, 1971 WitTl lordez of Immberdye, to lette hyme the waves.’ 1 Digitized by Google ARTHUR GOES TO SAXONY. 59 B ot owre wyese kyng es warre to wayttene his renkes, And wyesly by the woddez voydez his oste; Gerte felschene his fyrez, flawmande fulle heghe, Trussene fuile traystely, and treunt there-aftyre. 1976 Serene in-to Sessoyne, he soughte at the gayneste, And at the snrs of the son we disseuerez his knyghttez : fforsette theme the cit4 appone sere halfez, So-daynly on iche halfe, with seuene grett stales. 1980 Anely in the vale a vawewarde enbusches; Sir Valyant of Vyleris, with valyant knyghttez, Be-fore the kyngez visage made siche avowez, To venquyse by victorie the vescownte of Rome ! 1984 ffor-thi the kyrige chargez hym, what chaunce so be-falle, Cheftayne of the cheekke, 'with cheualrous knyghttez, And sythyne meles with mouthe, that he moste traistez; Demenys the medylwarde menskfully hyme selfene, ffittes his fote-mene, aHs hym faire thynkkes; 1989 On frounte in the fore breste, the flo ur of his knyghtez, His archers on aythere halfe he ordaynede taer-aftyre To schake in a sheltrone, to schotte whene ^ame lykez; He arrayed in the rerewarde fulle rialle knyghtez, With renkkes renownwd of the Rounde Table, King Arthur, getting intelligence of this, withdraws his men secretly by the woods J takes the shortest road into Saxony j 3 suddenly besets the city with seven bands. Sir Valiant makes a vow to vanquish the viscount -of Rome. The king gives him command of the vanguard j he himself directs the centre. He arranges the archers on either flank; [leaf 74, back] places renowned knights for a rearguard. Sir Raynalde, sir Richere, that rade was neuer, The riche duke of Rowne wyt[h] ryders ynewe; 1996 Sir Cayo us, sir Clegis, and clene mene of armes, The kyng castes to kepe be then, clere strandes. Sir Lott and sir Launcelotte, thise lordly knyghttez, sir Lott and sir Salle lenge on his lefte hande, wyth legyones ynewe, Jhe n ieft hand ° n To meue in the mome-while, 3 if the myste happynwc ; J^themu£of° ve Sir Cador of Comewaile, and his kene knyghtez, sir^So^mf Ms men are to keep To kope at the karfuke, to close in the r 0 there: guard over the — 7 passes. He plantez in siche placez pryncez and erlez, 2004 That no powere sulde passe be no preue wayes. B ot the emperowr onone, with honourable knyghtez And erlez, entcres-the vale, awnters to seke, And fyndez sir Arthure with hostez aravede ; 2008 And at his in-come, to ekkenc his sorowe, The emperor and his knights quickly enter the vale in search of adventures. He finds Arthur’s host drawn up in battle array, Digitized by Google CO LUCIUS PREPARES FOR THE BATTLE. ami all the positions occupied. f Then Sir Lucius I declares with wrath that there is no way else but to fight, for fly he may not. He arrays his rich Romans. The viscount is in the van. He hoists his standard, the golden dragon enamelled with eagles. They drink and make merry. Sir Lucius exhorts them to think on the great renown of Rome—how it had conquered all Christendom, [leaf 75] and all the land of the Saracens, from Jaffa to the gates of Paradise. Without doubt they will quickly reduce these rebels. Oure burljclie bolde kynge appone the bente liowes, With his bataile one brede, and baners displayed©. He hade the cetb for-sett appone sere halfes, 2012 Bothe the clewez and the clyfez with clene meneof armez! The mosse and the marrasse, the mouwttez so hye, With gret multytude of mene, to marre hym in the wayes. Whene stV Luciws sees, he sais to his lordez, 2016 “ This traytow has treunt this tresone to wyrche I He has the cete forsett appone sere halfez, A lie the clewez and the cleyffez with clene mene of armez! Here es no waye i-wys, ne no wytt elles, 2020 Bot feghte with oure foo-mene, for flee may we neuer ! Thane this ryche mane rathe arayes his byernez, Bewlede his Bomaynez, and realle knyghtez; Buscliez in the avawmewarde the vescounte of Rome, ffro Yiterbe to Venyse, theis valyante knyghtez : 2025 Dresses vp dredfully the dragone of golde, With egles alouer, enamelede of sable ; Drawene dreghely the wyne, and drynkyne thare-aftyre, Dukkez and dusseperez, dubbede knyghtez, 2029 ffor dauncesynge of Duche-mene, and dynnynge of pypez, Alle dynned fore dyne that in the dale houede. A nd thane sir Luciws on lowde said lordlyche wordez, “ Thynke one the my che renownne of 30 nr ryche fadyrs; 2033 And the riatowrs of Rome, that regnede with lordez; And the renkez ouer-rane alle that regnede in erthe, Encrochede alle Cristyndome be craftes of armes; In eueriche a viage the victorie was haldene; 2037 In sette alle the Sarazenes with-in seuene wyntter, The parte ffro the porte Iaffe to Paradyse 3 atez! Thoghe a rewme be rebeHe, we rekke it bot lyttiile ! It es resone and righte the renke be restreynede! 2041 Do uresse we thare-fore, and byde we no langere, fibre dredlesse witA-owttyne dowtte, the daye schalle be ourez ! ” Digitized by AnOOQle THE VISCOUNT OF VALENCE IS SLAIN. 61 When© th eise wordez was saide, the Walsche kynge hym selfene 2044 Whas warre of this wyderwyne, th at werrayede his knyghttez: Brothely in the vale with voyce he ascryez,— “ Viscownte of Valewnce, enuyous of dedys, The vassallage of Yiterbe to daye schalle be reuengede ! Ynuenquiste for this place voyde schalle I neuer ! ” Thane the vyscownte valiante, with a uoyse noble, Auoyeddyde the avawewarde, enuerounde his horse; He drissede in a derfe schelde, endenttyd with sable, With a dragone engowschede, dredfulle to schewe, 2053 Deuorande a dolphyne with dolefulle lates, In seyne that oure soueraygne snide be distroyede, And alle done of dawez with dynttez of swerddez ; l ffor thare es noghte bot dede thare the dragone esraissede! Thane the comlyche kynge castez in fewtyre, 2058 With a erewelle lauwce cowpez fulle euene A-bowne the spayre 2 a spanne, emange the schortte rybby s, That the splent and the spleene on the spere lengez ! The blode sprente owtte and sprede as the horse spryngez, And he spronlez fulle spakely, bot spekes he no more! And thus has sir Yalyant haldene his a-vowez, 2064 And venqwyste the viscownte, thate victor was haldene ! Thane sir Ewayne sir Eytz Yrieneffulle enkerlye rydez Onone to the emperowr his egle to towche ; Thrughe his brode bataile he buskes be-lyfe, 2068 Braydez owt his brande with a blyth chere, Beuerssede it redelye, and awaye rydys; fferkez in with the fewle in his faire handez, And ffittez in freely one frounte with his feris. 2072 How buskez sir Launcelot, and braydez fulle euene To sir Luciws the lorde, and lothelye hyme hyttez; Thurghe pawnee and platez he percede the maylez, That the prowde penselle in his pawnche lengez ! 2076 The hede haylede owtt be-hynde ane halfe fote large, 1 MS. swreddez. 2 MS. the spayre the spayerc. /, . Arthur calls upon the viscount of Valence, and threatens him with vengeance. The viscount boldly prepares for the fray. Hia device is a dragon devouring a dolphin. The king lays his lance in rest, and pierces him through the short ribs. And thus has Sir Valiant kept his vow. Sir Ewain makes a bold attempt to reach the emperor. Sir Lanoelot slay* the lord Ludus. J Digitized by ^.ooQle -62 LANCELOT SLAYS THE EMPEROR. Sir Lott rejoices that his turn is . now come. [leaf 75, back] He slays a giant. and many warriors beside. The British bowmen discharge their arrows. The Dutchmen throw darts. Many are slain by the sharp arrows. But the gianfs make a terrible chaise. ' Thurghe hawberke and banche, with the harde wapyne ! The stede and the steryne mane strykes to the grownde, Strake downe a standerde, and to his stale wendez ! “Me lykez wele,” sais sir Loth, “jone lordez are delylierede! 2081 The lott lengez nowe on me, with leue of my lorde: To day salle my name be laide, and my life aftyre, Bot some leppe fro the lyfe, that one jone lawnde houez ! ” Thane strekez the steryne, and streynys his brydylle, Strykez in-to the stowre on a stede xyche, Enjoynede with a geaunt, and jaggede hym thorowe ! Jolyly this gentille for-jnstede Si-nother, 2088 Wroghte wayes fulle wyde, werrayande knyghtez, And wondes alle wathely, that in the waye stondez ! ffyghttez with alle the ffrappe a furlange of waye, ffelled fele appone felde with his faire wapene, 2092 Yenqwiste and has the victorie of valyaunt knyghtez, And alle enverounde the vale, and voyde whene hym likede! rFlhane bowmene of Bretayne brothely ther-aftyre Bekerde with bregauwdez of ferre in tha laundez, With flonez fleterede thaj flitt fulle frescly tker frekez, ffichene with fetheris thurghe the fyne maylez : Siche flyttynge es foule th&t so the flesche derys, That flowe o ferrome in flawnkkes of stedez; 2100 Dartes the Dnche-mene daltene a^aynes, With derfe dynttez of dede, dagges thurghe. scheldez; Qwarelles qwayntly swappez thorowe knyghtez, W ith iryne so wekyrly, that wynche they neuer. 2104 So they scherenkene fore schotte of the scharppe arowes, that alle the scheltrone schonte, and schoderide at ones \ Thane riche stedes rependez, and rasches one armes; The hale howndrethe one hye appone heyghe lygges, iBott 3 itte the hathelieste on hy, haythene and other; .Alle hoursches oner hede harmes to wyrke. 2110 And alle theis geauntez be-fore, engenderide with fendez, Xoynez on sir Ienitalle, and gentille knyghtez, Digitized by AnOOQle ARTHUR CUTS DOWN THE GIANT GOLAPAS. 63 With clubbez of clene stele clenkkede in helmes, Craschede doune crestez, and craschede braynez; Kyllede cou[r]sers and couerde stedes, 2115 Choppode tburgbe cheualers one chalke-wbytte stedez. Was neuer stele ne stede mygbte stande them a^aynez, Bot stonays and strykez doune, that in the stale houys. Tille the conquerowr come with his kene knyghttez, With crewelle contenazmce he cryede fulle lowde,— “ I wende no Bretones walde bee basschede for so lyttille, And fore bare-legyde boyes, that one the bente houyd! ” H e clekys owtte Collbrande fnlle clenlyche burneschte, Graythes hyme to Golapas, that greuyde moste; Kuttes hyme euene by the knees clenly in sondyre. “Come downs,” quod the kynge, “and karpe to thy ferys! Thowe arte to hye by the halfe, I hete the in trouthe ! 1 Thow salle be handsomere in hye, with the helpe of my Lorde!” 2128 With that stelene brande he strake ofe his hede. Sterynly in that sto ure he strykes a-no ther. Thus he settez on seuene with his sekyre knyghttez: Whyllee sexty ware seruede soo, ne sessede they neuer! And thus at the joynenyge the geauntez are distroyede, And at that jowmey for-justede w?tft gentille lordez. Than the Romaynes, and the rewnkkez of the Rounde Table, Rewles theme in arrayo, rerewarde ande other, 2136 With wyghte wapynez of werre, thay wroghtene one helmes, ■Rittez with rannke stele fulle ryalle maylez ; Bot they fitt 1 theme fayre, thes frekk byemez, ffewters in freely one fferaunte stedes, 2140 ffoynes fulle felly with flyschande speris, ffretene of orfrayes feste appone scheldez. So fele fay es in fyghte appone the felde leuyde, 2143 That iche a furthe in the firthe of rede blode rynnys ! By that swyftely one swarthe the swett es by-leuede, 1 Or fut. and with their steel clubs destroy many knights on white steeds. Nothing can stand against them until Arthur comes. He despises them. and plucking out Colbrand, quickly cuts the giant Golapas in two at the knees. telling him he is too high by half. Then he strikes off his head. [leaf 76] He and his knights slay sixty giants. The Romans rally and make a fierce resistance. So many are left dead on the field, that each path in the forest runs with red blood. Digitized by Google SIR CAYOUS WOUNDED BY A COWARD. 64 Swerdez swangene in two, sweltand knyghtez Lyes wyde opyne welterande one walopande stedez; Wondes of wale mene werkande sydys, 2148 ffacez feteled vn-faire in filterede lakes, The Romans begin to retreat, and Arthur presses on them. Sir Cayous, Sir C'legis, and their men slav fiva hundred. Sir Cayous rides to a king and thrusts him through with his lance. Alle craysed for-trodyne with trappede stedez, The faireste fyg'wred folde 1 that fygurede was eu er, AHs ferre alls a furlange, a thosande at ones ! 2152 Be than the Romaynez ware rebuykyde a lyttille, With-drawes they me drerely, and dreches no lengare; Oure prynce with his powere persewes theyme aftyre, Prekez one 2 the proudeste with his price knyghttez. Sir Kayo?£$, sir Clegis, with clene mene of arrnez, 2157 Enconters theme at the clyffe with clene mene of armes; ffyghttes faste in the fyrth, frythes no wapene, ffelled at the firste come fyfe hundrethe at ones ! And when they fande theym foresett with oure fers knyghtez, 2161 ffewe mene agayne fele mot fyche theme bettyre; ffeghttez with alle the frappe, foynes with speres, And fauglite with the frekkeste that to Fraunce langez. Bot sir Kayowe the kene castis in fewtyre, Chasez one a cowrsere, and to a kynge rydys; 2166 With a launce of Lettowe he thirllez his sydez, That the lyuer and the luwggez on the launce lengez. The schafte sc[h]odyrde and schott in the schire byerne, And soughte thorowowte the schelde, and in the schalke rystez. but is sorely Bot Kayo?/5 at the in-come was kepyd vn-fayre wounded by a J 1 J J coward kmght. With a cowarde knyghte of the kythe ryche; 2172 At the turnyttge that tym the trayto ure hym hitte In thorowe the felettes, and in the flawnke aftyre, That the boustous launce the bewells attamede, Th at braste at the brawlynge, and brake in the myddys. Sir Kay owe knewe wele, be /Aat kyde wounde, 2177 [leaf 76, backj Tliat he was dede of the dynte, and done owte of lyfe. i Or felde. 2 Or o \er. Digitized by AnOOQle DEATH OP SIR CAYOUS. 65 Than he raykes in array© and one rawe rydez, One this ryalle his dede to reuenge; 2180 “ Kepe the, cowarde,” and calles hym sone, Cleues hym wyth his clere brande elenliehe in sondire ! ( “ Hadde thow wele delte thy dynt with thi handes, I hade for-geffene the my dede, be Crist now of hewyne ! ” He weyndes to the wyese kynge, and wynly hym gretes, “lam wathely woundide, w r aresche mone I neuer ! Wirke no we thi wirchipe, as the worlde askes, And brynge me to beryelle, byd I no more ! 2188 He goes to the king, tells him he is mortally wounded, and bids him greet well the queen, the ladies of the court, and his wife. Grete wele my ladye the qwene, 3 ife the werlde happyne, And alle the burliche birdes that to hir bonre lengez, And my worthily weife, that wrethide me neuer, Bid hire fore hir wyrchipe wirke for my saulle!” 2192 The kyngez confessowr come, with Criste in his handes, ffor to comforthe the knyghte, kende hym the wordes. The knyghte coueride on his knees with a kaunt herte, And caught© his Creato ure that comfurthes vs alle ! Thane remmes the riche kynge fore rewthe at his herte, Bydes in-to rowte his dede to reuenge; Presede in-to the phmpe, and with a prynce metes, That was ayere of Egipt in thos este marches; 2200 Cleues hym with Collbrande clenlyche in sondyre! He broches euene thorowe the by erne, and the saddle bristes, Then comes the king’s confessor to comfort the knight. / Then Arthur, full of grie£ rushes into the fray to avenge him. He cleaves an Egyptian prince i asunder. .'{/' i And at the bake of the blonke the bewellee entamede ! Manly in his maly[n]coly he metes a-no ther, 2204 h « «*“*■ The medille of that myghtty, that hym myche greuede; He merkes thurghe the maylez the myddes in sondyre, That the myddys of the mane on the mouwte fallez, 77ie to ther halfe of the haunche on the horse leuyde. Of that hurte, aHs I hope, heles he neuer ! 2209 He schotte thorowe the schiltrouws with his scharpe wapene, Schalkez he schrede thurghe, and schrenkede maylez ; Baneres he bare downwe, bryttenede scheldes, 2212 He speeds his way through the battle, cutting men in sunder, bearing down banners. MORTE ARTHURE. 6 Digitized by ^.ooQle 66 SIR BEDWERE IS SLAIN. mid fiercely Brothely with browne stele his brethe he thave wrekes : wreaking his 7 wrath on his foes. Wrothely he wryththis by wyghtnesse of strenghe, Woundes these whydyrewyns, werrayede knyghttes, Threppede thorowe the thykkys thryttene sythis, 2216 Thryngez throly in the thrange, and chis euene aftyre i sir Gawaine goes Thane sir Gawayne the gude, with wwrchipfull# forward and meets ^ 0 7 d x with the emperor. knyghttez, Wendez in the a-vawewarde be tha wodde heramys ; Was warre of sir Luc ius, one launde there he houys, With lordez and ligge mene, that to hyme selfe lengede. Thane the emperour enkerly askes hym sonwe, 2222 “ What wille thow, Gawayne, wyrke with thi wapyne 1 [leaf 77] I watte be thi wauerynge, thow willnez aftyre sorowe ; I salle be wrokyne on thi wrethe, fore alle thi grete wordez ? ” Luctus with his long sword wounds Sir Lionel, He laughte owtte a lange swerde, and luyschede one ifaste, And sir Lyonelle in the launde, lordely hym strykes, Hittes hym on the hede, that the helme bristis ; 2228 Hurttes his herne-pane an hannde-brede large ! Thus he layes one the lumppe, and lordlye theme seruede, inpfSfkniTts Won dide worthily wirchipfulle knyghttez ! ffighttez with Floreiit that beste es of swerdez, 2232 Tille the fomande blode tille his fyste rynnes ! Thane th e Eomayns releuyde, that are ware rebuykkyde, And alle to-rattys oure mene with theire riste horsses; • The Romans, ex- ffore they see thaive cheftayne be chauffede so sore, be tter r of Chur’s They chasse and choppedoune oure cheualrous knyghttes! Sir Bedwere was borne thurghe, and his breste thyrllede, With a burlyche brannde, brode at the hiltes; The ryalle rannke stele to his herte rynnys, 2240 And he rusches to the erthe, rewthe es the more ! Thane the conquerowr tuke kepe, and come with his strenghes To Teschewe the ryche mene of the Eounde Table, c men. Sir Bedwere is slain. Then Arthur conies to the rescue. To owttraye the emperowr, $if auntire it schewe, 2244 lEwyne to the egle, and “ 4rthure ! ” askryes. Digitized by Google ARTHUR SLAYS THE EMPEROR. 67 The emperour thane egerly at Arthure he strykez, Awkwarde on the vmbrere, and egerly hym hittez! The nakydo swerde at the nese noyes hym sare, 2248 The blode of [the] bolde kynge oner the breste rynnys, Beblede at the brode schelde and the bryghte mayles 1 Oure bolde kynge bowes the blonke be the bryghte brydylle, With his burlyche brande a buflfette hym reches, 2252 Thourghe the brene and the breste with his bryghte wapyrie, O-slante doune fro the slote he slyttes at ones! Thus endys the emperour of Arthure hondes, And alle his austeryne oste thaxe-ofe ware affrayede ! Now they ferke to the fyrthe, a fewe that are leuede,. flfor ferdnesse of oure folke, by the fresche strandez ! The floure of oure ferse mene one fferant stedez ffolowes frekly on the frekes, thate ffrayede was neuer. Thane the kyde conquerowr cryes fulle lowde,— 2261 “ Cosyne of Comewaile, take kepe to thi selfene, That no captayne be kepyde for none siluer, Or s ir Kayows dede be cnielly vengede ! n 2264 “ Nay,” sais sir Cador, “ so me Cryste helpe l Thare ne es kaysere ne kynge, that vndire Criste ryragnes, That I ne schalle kille colde dede be erafte of my handez! ” Thare myghte mene see chiftaynes, on chalke whitte stedez, Choppe doune in the chaas cheualrye noble; 2269 Romaynes the rycheste and ryalle kynges, Braste with ranke stele theire rybbys in sondyre ! Braynes fore-brustene thurghe bumeste helmes, 2272 With brandez for-brittenede one brede in the laundez. They hewede doune hay thene mene with hiltede swerdez, Be hole hundrethez on hye, by the holte eynyes ! Thare myghte no siluer thaym saue, ne socoure theire lyues, 2276 Sowdane, ne Sarazene, ne senatowr of Rome ! Thane releuis the renkes of the Rounde Table, Be the riche reuare that rynnys so faire; Lugegez thaym luflye by the lyghte strandez, 2280 Alle on lawe in the lawnde, thas lordlyche byemes. The emperor strikes Arthur on the visor, and wounds his nose. Arthur gives him a buffet that cuts through his cuirass and his breast. Sir Lucius dies, and the Romans fly. Arthur’s men pursue them. The king bids them take vengeance for Sir Cayous. Sir Cador declares that he will spare neither king nor kaiser. [leaf 77, back] A fearful carnage follows. 1 Heathen hewn down hundreds. men are f «rn by | Digitized by ^.ooQle 68 ARTHUR HAS THE EMPEROR’S BODY EMBALMED, Arthur’s men Thay kaire to the karvage, and tuke whate them likes, i plunder the rich J J to > . ’ 1 Sonmns. the Kamelles and sekadrisses, and cofirs fulle riche, Hekes, and hakkenays, and horses of armes, 2284 Howsynge and herhergage of heythene kyngez; Horses, camels. They drewe owt of dromon daries dyuerse lordes, dromedaries, u * andman^mar- 68 * Moyllez mylke whitte, and meruayllozzs bestez, captured. ea8t8 “* Elfaydes, and arrahys, and olyfauntez noble, 2288 Ther are of the Oryent, with honourable kynges. B ot sir Arthure onone ayeres ther-aftyre Ewyne to the emperowr, with honourable kyngis; Laughte hymvpe fulle louelyly with lordlyche knyghttez, And ledde hyme to the layere, thare the kyng lygges. Thane harawdez heghely, at heste of the lordes, Hunttes vpe the havthemene, that on heghte lygges, The bodies of the The Sowdane of Burry, and certayne kynges, 2296 emperor and ° the chief men of g e xty of the cheefe senators of Eome. Rome are em- «/ HT^ped a ln lead, Thane they bussches and bawmede thane honowrliche kyngis, Sewed theme in sendelle sexti-faulde aftire, enclosed in chests, and sent to Rome with, their banners' over them. Two senators come barefoot and kneel before the conqueror. Lappede them in lede, lesse that they schulde 2300 Chawnge or chawffe, 3 if thay myghte escheffe \ Closed in kystys clene vn-to Rome, With theire baners a-bowne, theire bagis there-vndyre, In whate couwtre thay kaire that knyghttes myghte knawe Iche kynge be his colours, in kyth whare pie] lengede. Onone one the secouwde daye, sone by the morne, Twa senators ther come, and certayne knyghttez, Hodles fro the hethe, ouer the holte eynes, 2308 Barefote ouer the bente, with brondes so ryche, Bowes to the bolde kynge, and biddis hym the hiltes, Whethire he wille hang theym or hedde, or halde they me on lyfe ; 2311 Knelyde be-fore the conquerowr in kyrtilles allone; "With carefulle cowtenawnce thay karpide these wordes,—* “ Twa senators we are, thi subgettez of Rome, Tliat has sauede oure lyfe by the ise salte strandys; Hyd vs in the heglie wode,thurghe the helpynge of Criste • Digitized by Google AND SENDS IT TO ROME AS TRIBUTE, 69 Be-sekes the of socoure, as soueraygne and lorde; 2317 Grante vs lyffe and lyme with leberalle herte, ffor his luffe that the lente this lordeliipe in erthe ! ” 11 1 graunte,” quod [the] gude kynge, “ thurghe grace of my selfene, 2320 I giffe 30 we lyffe and lyme, and leue for to passe, So $e doo my message menskefully at Rome, That ilk^ charge that I 30 W 3 iffe here be-fore my cheeffe knyghttez.” “ 3is,” sais the senators, “ that salle we ensure, 2324 Sekerly be oure trowhes thi sayenges to fullfille; We salle lett for no lede that lyffes in erthe, ffore pape, ne for potestate, ne prynce so noble, That ne salle lelely in lande thi letteres pronounce, 2328 ffor duke ne fore dussepere, to dye in the payne ! ” T hane the banerettez of Bretayne broghte theme to tentes; There harbours ware bownne, with basyns one lofte, With warme watire 1 i-wys they wette theme fulle sone; They schouene thes schalkes schappely ther-aftyre, To rekkene theis Romaynes recreaunt and 3 oldene; ffor-thy schoue they theme to schewe, for skomfite of Rome. They coupylde the kystys on kameles be-lyue, 2336 On asses and arrabyes, theis honourable kynges; The emperowre for honowe, alle by hym one, Euene appone ane olyfaunte, hys egle owtt ouere; Be-kende theme the captyfis, the kyngedide hyme selfene, And alle by-fore his kene mene karpede thees wordes,— “TTere are the kystis,” quod the kynge, “ kaire ouer the mownttez; Mette fulle monee that 36 haue mekylle 3 emede, The taxe and the trebutte of tene schore wynteres, 2344 That was tenefully tynte in tyme of oure elders. Saye to the senatowre, the cete that 3 emes, That I sende hyme the som me, assaye how hyme likes ! 1 MS. wartire. [leaf 78] The king grants them their lives on condition of their earning a message for him to Rome. The Britons cause barbers to shave them, in token of their submission. They fasten the chests on camels. The emperor’s body, for honour, is by itself on an elephant. Arthur charges them to say that they have brought the arrears of tribute due from him to Rome. Digitized by ^.ooQle 70 ARTHUR BURIES HIS DEAD KNIGHTS. This is the only Bott byde theme neuere be so bolde, why lies my blode tribute they will J ’ J J him get from regnes, 2348 Efte for to brawlle theme for my brode landez, He to aske trybut ne taxe be nakyne tytle, Bot syche tresowe as this, whilles my tyme lastez.” Tiiey hasten to Howe they raike to Rome the redyeste wayes, 2352 totheCapitoi! 6 Knylles in the Capatoylle, and comowns assembles, Souerayngez and senators, the cet 6 that 3 emes; Be-kende theme the caryage, kystis and other y 2355 They perform Alls the conquerowr comaunde with cmelle wordes. as he directed. “We hafe trystily trayuellede this tributte to feche, They have The taxe and the trewage of fowre score wynteris, brought the taxes ° J 7 ireSnd? and d aii nd Of I[n]glande, of Irelande and alle thi r owtt illes, the west. That Arthure in the Occedente ocupyes att ones. 2360 He byddis 30 W neuere be so bolde, whills his blode regnes, To brawle 3 owe fore Bretayne ne his brode landes, He aske hyme trebute ne taxe be nonkyns title, Bot syche tresoz^re as this, whills his tyme lastis. 2364 t hey^deciar^ ti!at ^ehaife foughttene inffrance, and vs es foule happenede, ed e defe a at e a S n(f er ’ oure myehe faire folke faye are by-leuede ! gi eat loss, Eschappide there ne cheuallrye, ne cheftaynes no ther y Bott choppede downne in the chasse, syche chawnse es be-fallene! 2368 We rede 3 e store 30 we of stone, and stuffene 30 ur walles : and bid the Ro- wakkens wandrethe and werre : be ware, ^if 30 W mans beware. lykes ! ” This great battle Tn the kalendez of Maye this caas es be-fallene: 2371 between Arthur I and the Romans X The roy ryaHe renownde, with his Rownde Table, was fought in the */ J ' ’ \ calendB of Ma ^- One the coste of Costantyne by the clere strandez, Has the Romaynes ryche rebuykede for euer ! Whene he hade foughttene in Fraunce, and the felde wonnene, And fersely his foomene fellde owtte of lyfe, 2376 1 Arthur buries his He bydes for the beryenge of his bolde knyghtez, That in batelle with brandez ware broughte owte of lyfe. ' Raymm^ ere afc He beryes at Bay one sir Bedwere the ryche ; cirne? yous at The cors of Kayone the kene at Came es be-leuefede, Digitized by Google ARTHUR DESIRES THE DUCHY OF LORRAINE. 71 Koueride with a crystalle clenly alle oner; 2381 His fadyre cowqueride that kyth knyghtly with hondes. Seyne in Burgoyne lie bade to bery mo knyghttez, Sir Berade and Bawdwyne, sir Bed war the rycbe, Gud sir Cador at Came, as bis kynde askes. Thane sir Arthure onone, in the Auguste ther-aftyre, Enteres to Almayne wytb ostez arrayed; 2387 Lengez at Lusscheburghe, to lechene hys knyghttez, With his lele ligge mene, as lorde in his awene. And on Christoi re daye a concede he haldez, Withe kynges and kaysers, clerkkes and other, Comandez them kenely to caste alle theiie wittys, 2392 How he may ccwquere by crafte the kythe tha,t heclaymes. Bot the cowquerowr kene, curtais and noble, Karpes in the concelle theys knyghtly wordez,— “Here esa knyghte in theis kleuys, enclesside with hilles, That I haue cowayte to knawe, be-cause of his wordez, That es Lorayne the lele, I kepe noghte to layne; The lordchipe es louely, as ledes me telles. 2399 I wille that ducherye devyse, and dele as me lykes, And seyne dresse wyth the duke, if destyny suffre: The renke rebelle has bene vn-to my Rownde Table, Redy aye with Romaynes, and ryotte my landes ! We salle rekkene fulle rathe, if resone so happene, 2404 Who has ryghte to tha,t rente, by ryche Gode of heuene! Thane wille I by Lumbardye lykande to schawe, Sett lawe in the lande, that laste salle euer; The tyrauntez of Twrkayne tempeste a littylle, 2408 Talke with the temperalle, whilles my tyme lastez; I gyffe my protteccione to alle the pope landez, My ryche penselle of pes my pople to scliewe. It es a foly to offende oure fadyr vndire Gode, 2412 Owther Peter or Paule, the, postles of Rome, i Jif we spare the spmtfuelle, we spede bot the bettire; Whills we haue for to speke, spille salle it neuer ! ” N ow they spede at the spurres, wit/i-owttyne speche more, 2416 In the August after Arthur enters into Germany, and tarries at Luxemburg to heal his knights. He holds a council to devise how he may conquer all the territory that he claims. He makes a speech in the council, saying that he much desires the possessions of the duke of Lorraine, who has long been a rebel to his Round Table. Full soon will ho reckon who hns right to the rent. Afterwards ho will go to Lombardy and then visit the tyrants of Turkey, but he will give protection to nil the lands of the [leaf 79] Pope, for it is folly to offend our father under God. If we spare the ' goods of the spiritualty we .. shall speed the better. Digitized by AnOOQle 72 ARTHUR VIEWS THE WALLS OF THE CITY. ; 3* To the marche of Meyes, theis manliclie knyghtez, • / ' ) - ' ' * *? That es Lorrayne alofede, as Londone es here; ■’ fi** Arthur straight- Cete 1 of that seymowre, that soueraynge es holdene. way leads his knights to lay The kyng ferkes furthe on a faire stede, 2420 siege to Metz. J ' With Ferrer and 2 Ferawnte, and other foure knyghtez; A-bowte the cete tlia seuene, they soughte at the nextte, They seek a r iace To seke theme a sekyre place to sett withe engeynes ; to fix the engines. Thane they beneyde in bnrghe bowes of vyse, 2424 The bowmen Bekyrs at the bolde kynge with bonstouse lates, shoot at them. Allblawsters at Arthure egerly schottes, ffor to hurte hyme or his horse with that hard wapene. The king, with- The kynge schonte for no schotte, ne no schelde askys, remains ciose’to Bot schewes hym scharpely in his schene wedys : 2429 the walls within J 1 J J arrows >f the Lenges alle at laysere, and lokes one the wallys, Whare the y ware laweste the ledes to assaille. Sir Ferrere re- “ Sir,” said air fferrere, “ a ffoly thowe wirkkes, him for exposing Thus nakede in thy noblaye to neghe to the walles, himself to such J J o danger. Sengely in thy surcotte, this cete to reche, 2434 And schewe the wztA-ine, there to schende vs alle. j Arthur scorns 1 him, and tells I him that he would be afraid of a fly that lighted on him. Never knave will be allowed to kill a crowned king. Hye vs hastylye heynwe, or we mone fulle happene, ffor hitt they the or thy horse, it harmes for euer ! ” “ Ife thow be ferde,” quod the kyng, “ I rede thow ryde vttere, 2438 Lesse that the y rywe the with theire rownnd wapyne ! Thow arte bot a fawntkyne, no ferly me thynkkys ! Thou wille be flayede for a fly e that one thy flesche lyghttes! I ame nothynge agaste, so me Gode helpe ! 2442 Thoi siche gadlynges be greuede, it greues me botlyttille! Thay wyne no wirchipe of me, bot wastys theire takle! They salle wante or I weende, I wagene myne hevede ! Salle neuer harlotte haue happe, thorowe helpe of my Lorde, To kylle a corownde kynge with 3 krysome enoynttede ! M Then come the Thane come the herbariours, harageous knyghtez, 2448 & trooi>8 ° f The hale batelles one hye harrawnte ther-aftyre; And onre forreours ferse, appone fele halfes, 1 MS. Tety. 2 MS. ferrerannde. 3 MS. with with. Digitized by Google THE BRITONS BESIEGE THE CITY. 73 Come flyeande be-fore one ferawnt stedes; fferkande in arraye theire ryalle knygbttez, 2452 The renkez renownde of the Kownnd Table. Alle the frekke mene of Fraunce folowede thare-aftyre, flfaire fittyde one frownte, and one the felde houys. Thane the schalkes scharpelye scheftys theire horsez, To schewene them semly in theire scheene wedes; 2457 Buskes in batayle with baners displayede, With brode scheldes enbrassede, and burlyche helmys, With penouws and penselles of ylke prynce armes, 2460 AppayreHde with perrye and -precious stones. The lawnces with loraynes, and lemande scheldes, Lyghtenande as the leuenynge, and lemand al oner. T hane the price mene prekes, and proues theire horsez, Satilles to the eet6, appone sere halfes ; 2465. Enserches the subbarbes sadly thare-aftyre, Discoueris of schotte-raene, and skyrmys a lyttille ; Skayres theire skottefers, and theire skowtte-waches, Brittenes theire barrers with theire bryghte wapyns; Bett downe a barbycane, and the brygge wynnys. 2470 Xe hade the gamysone bene gude at the grete 3 ates, Thay hade wonne that wone be theire awene strenghe ! Thane with-drawes oure mene, and drisses theme bettyre, ffor dred of the drawe-brigge dasschede in sondre; Hyes to the harbergage, thare the kynge honys With his batelle one heghe, horsyde on stedys ; 2476 Thane was the prynce pwruayede, and the ire places nommene, Pyghte pauyllyons of paHe, and plattes in seegge. Thane lenge they lordly, as theme leefe thoghte, Waches in ylke warde, as to the werre falles, 2480 Settes vp sodaynly certayne engynes. One Sonondaye be the Soone has a flethe 3oldene. The kynge calles one Florente, thet flo ur was of knyghttez,— ‘ 1 The F raunche-mene enfeblesches,ne farlyme thynkkys! They are vn-fondyde folke in the, faire marches, 2485 and the renowned champions of the Ronnd Table: and all the bold men of France following them. [leaf 79, back] They proceed in battle-array with banners and broad shields, and pennons adorned with precious stones. The lances gleam like lightning. They encompass the city on divers sides, skirmish with the garrison, and break down their defences. But the garrison at the great gates checks them. Arthur’s men withdraw to where the king is waiting. They pitch their tents, and prepare for a regular siege. Arthur calls Sh Florent, Digitized by 74 GAWAYNE MEETS WITH AN ARMED KNIGHT, and sends him to forage for cattle. Sir Gawaine himself, the worshipful warden, shall accompany them. and many other knights of renown. These fresh men of arms start on their journey through woods and over hills, [leaf 80] V They fall upon a field of grass newly mown, where they bait their horses, while the birds sweetly sing. Sir Gawaine goes forth by himself to seek adventures. He sees a knight well armed, ffor theme wantes the flesche and fude that theme lykes. Here are fforestez faire appone fele halues, 2487 And thedyre feemene are flede with freliche bestes ! Thow salle foonde to the felle, and forraye the moimtes; Sir fforawnt and sir Florydas salle folowe thi brydylle; Vs moste with some fresche mette refresche oure pople, That are feedde in the fyrthe with the froyte of the erthe. Tliare salle weende to^/iis viage sir Gawayne hymselfene, Wardayne fulle wyrchipfulle, and so hyin wele semes ; Sir Wecharde, sir Waltyre, theis wyrchipfulle knyghtes, With alle wyseste mene of the weste marches; 2496 Sir Clegis, sir Clarybalde, sir Clarymownde the noble, The capytayne of 1 Cardyfe clenlyche arrayede. Goo now, warne alle the wache, Gawayne and other , And weendes furthe on 30 ur waye withowttyne moo wordes.” 2500 "VTow ferkes to the fyrthe thees fresche mene of armes, To the felle so fewe, theis fresclyche by ernes, Thorowe hopes and hymlande hillys and other , Iioltis and hare woddes with lieslyne schawes, 2504 Thorowe marasse and mosse and montes so heghe ; And in the myste mornynge one a mede falles, Mawene and vne-made, maynoyrede bott ly tty lie, In swathes sweppene downe, fulle of swete flowres. 2508 Thare ynbrydilles theis blode, and baytes theue horses, To the grygynge of the daye, that byrdez 2 gane synge, Why lies the surs of the son tie, that sonde es of Cryste, That solaces alle synfulle, that syghte has inerthe.^S^ Thane weendes owtt the wardayne, sir Gawayngnyme selfene, AHs he that weysse was and wyghte , 3 wondyrs to seke; Thane was he warrc of a wye, wondyre wele armyde, Baytand one a wattire banke by the wodde eynis, 2516 Buskede in brenyes bryghte to be-halde, Enbrassede a brode sclielde on a blonke ryche, With bircnrce ony borne, bot a boye one, 1 MS. 00. 2 MS. that byrdez that bvrdes 3 MS. wyghte wyghte Digitized by Google AND ATTACKS HIM BOLDLY. 75 Houes by hym on a blonke, and his spere holdes. 2520 He bare gessenande in golde, thre grayhondes of sable, With chapes a cheynes of ehalke whytte syluer, A charebocle in the cheefe, chawngawnde of hewes, And a cheefe anterous, chalange who lykes. 2524 S ir Gawayne glyftes on the gome with a glade wille ! A grete spere fro his grome he grypes in hondes, Gyrdes ewene ouere the streme one a stede ryche, To that steryne in stowr, one strenghe Mare he houys ! Egerly one Inglisce “ Arthure ! ” he askryes, 2529 The tether irouslye ansuers hym sone On a launde of Lorrayne with a lowde steuera, That ledes myghte lystene the lenghe of a myle ! 2532 “ Wliedyr prykkes thow, pilouwr, that profers so large ? Here pykes thowe no praye, profire whene the lykes I Bot thow in this perelle 1 put of the bettire, Thow salle be ray presonere, for alle thy prowde lates ! ” “ Sir,” sais air Gawayne, “ so me Gode helpe ! 2537 Siche glauerande gomes greues me bot lyttille ! Bot if thowe graythe thy gere, the wille grefe happene, Or thowe goo of this greue, for alle thy grete wordes ! ” Tliane Meire laimces they lachene, thes lordly che byernez, Laggene with longe speres one lyarde stedes ; Cowpene at awntere be kraftes of armes, Tille bo the the crowelle speres broustene att ones ! 2544 Thorowe scheldys the y schotte, and scherde thorowe ma[i]le8, Bothe schere thorowe schoulders a schaft-monde large! Thus worthylye the a wyes wondede ere bothene ; Or they wreke the me of wrethe a-waye wille they neu er ! Than they raughte in the reyne and a-gayne rydes, Redely theis rathe mene rusches owtte swerdez, 2550 Hittes one hcllmes fulle hertelyche dynttys, Hewes appone liawberkes with fulle harde wapyns! fiulle stowttly they stryke, thire steryne knyghttes, Stokes at the stomake with stelyne poyntes, 2554 1 MS. pererelh. and a page carrying his spear. On his shield his coat of arms is depicted. Sir Gawaine beholds him with great joy, and goes across the stream towards him. He shouts his cry, “ Arthur.’* The other answers with a loud voice. Then the strange knight declares that Gawaine shall be his prisoner. Sir Gawaine treats his great words with contempt. Then they lay their spears in rest, and meet. Both the spears strike fair, and wound the knights. Then they rein in their horses [leaf 80, hack] and return to •the fight with swords. Fearful blows are exchanged. Digitized by ^.ooQle 76 GAWAYNE IS SORELY WOUNDED. Sir Gawaine waxes wroth, and strikes grimly with his sword Galuth. He cleaves the knight’s shield asunder, and lays open his side. The knight strikes fiercely at Sir Gawaine. He cuts through his armour and draws blood. which flows over all his dress. Then the knight jeers at him, and says the blood shall never be staunched. ffeghttene and floresche withe flawmande swerdez, Title the flawes of fyre flawmes one theire helmes. Thane sir Gawayne was greuede, and grychgide fulle sore; With Galuthe his gude swerde grymlye he strykes! Clefe the knyghttes schelde clenliche in sondre ! 2559 Who lukes to the lefte syde, whene his horse launches, With the lyghte of the sonne men myghte see his lyuere! Thane granes the gome fore greefe of his wondys, And gyrdis at sir Gawayne, as he by glentis ; And awkewarde egerly sore he hym smyttes; 2564 An alet enamelde he oches in sondire, Bristes the rerebrace with the bronde ryche, Kerues of at the coutere with the clene egge, Ane[n]tis the avawmbrace, vrayllede with siluer! 2568 Thorowe a dowble vesture of veluett ryche, With the venymous swerde a vayne has he towchede ! That voydes so violently that alle his witte changede ! The vesere, the aventaile, his vesturis ryche, 2572 With the valyant blode was verrede alle ouer! Thane this tyrante tite tames the brydille, Talkes vn-tendirly, and sais, “ thow arte towchede ! Vs bus haue a blode-bande, or thi ble change, 2576 ffor alle the harbours of Bretayne salle noghte thy blode stawnche! ffor he th&t es blemeste with this brade brande, blyne schalle he neue/*.” Sir Gawaine despises his words. q noa sir uawayn lyttille! 2579 Thowe wenys to glopyne me with thy gret wordez ! Thow trowes with thy talkynge ^at my harte talmes ! ' : J> Thow be-tydes towrfere or thowe hyene tume, ^ ^ wimt’wfiuto teU ^how telle me hytte, and tarye no lengere, the bleeding. What may staunche this blode that thus faste rynnes.” “ 3ise, I say the sothely, and sekire the my trowthe, teii Gawaine if Ao surgyone in Salarne salle sane the bet tyre ; THE STRANGE KNIGHT TELLS HIS NAME AND LINEAGE. 77 Witfi-thy th&t thowe suffre me, for sake of tliy Cryste, To schewe schortly my schrifte, and schape for myne ende.” 2588 “ 3is,” quod s ir Gawayne, “ so me God helpe ! I gyfe the grace and graunt, thofe thou hafe grefe seruede, With-thy thowe say me sothe what thowe here sekes, Thus sengilly and sulayne alle thi selfe one; 2592 And whate laye thow leues one, layne noghte the sothe. And whate legyauwce, and whare thow arte lorde.” “ My name es sir Priamws; a prynce es my fadyre, Praysede in his partyes with prouede kynges; 2596 In Rome thare he regnes he es riche haldene ; He has bene rebelle to Rome, and redene theire landes, Werreyand weisely wyntters and }eres, 2599 Be witt, and be wyssdome, and be wyghte strenghe, And be wyrchipfulle werre, his awene has he wonne. i He es of Alexandire blode, ouerlynge of kynges, The vncle of his ayele, sir Ector of Troye ; 2603 And here es the kynredene that I of come, And Iudas and Iosue, thiee gentille knyghtes. I ame apparaunt his ayere, and eldeste of other; Of Alexandere and Aufrike, and alle the, owte landes, I am in possessione, and plenerly sessede. 2608 In alle the price cetees that to the porte langes, I salle hafe trewly the tresowr and the londes, And bothe trebute and taxe whilles my tyme lastes. I was so hawtayne of herte, whilles I at home lengede, I helde nane my hippe heghte vndire heuene ryche ; ffor-thy was I sente hedire with seuene score knyghttez, To a-saye of this werre, be sente of my fadire ; 2615 And I am for Cyrus witrye schamely supprisede, And be aw[n]tire of armes owtrayede fore euere ! Now hafe I taulde the the kyne that I ofe come, Wille thow for knyghthede kene me thy name?” 2619 “Be Criste,” quod sir Gawayne, “knyghte was I neu er\ With the kydde conquero?/r a knafe of his chambyre Has wroghte in his wardrope wynters and 3 eres, he will allow him to have shrift and prepare himself for his end. Gawaine readily grants this. The stranger knight tells him that he is Sir Priamus, son of a prince, who rebelled against Rome, and gained a king< leaf 81] lorn. He is of the blood of Alexander and Hector of Troy; related also to Judas and Joshua; and is heir of Africa. When at home he was so proud and overbearing, that he was sent by his father to this war with a band of knights. He desires to know Sir Gawaine’s name. Sir Gawaine answers deceitfully that he is only a knave of Arthur's diamher. Digitized by ^.ooQle 78 PRIAMUS TELLS G A WAYNE OF THE ENEMY. “ He made me a yeoman at Yule, and gave me great gifts.” “ If his knaves be such, his knights are noble ! ” exclaims Sir Priamus. Alexander and Hector will be nothing to him. Then Sir Gawaine tells him the truth. He is Sir Gawaine, cousin to the conqueror, the richest knight of all the Round Table. [leaf 81, back] Then Sir Priamus says he is better pleased than if he were prince of Provence and Paris. Then he warns Gawaine that the diike of Lorraine with his knights is lying in tho wood near. One his longe armo?/r that hym heste lykid I poyne alle his pavelyoims that to hym sell Dyghttes his dowhlettez for dukes and erles Aketou/is auenawnt fore Arthure hym selfen That he vsede in werre alle this aughte wyr He made me 3 omane at 3ole, and gafe me gi And c. 1 pouwde, and a horse, and harnayse : Gife I happe to my hele that hende for to s I he holpene in haste, I hette the for-sothe “ Giffe his knafes be syche, his knyghttes There es no kynge vndire Criste maykempew/i He wille he Alexander ayre, that alle the erti Ahillere thane eu er was sir Ector of Troye. How fore the krisome that thou kaghte th was crystenede, Whethire thowe he knyghte or knafie, kna sothe.” tf My name es sir Gawayne, I graunt the for Cosyne to the conquercmr, he knawes it hyp Kydd in his kalander a knyghte of his chan And rollede the richeste of alle the Eounde I ame the dussepereand duke he dubbedewitt Deynttely on a daye be-fore his dere knygh Gruche noghte, gude sir, thoie me this grac It es the gifte of Gode, the gree es hys awei “ Petire ! ” sais Priamwe, “ now payes me he Thane I of Provynce warre prynce, and of Part fibre me ware leuer preuely be prykkyd to i Thane euer any prikkere had siche a pryse 1 Bot here es herberde at hande, in 3 one huge Halle bataile one heyghe, take hede 3 if the The duke of Lorrayne the derfe, with his dei The doughtyest of Dolfinede, and Duche m< The lordes of Lumbardye that leders are hal The gamysone of Godarde gaylyche arrayedi The wyese of the Westuale, wirchipfulle bie i MS. o. Digitized by Google THEY BOTH GO TO ARTHUR'S MEN. 79 Of Sessoyne and Surylande Sarazenes enewe; They ate uowmerde fulle neghe, and namede in rollez, Sextv thowsande and tene for-sothe of sekyre mene of There is a J J mighty host armez; 2659 well armed. Bot $if thow hye fro this hethe, it harmes vs bothe, And bot my hurtes be sone holpene, bole be I neu er ! Tak beede to this hansemane, that be no borne blawe, He bids Mm be- ware lest they Are tbowe beyly in baste beese hewene al to peces : should discover J '* and destroy him. ifor they are my retenuz to ryde whare I wylle, 2664 Es none redyare renkes regnande in ertbe ; Be tbow ragbte with that rowtt, thow rydes no former, Ne tbow bees neuer rawnsonede for recbes in ertbe ! ” S ir Gawayne wente or the wathe come, wbare bym beste lykede, 2668 With this wortbelicbe wye, that wondyd was sore; Merkes to the mountayne there oure mene lenges, Baytaynde tbeire blonkes ther on the brode mede; Lordes lenande lowe one lemande scbeldes, 2672 With lowde laghttirs one lofte for lykynge of byrdez, Of larkes, of lynkwbyttez, that lufflyche songene, And some was sleghte one slepe with slaugbte of the pople, Sir Gawaine goes with the wounded knight to Arthur’s men, who are baiting their horses on the broad mead and That sange in the sesone in the scbenwe scbawes, So lawe in the lawndez so lykande notes.^] Thane sir Whyeher wbas warre thaiie wardayne was wondyde, 2678 And went to bym wepand, and wryngande his bandes; listening to the songs of the birds. Sir Wlivcher perceives that Sir Gawaine is wounded. Sir Wychere, sir Walchere, tbeis weise mene of armes, Had wondyre of sir Gawayne, and wente hyme a-gayns, Mett hym in the mydwaye, and memaile theme t[b]oghte How be maisteredejj^at mane, so mygbtty of strengbes ! Be alle the weltlie of the wettd^. so woo was theme neuer! “ fFor alle oure wirchipe i-wy«§e awaye es in-ertbe !” “ Greue 30 W nogbte,” quod GKWayne, “ for Godis luffe of heuene ; and wonders how he could have Sir Gawaine makes light of his wounds. ffore this es bot gosesomere, and gyffene one erles ; 2687 Th offe my schouldire be schrede, and my scbelde thyrllede, And the wielde of myne arme werkkes a littille, ; J n \ . Digitized by ^.ooQle 80 A KNIGHT DRESSES SIR PRIAMUS’S WOUNDS. His prisoner, Sir Priamus, has salves that will heal them. They assist him to dismount. [leaf 82 ] The knights lift Sir Priamus from his horse. They lay him down, and take off his weeds. n ubb - tvcCC A knight dresses their wounds. Then wine and provisions are brought to them. The scouts bring news of the army in the wood. Sir Gawaine is for attacking them, This prissonere sir Priamz/s, that has perih Sais that he has saluez salle softene vs botl] Thane stirttes to his sterape sterynfulle kn; And he lordely lyghttes and laghte of his ' And lete his burlyche blonke baite on the Braydes of his bacenette and his ryche wee Bownrces to his brode schelde and bowes tc In alle the bodye of that bolde es no blode Than prases to sir Priamozzs preciows knyg' Auyssely of his horse hentes hym in armes His helme and his hawberke thay takene o And hastily for his hurtte alle his herte ch They laide hyme downe in the lawndez, a his wedes, And he lenede hym one lange, or how hym' A ffoyle of fyne golde they fande at his gyi That es fulle of the flo ur of the fouur welh That flowes owte of Paradice whene the fle That myche froyt of fallez, that feede scha! Be it frette on his flesche, thare sywues are The freke schalle be fische halle with-in fo They vneonere that cors with fulle clene With clere watire a knyghte clensis theire Keled theyme kyndly, and comfortlied the: And whene the carffes ware clene, thay clede i Barelle ferrers they brochede, and broghte the Bothe brede and brawne, and bredis fulle i Whene thay hade etene anone they armede Thane tha awntrende men “ as armes ! ” a With a claryou ne clere, thire knyghtez to-g Callys to concede, and of this case tellys “ Jondyr es a companye of clene mene of a The keneste in contek that vndir Criste ler In 3 one okene wode an oste are arrayeae, Vndir-takande mene of ^iese owte londes : As sais vs sir Priam ozzs, so lielpe seynt Pel “ Go, mene,” quod Gawayne, " and grape in _ Digitized by <^.OOQLe SIR PLORBNT AND HIS MEN ENTER THE FOREST. 81 Who salle graythe to jone greue to 30110 gret lordes; 3 if we gettlesse goo home, the kyng wille he greuede, And say we are gadlynges, agaste for a lyttille. 2728 We are w ffli sir Florente, as to-daye falles, That es floure of ffraunce, for he fleede neue?-; He was chosene and chargegide in chambire of the kynge, Chiftayne of this, jowmee with cheualrye noble; 2732 Whethire he fyghte or he flee, we salle folowe aftyre; ffore alle the fere of 3 one folke forsake salle I neuer ! ” “ ffadyre,” sais sir Florent, “ fulle faire 3 e it telle ! Bot I ame bot a fawntkyne, vn-fraystede in armes; 3 if any foly be-falle, the fawte salle be owrs, And fremdly o Fraunce be flemede for euer ! 2738 Woundes noghte 30 ^ 7 * wirchipe, my witte es bot symple ; 3 e are owre wardayne i-wysse, wyrke as 3 owe lykes; Je are at the ferreste noghte passande fyve hundrethe, And that es fully to fewe to feghte with theme alle, fibre harlottez and hansemene salle helpe bott littille; They wille hye theyme hyene for alle fAeire gret wordes ! I rede 30 wyrke aftyre witte, as wyesse men of armes, And warpes wylily a-waye, as wirchipfulle knyghtes.” “ I grawnte,” q uod sir Gawayne, “some Gode helpe ! Bot here are galyarde gomes that of the gre semis, The kreuelleste knyghttes of the kynges chambyre, That kane carpe with the coppe knyghtly wordes ; We salle proue to-daye who salle the prys wyne.” 2751 N owe ferriours fers vn-to the fyrthe rydez, And fonwgez a faire felde, and on fotte lyghttez; Prekes affcyre the pray, as pryce mene of armes. fflorent and Floridas, with fyye score knyghttez, 2755 fiolowede in the foreste, and on the way fowndys, fflyngande a faste trott, and on the folke dryffes. Than felewes fast to oure folke wele a fyye hundreth Of freke mene to the fyrthe, appone fresche horses; One sir Feraunt be-fore, apone a fayre stede, 2760 Was fosterde in Famacoste, the fende was his fadyre, MORTE ARTIIURE. 6 but refers to Sir Florent, the leader of the party. Sir Florent expresses his deference to Sir Gawaine, the warden of the knights of the Round Table, and thinks they are too few to [leaf 82, back] fight with so many. He Is for a careful retreat. Arthur's men advance to the wood. A band of 600 of the enemy meet them, headed by Sir Feraunt. Digitized by ^.ooQle 82 NOBLE DEEDS OF THE KNIGHTS. He calls scornfully on Sir Florent, who with his lance in rest pierces him through the brain. His cousin vows vengeance for his death, but Sir Floridas quickly disposes of him. Sir Raynald, the renegade, proudly presses in; but Sir Richer, of the Round Table, runs him through with a [leaf 83] spear. The rest of the live hundred He flenges to sir Florent, and pristly he 1 “Whyflees thow, falls knyghtel Mefende h Thane sir fllorent was fayne, and in fe\" One Fawnelle of ffryselande to 1 fferannt h And raghte in the reyne on the stede rycb And rydes to-warde the rowte, restes he n ffulle butt in the frounte he flysches hyme And alle dysfego?^res his face with his fell Thurghe his bryghte bacenette his brayne ha: And brustene his neke-bone, that alle his br Thane his cosyne askryede, and cryede “ Thowe has killede colde dede th e kynge of a He has bene fraistede on felde in fyftene i He fonde neuer no freke myghte feghte w Thow schalle dye for his dede with my de And alle the doughtty for dule that in 3 one “fly,” sais sir ffloridas, “thow ffleryande 1 Thow wenes for to flay ys, ffloke-mowthed Bot ffloridas with a swerde, as he by glenl Alle the flesche of the flanke he flappes in That alle the filthe of the freke and fele oJ ffoloes his foie fotte, whene he furthe ryde Than rydes a renke to reschewe that by That was Baynalde of the Bodes, and reb< Peniertede with paynyms that Cristene pe Presses in prowdly, as the praye wendes, fibre he hade in Prewsslande myche pryce ffor-thi in presence thare he profers so lar£ Bot thane a renke, sir Bichere of the Bou: One a ryalle stede rydes hym a 3 aynes; Thorowe a rownnde rede schelde he rusch< That the rosselde spere to his herte rynne; The renke relys a-bowte and rusches to th Boris fulle ruydlye, bot rade he no more ! Now alle that es fere and vnfaye of the s i 1 MS. te. Digitized by Google PRIAMUS ASKS LEAVE TO JOIN IN THE FIGHT. 83 ffalles on air fflorent, a ffyve score knyghttes, Be-twyx a plasche and a flode, appone a date lawnde ; Oure folke fongene theire felde, and fawghte theme agaynes. 2799 Than was lowde appone lofte “ Lorrayne ! ” askryede, Whene ledys with longe speris lasschene to-gedyrs, And M Arthur©!” one oure syde, whene theymeoghteaylede. Than air fflorent and Floridas in fewtyre they caste, firuschene one alle the firape, and biemes affrayede; ffetiis fyve at the frounte thare they fyrste enteride, And, or they ferke forthire, fele of these othere ! 2806 Brenyes browddene they briste, brittenede scheldes, Bettes and beres downe the best that theme byddes; Alle that rewlyde in the rowtte they rydene awaye, So rewdly they rere theys ryalle knyghttes ! When air Priamowe, that prince, persayuede theire gamene, 2811 He hade pet4 in herte that he ne durst© profire; He wente to air Gawayne, and sais hym these wordes,— “ Thi price mene fore thi praye putt are alle vndyre, They are with Sarazenes ouer-sette, mo ^ane seuene hundreth 2815 Of the Sowdanes knyghtes owt of sere londes; Walde thow suffire me, sir, for sake of thi Criste, With a soppe of thi mene suppowelle theym ones.” “ I grouche noghte,” quod Gawayne, “ the gree es thaue awene! 2819 They mone hafe gwerddou/is fulle grett graunt of my lorde, Bot the freke mene of Fraunce fraiste theme selfene ! ffrekes faughte noghte the ire fille this fyftene wynter ! I wille noghte stire with my stale halfe a stede lenghe, Bot they be stedde with more stufie thane one 3 one stede houys.” 2824 T hane air Gawayne was warre, with-owttyne the wode hemmes, Ml on Sir Florent and hia men. The one tide shouts “Lorraine,” the other “Arthur.” Sir Florent and Sir Floridas perform great deeds of valour. Sir Priamus beseeches Gawaine that he may help Arthur's knights against the Saracens. Sir Gawaine says that they have not fought their fill these fifteen winters. He sees, outside the wood, Digitized by ^.ooQle 84 SIR GAWAINE CHEERS HIS FRIENDS. men Df Westphalia, headed by the Earl Antele, who leads 8000 knights. The Earl is indignant that Arthur’s knights should venture to resist so great a host. [leaf 83, back] They had better retreat while they are able. Sir Alger, his brother, says that though i hey are so few they are a match for an army. Sir Gawaine encourages his knights. “If we fight today, the field shall be ours.'* Wyes of the Westfale appone wyght horsez, Walopande wodely, as the waye forthes, With alle the wapyns i-wys that to the werr< The erle Antele the olde the avawmwarde h Ayerande one ayther hande heghte thosande His pelours and pauysers passede alle nomb That eu er any prynce lede puruayede in ertl Than the duke of Lorrayne dresesse thare With dowbille of the Duche-mene, that doi holdene; Paynymes of Pruyslande, prekkers fulle not Come prekkande be-fore with Priamows kny Than saide the erle Antele to Algere his bro “ Me angers ernestly at Arthures knyghtez ! Thus enkerly one an oste awnters the me sell They wille be owttrayede anone, are vndron Thus folily one a felde to fyghte with vs all Bot they be fesede in faye, ferly me thynkes Walde they pwrposse take, and passe one tl Prike home to theire prynce, and theire pra; They myghte lenghene theire lyefe, and lossene It wolde lyghte my herte, so helpe me oure “ Sir,” sais air Algere, “ thay hafe littille vsi To be owttrayede withe oste : me angers tin The fayreste schalle be fulle feye, that in ouref] Alls fewe as they bene, are they the felde le T hane gud Gawayne, gracious and noble, Alle with glorious gle he gladdis his kn “ Gloppyns noghte, gud mene, for gleterand 3 ofe $one gadlyngez be gaye one 3 one gret h Banerettez of Bretayne, buskes vp 30 ur hert Bees noghte baiste of 3 oneboyes, ne of tfiaire brj We salle blenke theire boste for alle theire b Als bouxome as birde es in bede to hir lord 3 effe we feghte to-daye, the felde schalle be < The fekille faye salle faile, and falssede be d Digitized by AnOOQle A NOBLE JOUSTING TAKES PLACE. 85 2863 2867 i ^ Jone folk is one ffrountere, vnfraistede they^rie semes ; Tbay make faythe and faye to the fend seluene ! We salle in this viage victonres he holdene, And avauntede with voycez of valyant biemez; Praysede with pryncez in presence of lordes, And luffed© with ladyes in dyuerse londes ! Aughte neuer siche honowre none of oure elders, Vnwyne ne Absolon e, ne none of thies other ! Whene we are moste in destresse, Marie we mene, t That es oure maisters seyne, that he mycbe traistez; 1 Melys of that mylde qwene, that menskes vs alle; 2871 | Who so meles of that mayde, myskaries he neuer ! ” Be^ese wordeswaresaide, they ware noghte ferre he-hynde Bot the lenghe of a launde, and “ Lorayne ! ” askryes. Was neuer siche a justynge at ]oume in erthe, 2875 In the vale of Iosephate, as gestes vs telles, Whene Iulyus and^ IoataUe ware juggede to dy, As was whene the ryche mene of the Bownde Table Buschede in-to the rowte one ryalle stedes! 2879 ffor so raythely th ay ruscbe with roselde speris, That the raskaille was rade, and rane to the grefes, And karede to that courte as cowardes for euer! “ Peter! ” sais sir Gawayne, “ this gladdez myne herte! That 3 one gedlynges are gone, that made gret nowmbre ; I hope that thees harlottez salle harme vs bot littille, ffore they wille hyde theme in haste with-in ^one holte enis! 2886 Tbay are fewere one fifelde than tliay werefyrste nombirde, Befourtty thousande in faythe, for alle tbeyrefaire hostes.” Bot one Iolyan of Iene, a geante fulle howge, Has jonede one sir Ierante, a justis of Walis; Thorowe a jerownde schelde he jogges hym thorowe, And a fyne gesserawnte of gentille mayles, 2892 Ioynter and gemows, he jogges in sondyre ! One a jambe stede this jumee he makes; 1 neuen* struck out , and men* written instead. Great shall be the rewards and joys of victory. In distress let them complain to Mary the mild queen. The enemy come upon them. Never was there such a jousting. Even that in the valley of Jeho&haphat was not equal to it. The rascal rout run to the groves. Gawaine rejoices at the flight of the rabble. [leaf 84] A huge giant is l slain by a justice l of Wales. \ Digitized by Google Digitized by Google Sir Frederick attacks the British forayers. The knights of the Round Table advance and fight valiantly. Sir Priamu8 and his followers desert to the side of Arthur’s men. They upbraid the Duke of Lorraine for not having paid them their wages. Thus es the geante for-juste, that errawnte And Gerarde es jocunde, and joyes hym th Than the genatcwrs of Genwe enjoynes al And frykis one the frowntere welle a fyve 1 A freke highte sir ffederike, with fulle fele fferkes one a frusche, and fresclyche askryes To fyghte with oure fforreours, that one felc And thane the ryalle renkkes of the Eownc Eade furth fulle ernestly, and rydis theme i Melliswith the medille-warde,bot they ware i Of siche a grett multytude was meruayle tc Seyne at the assemble the Sarazenes discou The soueraynge of Sessoyne, that saluede w Gyawntis for-justede with gentille knyghtes Thorowe gesserawntes of Iene jaggede to th They hewe thorowe helmes hawtayne biern That the hiltede swerdes to f/zaire hertes ry Than the renkes renownde of the Eownd T Eyffes and ruyssches downe renayede wrecl And thus they dreuene to the dede ; dukes a Alle the dreghe of the daye, with dredfulle T hane sir Priamows the pry nee, in presens Presez to his penowne, and pertly it he Eeuertede it redily, and a-waye rydys To the ryalle rowte of the Eownde Table; And heyly his retenuz raykes hym aftyre, Ifor they his resone had rede on his schelde Owte of the scheltrone the y schede, as schej And steris furth to the stowre, and stode be ; Seyne they sent to the duke, andsaidehymtf/ii “We hafe bene thy sowdeours this sex 30 ^ We for-sake the to-daye be serte of owre loi We sewe to oure soueraynge in sere kynges Ys defawtes oure feez of this foure wyntter< Thow arte feble and false, and noghte bot ft Oure wages are werede owte, and thi werre THE FOLLOWERS OF SIR PRIAMUS DESERT. SIR GAWAINE IS ROUSED TO WRATH. 87 We maye with oure wirchipe weend whethire vs lykes ! I red thowe trette of a trewe, and trofle no lengere, Or thow sails tyne of thi tale ten thosande or euene/’ “ ffy adebles! ” saide the duke, “ the deuellshaue 30 wr bones! The dawngere of ^on doggez drede schalls I neusr! We sails dele this daye, be dedes of armes, 2936 My dede, and my ducherye, and my dere knyghtes ! Siche sowdeowrs as $e I sett bot att lyttills, That sodanly in defawte for-sakes theire lorde ! ” 2939 The duke in bis schelde and dreches no lengere, Drawes hym a dromedarie, with dredfulls knyghtez; Graythes to sir Gawayne, with fulls gret nowmbyre Of gomes of Gemaide, that greuous are holdens. 2943 Thas fresche borsesede mens to the frownt rydes, ffelles of oure fforreowrs be fourtty at ones ! They bade foughttens be-fore with a fyve bundrethe; It was no ferly, in f^ytbe, thofe they faynt waxens. Thane sir Gawayne was grefede, and grypys his spere, And gyrdez in agayne with galyarde knygbttez; 2949 Metes the maches of Mees, and melles bym thorowe, As man of this medills-ertbe, that moste bade greuede. Bot on Chastelayne, a cbilde of the kynges chambyrs, Was warde to sir Wawayns of the weste marches, Cheses to sir Cheldrike, a cheftayne noble, With a chasywg spere he chokkes hym thurghe ! 2955 This chekke hyms eschewede be chauncez of armes ; So tha,y chase that childe, eschape may he neusr! Bot on Swyans of Swecy, with a swerde egge, The swyers swyre-bane he swappes in sondyre ! 2959 He swounande diede, and on the swarthe lengede, Sweltes ewynwe swiftly, and swanke he no more! /TT^an sir Gawayns gretes with his gray eghne ; The guyte was a gude mans, be-gywnande of armes. ffore the cbarry cbilde so bis chere chawngide, 2964 That the chillande watire ons his cbekes rynnyde! “ Woo es me,” quod, Gawayne, “ that I ne wetens hade; The Duke answers furiously, [leaf 84, back] He charges Arthur’s knights on a dromedary. His men fell many of the forayers. Sir Gawaine grasps his spear. Child Chastelaine slays Sir Cheldrik. and is slain by Swyan. Gawaine grieves for him. \ Digitized by ^.ooQie 8S Arthur’s knights are victorious. He slays one Sir Dolphin, then Hardolf, happy in arms, and sixty more. He avenges the child. [leaf 85] and cuts his way through the enemy. The great deeds of Arthur’s chivalrous men secure the victory. Sir Florent nresses on with five score knights. I sails wage for tliat wye alls that I we! Bot I be wrokene on that wye,th at thus has He dresses hym drerily, and to the duk Bot one sir Dolphyne the derfe dyghte And sir Gawayne hym gyrd with a gry That the grou?zdene spere glade to his 1 And egerly he hente owte, and hurte aAn haythene knyghte, Hardolfe, happy Sleyghly in at the slotte slyttes hyme t That the slydande spere of his hande si Thare es slayne in that slope, be elagert Sexty slongene in a slade of sleghe mer Thofe sir Gawaynwe ware wo, he waytt And was warre of that wye that the ch And with a swerde swiftly he swappes That he swyftly swelte, and on the ertl: And thane he raykes to th e rowte, and ruys Biche hawberkes he rente, and rasede s Bydes one a rawndource, and his rayke Thorow-owte the rerewarde he holdes v And thare raughte in the reyne this ryj And rydez in-to the rowte of the Bown T hane onre cheualrous 1 men changes Chases and choppes downe clieftay Hittes fulle hertely on helmes and sche Hurtes and hewes downe haythene kny Ketelle-hattes they cleue euene to the s Was neuer siche a clamowr of capitayn Thare was kynges sondes kauglite, curt And knyghtes of the contre, that knaw Lordes of Lorayne and Lu??ibardye botl Laugh[t]e was, and lede in with oure It Thas that chasede that daye, theire chai Swiche a cheke at a chace escheuede tb W hen sir fflorent, be fyghte, had th\ He fferkes ine be-fore with fyve £ 1 MS. cheualrowrs. Digitized by Google 1 A HERALD BRINGS THE KING THE GOOD NEWS. 89 Theire prayes and ^eire presoneres passes one aftyre, With pylours, and pauysers, and pryse mene of armes. Thane gudly sir Gawayne gydes his knyghttez, Gas in at the gayneste, as gydes hym telles, fibre greffe of a garysone of fulle gret lordes 3007 Sulde noghte gripe vpe his gere, ne swyche grame wirche. ffore-thy they stode at the straytez, and with his stale houede, Tille his prayes ware paste the pathe that he dredis; Whene they the cete myghte see that the kyng seggede, Sothely the same daye was wit[h] asawte wonnene. 3012 An hawrawde hyes be-fore, the heste of the lordes, Horn at the herbergage, owt of tha hyghe londes ; Tomys tytte to the tente, and to the kynge telles 3015 Alle the tale sothely, and how they hade spede;— “ Alle thy forreowrs are fere, that forrayede with-owttyne, Sir fflorent, and sir ffloridas, and alia thy ferse knyghtez; Thay hafe forrayede and foghtene with fulle gret nowmhyre, 3019 And fele of thy foo-mene has broghte owt of lyffe! Oure wirchipfulle wardayne es wele escheuyde, ffor he has wonne to-daye wirchipe for eu ere, He has Dolfyne slayne, and the duke takyne ! 3023 Many dowghty es dede be dynt of his hondes ! He has prisoners price, pryncez and erles, Of the richeste blode that regnys in erthe ! Alle thy cheuallrous mene faire are eschewede, 3027 Bot a childe Chasteleynwe myschance es be-fallene.” “ Hawtayne,” sais the kyng, “ harawde, be Criste ! Thow has helyd myne herte, I hete the for-sothe ! I 3 ife the in Hamptone a hundreth pownde large.” 3031 fTlhe kynge than to assawte he sembles his knyghtez, With somercastelle and sowe appone sere halfes; Skyftis his skotiferis, and skayles the wallis, And iche wache 1 has his warde with wiese mene of armes. 3035 1 Or wathe. Sir Gawaine follows with caution. and sees the city which Arthur is besieging won on the same day. A herald hies to Arthur and tells him of the victory of his knights, and how Sir Gawaine has won worship for ever. Then the king rejoices and gives him a hundred pounds. [leaf 85, back] Arthur assembles his knights to assault the city. Digitized by ^.ooQle w Churches and chapels are beaten to earth. The pain of the C eopte is pity to ear. Thane boldly tf/^ay buske, and bendes en Payses in pylotes and proues theire caste Mynsteris and masondewes they malle t< Chirches and chapelles chalke-wliitte bla Stone [sjtepelles fulle styffe in the strete Chawmbyrs with chymnes, and many cl Paysede and pelid downe playsterede wa The pyne of the pople was pete for to he Thane the dnchez hire dyghte with dam< The cowntas of Crasyne with hir clere m THE CITY IS SURRENDERED. The ladies sue for mercy. Arthur promises that no hurt shall befall them. The city is surrendered. The Duke is sent to Dover as a prisoner. Many of the inhabitants escape. Knelis downe in the kyrnelles thare the On a couerede horse comlyli arayede ; They kne we hy m by con tenawnce, and cried “ Kyng crownede of kynde, take kepe tc We be-seke 30 W, s ir> assoueraynge and 1 That 3 e safe vs to-daye, for sake of 30 ure Send vs some socoure, and saughte with Or the cete be sodaynly with assawte wc He weres his vesere with a vowt noble; With vesage vertouous, this valyante bic Meles to hir myldly with fulle meke woi “ Salle no mysse do 30 W, ma dame, tha.t I gyf 30 W chartire of pes, and 30 ure chee Thechildireand the chaste mene, tliecheua' The duke es in dawngere, dredis it bott ] He salle idene the fulle wele, dout 30 W n Thane sent he one iche a syde to certa ffor to leue the assawte, the cete was 30 I 0 With the erle eldeste sone he sent hym t And seside the same nyghte, be sent of t\ The duke to Doue?*e es dyghte, and alle his To duelle in dawngere and dole, the daye Thare fleede, at the ferrere 3 ate, folk norabyre, ffor ferde of sir fHorent and his fers knyg Yoydes the cete and to the wode rynnys, With vetaile, and vesselle, and vestowe £ Digitized by Google ARTHUR TRAVELS TOWARDS ITALY. 91 Thay buske vpe a banere abowne the brode 3 ates. Of sir fflorent, in ffay so fayne was he neuer ! The knyghte houys on a hylle, be-helde to the wallys, And saide, “ I see be $one syngne the cete es oures ! ” Sir Arthure enters anone with hostes arayede, 3076 Euene at the vndrone etles to lenge. In iche leuere on lowde the kynge did crye, Ofpayne of lyf and lym and lesynge of londes, That no lele ligemane, that to hym lonwgede, 3080 Sulde^lye be no ladysse, ne be no lele maydyns, Ne be no burgesse wyffe, better ne werse; Ne no biernez myse-bide, that to the burghe longede. TTTTiene the kyng Arthure hade lely conquerid, 3084 * * And the castelle couerede of the kythe riclie, Alle the crowelle and kene, be craftes of armes, Captayns and constables, knewe hym for lorde. He deuysede and delte to dyuerse lordez, 3088 A dowere for the duchez and hir dere childire; Wroghte wardaynes by wytte to welde alle the londez, That he had wonnene of werre, thorowe his weise knyghtez. 3091 Thus in Lorayne he lenges as lorde in his awene, Settez lawes in the lande, as hym leefe t[h]oghte ; And one the Lammese day to Lucerne he wendez, Lengez thare at laysere with lykynge i-nowe; 3095 Thare his galays ware graythede, a fulle gret nombyre, Alle gleterand as glase, vndire grene hyllys, With cabanes couerede for kynges a-noyntede, With clothes of clere golde for knyghtez and other; Sone stowede theire stuffe, and stablede ^eire horses, Strokes stroke ouer the strem in-to the strayte londez. Now he moues his myghte with myrthes of herte, Ouere mowntes so hye, thase m^ruailo^ wayes ; 3103 Gosse in by Goddarde, the garett he wynnys, Graytlies the garnisone grisely wondes ! Whene he was passede the heghte, than the kyng houys With his hole bataylle, be-haldande a-bowte, 3107 Sir Florent sees by a sign that the city is won. Arthur enters with his hosts. [leaf 86J He forbids his liegemen to lie with the ladies. Arthur provides for the government of Lorraine which he has conquered. At Lammas he goes to Lucerne. His fair galleys are assembled. He leads his forces over the high mountains by marvellous ways; passes the St Gothard after defeating the garrison ; Digitized by w THE LORD OF MILAN MAKES SUBMISSION looks down on Lombardy, and advances to Como. Sir Florent and Sir Floridas plant an ambush, and capture the city. [leaf 86, back] The conqueror holds his court in Como. The lord of Milan sends to offer submission and tribute. Lukande one Lumbarddye, and one lowc “ In 3 one lykande londe, lorde be I tbyr Thane they cayre to Combe, with kynge: That was kyde of the coste, kay of alle o; Sir fflorent and sir ffloridas than fowndei With ffreke mene of ffraunce welle a fyv To the cete vn-sene thay soghte at the gi And sett an enbuschement, als theme sel Thane ischewis owt of that cete, fulle son Stale discouerowrs, skyftes theire horses : Than skyftes thes skouero^’s, and skippt Biskoueres for skulkers that they no ska Poueralle and pastorelles passede one aft; With porkes to pasture at the price ^ates Eoyes in the subarbis bourdene ffulle he< At a bare synglere that to the bente rym Thane brekes oure buschemeiit, and the Brayedez in-to the burghe with baners di Stekes and stabbis 1 thorowe that them a ffowre stretis, or thay stynte, they stroye N ow es the conquerowr in Combe, and h With-in the kyde castelle, with kyn< Beconsaillez 2 the comouws that to the kj Comfourthes the carefulle with knyglitly Made a captayne kene a knyghte of hys Bot alle the contre and he fulle sone war The syre of Melane herde saye the cet And send to Artliure sertayne lordes, Grete sommes of golde, sexti horse charg Be-soglite hyme as souerayne to socowre And saide he wolde sothely be sugette f( And make hyme seruece and suytte for 1 ffor plesaunce of Pawnee, and of Pownte ffor Pyse, and for Pavy, he praters fulle Bothe purpzsr, and palle, and precious st Palfrayes for any prynce, and prouede st< 1 MS. stablis. 2 Or Becc Digitized by Googl< ARTHUR TURNS INTO TUSCANY. 93 And ilke a 3 ere for Melane a melione of golde, Mekely at Martynmesse to menske with his hordes; And euer withowttyne askynge he and his ayers Be homagers to Arthure, whilles his lyffe lastis. 3147 The kynge be his concede a condethe hym sendis, And he es comene to Combe, and knewe hym as lorde. Tn-to Tuskane he tournez, whene thus wele tymede, Takes townwes fulle tyte with towrres fulle heghe ; Walles he welte downe, wondyd knyghtez, 3152 Towrres he tumes, and turmentez the pople, Wroghte wedewes fulle wlonke, wrotherayle synges, Ofte wery and wepe, and wryngene theire handis; 3155 And alle he wastys with werre, thare he awaye rydez, Thaire welthes and theire wonny[n]ges, wandrethe ho wroghte ! Thus they spryngene and sprede, and sparis hot lyttille, Spoylles dispetouslye, and spillis theire vynes; 3159 Spendis vn-sparely, that sparede was lange, Spedis theme to Spolett with speris inewe ! ffro Spayne in-to Spruyslande the worde of hyme sprynges, 3162 And spekynwgs of his spends, disspite es fulle hugge ! Towarde Yiterbe this valyant ayires the reynes ; Avissely in that vale he vetailles his biemez, With vemage, and other wyne, and venysone bakene ; And one the vicounte londes he visez to lenge. 3167 Yertely the avawmwarde voydez theire horsez, In the Yertenwone vale, the vines i-mangez; Thare suggeowrnes this souerayne, with solace in herte, To see whene the senafcwrs sent any wordes ; 3171 Reuelle with riche wyne, riotes hym selfene, This roy with his ryalle mene of the Rownde Table, With myrthis, and melodye, and manykyne gamnes; Was neuer meriere men made one this erthe ! 3175 "Dot one a Seterdaye at none, a seuenyghte thare-aftyre, The konyngeste cardynalle that to the courte lengede Knelis to the conquerowr, and karpes thire wordes, He pays homage to Arthur at Como. Arthur enters Tuscany, \ and ravages the country. \ In the Vale of Viterbo he victuals his men. The king and his knights make [leaf 87] great merriment. The cmraingest Cardinal of Rome is sent to him. Digitized by ^.ooQle 94 ARTHUR REJOICES AT HIS SUCCESS. and offers that the Pone shall crown him as sovereign in Rome. Hostages are given for the truth of his words. Prayes hym for the pes, and profyrs fulle To liafe pete of the pope, that put was at Be-soghte hym of surrawns, for sake of o Bot a seuenyghte daye to they ware alle i And they schulde sekerlye hym see tl ther- aftyre, In the cete of Rome, as soueraynge and 1 And crowne hyme kyndly with krysomed With his ceptre, as soueraynge and lorde. Of this vndyrtakynge ostage are comyne, Of ayers fulle auenawnt awughte score ch In toges of tarsse fulle richelye attyryde, And be-tuke theme the kynge, and his cl When they had tretide thiere trewe, wit) ther-aiter They tryne vn-to a tente, whare tables w. The kynge hyme selfene es sette, and cerl Yndyre a sylure of sylke, sawghte at the Alle the senators are sette sere be theme The Roman sena- Serfed solemply with selcouthe metes : tors are solemnly feasted. The kynge myghtty of myrthe, with his ] Rehetez the Romaynes at his riche table, Comforthes the cardynalle so knyghtly 1 ] And this roye ryalle, as romawns vs tellis Reuerence the Romayns in his riche tabk The tawghte mene and the conynge, whei thoghte, Arthur glorifies himself for his great success. Tas theire lefe at the kynge, and tornede To the cete that nyghte thaye soughte at And thus the ostage of Rome with Arthu T han this roy royalle rehersys theis wor “ Now may we reuelle and riste, fore awene! Make oure ostage at ese, thi se auenawnt 2 And luk $e hondene theme alle that in my The emperoi/r of Almayne, and alle theis 1 MS. kynghtly. 2 MS. auen Digitized by Google HIS DREADFUL DREAM. 95 We salle be ouerlynge of alle th&t one the erthe lengez ! We wille by the Crosse dayes encroche 1 tf^eis londez, And at the Crystynmesse daye be crowned 2 ther-aftyre; Ryngne in my ryalltes, and holde my Rownde Table, Withe the rentes of Rome, as me beste lykes ; 3215 Syne graythe ouer the grette see with gud mene of armes, To reuenge the renke that one the rode dyede !” Thane this comlyche kynge, as cronycles tellys, Bownnys brathely to bede with a blythe herte; 3219 Of he slynges with sleghte, and slakes gyrdille, And fore slewthe of slomowre one a slepe fallis. Bot be ane aftyre mydnyghte alle his mode changede; He mett in the morne-while fulle meruaylowe dremes ! And whene his dredefulle drem whas drefene to the ende, The kynge dares for dowte, dye as he scholde; 3225 Sendes aftyre phylosophers, and his affrayo telles,— “ Sene I was formede in fayth, so ferde whas I neuer! ffor-thy rawnsakes redyly, and rede me my swefenwys, And I salle redily and ryghte rehersene the sothe. Me thoughte I was in a wode willed myne one. That I ne wiste no waye whedire that I scholde, 3231 ffore woluez, and whilde swyn?ie, and wykkyde bestez; Walkede in that wastemrce, wathes to seche ; Thare lyouws fulle lothely lykkyde tfAeire tuskes, Alle fore lapynge of hlude of my lele knyghtez ! 3235 Thurghe that foreste I flede, thare floures whare heghe, ffor to fele me for ferde of tha foule thyngez; Merkede to a medowe with montayngnes enclosyde, The meryeste of medillerthe that mene myghte be-holde ! The close was in compas castyne alle abowte, With clauer and clereworte clede euene ouer; The vale was enuerownde 3 with vynes of siluer, Alle with grapis of golde, gretter ware neuer, 3243 Enhorilde with arhorye and alkyns trees, Erberis fulle honeste, and hyrdez ^ere-vndyre; He will be crowned at Christmas in Rome, and hold his Round Table there. He goes to bed and dreams. [leaf 87, back] He sends for his philosophers, and tells them the dream. Li He was in a wood among wild beasts, which were licking from their teeth the blood of his knights. He flew to a beautiful meadow enclosed with mountains, and having vines of silver and grapes of gold. MS. Encroche encroche. % MS. crownewd. 3 MS. euen* rownde. Digitized by Google 96 THE KINGS ON FORTUNE’S WHEEL. A beautiful duchess descended from the clouds, dressed in gorgeous apparel. Thereon was a chair of silver, ornamented with carbuncles. Kings clave to the wheel one after another. Six had fallen from the settle, and lamented their misfortune. [leaf 88] ) The first was a little man with lean loins and long hair. Alle froytez foddenid was that floresched ffaire frithed In frawnke appone tha free Whas thare no downkynge of dewe tl scholde, With the drowghte of the daye alle drye 1 Than discendis in the dale, downe fra A duches dereworthily dyghte in dyaper In a surcott of syljre fulle selkouthely he Alle with loyoto ur ouer-laide lowe to the And with ladily lappes the lenghe of a 3 And alle redily reuersside with rehanes c Bruchez and besauntez, and other bryglit With hir bake and hir breste was broche With kelle and with corenalle clenliche i And that so comly of colour one knowen A-bowte cho whirllide a whele with hir Ouer-whelme alle qwayntely the whele a; The rowelle whas rede golde with ryalle , Baylide with reehed and rubyes i-newe ; The spekes was splentide alle with spelti The space of a spere lenghe springande f There-one was a chayere of chalke-whytt And chekyrde with charebocle chawngyi Appone the compas ther clewide kyngis ( With corowns of clere golde that kraked< Sex was of that setille fulle sodaynliche i like a segge by hyme selfe, and saide the ‘ That euer I rewgnede one thi r rog, me r< Was neuer roye so riche that regnede in Whene I rode in my rowte, roughte I nc Bot reuaye, and reuelle, and rawnsone th And thus I drife forthe my dayes, wl myghte, And there-fore derflyche I am dampnede The laste was a litylle mane that laide w; His leskes laye alle lene and latheliche tc Digitized by Google THE KINGS DESCRIBED. 97 The lokkes lyard,e and longe the lenghe of a 3 erde, His lire and his lyghame lamede fulle sore ; The two eyne of the byeryne was brighttere thane siluer, The to ther was 3 alowere thene the 3 olke of a naye. ‘ I was lorde/ q uod the lede,‘ of londes i-newe, 3284 And alls ledis me lowttede that lengede in erthe; And nowe es lefte me no lappe my lygham to hele, Bot lightly now ame I loste, leue iche mane the sothe ! * The secunde sir for-sothe that sewede theme aftyre, Was sekerare to my sighte, and saddare in armes; Ofte he syghede vn-sownde, and said theis wordes,;— I On 3 one see hafe I sittene, als souerayne and lorde, And ladys me louede to lappe in theyre armes; 3292 And nowe my lordchippes are loste, and laide for eu er ! ’ The thirde thorowely was throo, and thikke in the schuldyrs, A thra man to thrette of, there thretty ware gaderide; His dyademe was droppede downe, dubbyde with stonys, Endente alle with diamawndis, and dighte for the nonis; I I was dredde in my dayes,’ he said, ‘ in dynerse rewmes, And now dampnede to the dede, and dole es the more ! * The fourte was a faire mane, and forsesy in armes, The fayreste of fegure that fowrmede was euer! ‘I was frekke in my faithe,’ he said, 1 whilles I one fowlde regnede, fFamows in fferre londis, and floure of alle kynges; 3303 How es my face defadide, and foule es me hapnede, ffor I am fallene fro ferre, and frendles by-lenyde ! * The fifte was a faire mane thane fele of thies other, A fforsesy mane and a ferse, with fomand lippis; 3307 He fongede faste one the feleyghes, and fay led his armes, Bot jit he failede and felle a fyfty fote large; Bot 3 it he sprange and sprente, and spraddene his armes, And one the spere-lenghe spekes, he spekes ^ire wordes— 1 1 was in Surrye a syr, and sett be myne one, 3312 As souerayne and seyngnowr of sere kynges londis ; MORTE ARTHURE. 7 * He had been lord of many lands, but now was lost. The second had sat on the seat us sovereign and lord. The third was stout and strong. He had been dreaded in his day. The fourth was a fair man, but foul mischance had now happened to him. The fifth was very \ fierce and violent. He had been sovereign in Syria, but was now fallen. Digitized by ^.ooQle 98 FORTUNE WELCOMES ARTHUR, Now of my solace I am fulle sodanly fallene, And for sake of my syne, 3 one sete es me rewede [ 1 The sexte hade a sawtere semliche bowndene, With a surepel of silke sewede fulle faire, 3317 A harpe and a hande-slynge with harde flynte stones; What harmes he has hente he halowes fulle sone,— ‘ I was demede in my dayes,’ he said, ‘ of dedis of armes He had been One of the doughtyeste that duellede in erthe: amnncr tho ° d ? [leaf 88, back] Bot I was merride one molde in my moste strengliethis, bin marked by d With this maydene so mylde, that mofes vs alle.’ 3323 Two kyngea ware clymbande, and clauerande one heghe, Two kings were The creste of the compas they couette fulle aerne : climbing to the - r j ? j toreach U R. failed ‘ This chaire of charbokle,’ they said, ‘ we chalange here-aftyre, As two of the cheffeste chosene in erthe ! 1 3327 The cliildire ware chalke-whitte, chekys and other, Bot the chayere a-bownwe cheuede they neue?’: The one was pass- The forthirmaste was freely, with a frount large, ine fair of feature. J 9 ° ’ wue wUhfleure- The faireste of fyssnamy that fowrmede was euer; 3331 de-us of gold. And wag k us k ec i e { R a ki ee 0 f a bi ewe noble, With flowrdelice of golde florescliede al ouer; The other was The to ther was cledde in a cote alle of clene siluer, clad in silver, with a cross of gold. With a comliche crosse coruene of golde, 3335 ffowre crosselettes krafty by the crosse ristes, And ther-by knewe I the kynge, tli&t crystnede hyme semyde. Ihane I went to that wlonke, and wynly hire gretis, Arthur greeted the Duchess, who welcomed him. And cho said, * welcome i-wis ! wele arte thow < fowndene; 3339 The aughte to wirchipe my wille, and thow wele cowtho, Of alle the valyant men that euer was in erthe; fibre alle thy wirchipe in werre by me has thow wonnene, I hafe bene frendely, freke, and frerwmede tille o ther; That has thow fowndene in faithe, and fele of thi biernez, fibre I fellid downe sir Frolle with frowarde knyghtes ; fibre-thi the fruytes of Fraunce are freely thynwe awene. Digitized by Google AND SETS HIM IN THE SEAT. 99 Thow salle the chayere escheue, I chese the my selfene, Be-fore alle the cheftaynes chosene in this erthe/ 3348 Scho lifts me vp lightly with hir lene hondes, And sette me softely in the see, the septre me rechede; Craftely with a kambecho kembede myne heuede, 3351 That the krispane kroke to my crownwe raughte; Dressid ofie me a diademe, that dighte was fulle faire, And syne profres me a pome pighte fulle of faire stonys, Enamelde with azonre, the erth the re-one depayntide, Selkylde with the salte see appone sere halfes, 3356 In sygne that I sothely was souerayne in erthe. Than broght cho me a brande with fulle bryghte hiltes, And bade me brawndysche the blade, ‘ the brande es myne awene: 3359 Many swayne with the swynge has the sw[e]tte leuede; ffor whilles thow swanke with the swerde, it swykkede the neu er. 9 Than raykes cho with roo, and riste whene hir likede, To the ryndes of the wode, richere was neuer; 3363 Was no pomarie so pighte of pryncez in erthe, Ne nonwe apparaylle so prowde, hot paradys one. Scho bad the bewes scholde bewe downe, and bryng to my hondes 3366 Of the beste that they bare one brawnches so heghe ; Than they heldede to hir heste alle holly at ones, The hegheste of iche a hirste, I hette 30 W for-sothe : Scho bade me fyrthe noghte the fruyte, bot fonde whilles me likede, ( ffonde of the fyneste, thow freliche byeme, 3371 And reche to the ripeste, and ryotte thy seluene ! Riste, thow ryalle roye, for Rome es thyne awene ! And I salle redily rolle the roo at the gayneste, And reche the the riche wyne in rynsede coupes.’ 3375 Thane cho wente to the welle by the wode enis, That alle wellyde of wyne, and wondirliche rynnes; Kaughte vp a coppe-fulle, and couerde it faire ; 3378 Scho bad me dereliche drawe, and drynke to hir selfene. He was chosen to achieve the chair. and was set therein. The kingly ornaments were given to him. A sword with a bright hilt was brought to him. He was taken to the wood, and the boughs were made to yield their fruit to him. He was bid take [leaf 89] freely of the finest. The lady drew wine for him from the spring, and bade him drink to her. Digitized by AnOOQle Digitized by THE7 WILD BEASTS ARE ARTHUR’S FOES. 101 The fyfte was Iosue, that joly mane of armes, 3414 the fifth Joshua, Th at in Ierwsalem oste fulle myche joye lymppede ; The sexte was Dauid the dere, demyd with kynges the sixth David, One of the donghtyeste that dubbede was euer, & reat Goliath, ffor he slewe with a slynge, be sleyghte of his handis, Golyas the grette gome, grymmeste in erthe; 3419 Syne endittede in his dayes alle the derepsalmes, [leaf so, back] That in the sawtire ere sette with selcouthe wordes. The two clymbande kynges, I knawe it for-sothe, Salle Karolus be callide, the kyng sone of Fraunce ; He salle be crowelle and kene, and conquerowr holdene, Of the two kings who were climbing, one shall be Carolus of France; Couere be conqueste contres ynewe ; 3425 He salle encroche the crowne that Crist bare hym selfene, And that lifeliche launce, that lepe to his herte, When he was crucyfiede one crose, and alle the kene naylis, Knyghtly he salle conquers to Cristyne men hondes. The tother salle be Godfraye, that Gode schalle reuenge One the Gud Frydaye with galyarde knyghtes; 3431 he shall win the crown that Christ bare, and the lance that leapt to his heart; He salle of Lorrayne be lorde, be leefe of his fadire, And syne in lemsalem myche joye happyne, ffor he salle couer the crosse be craftes of armes, 3434 the other shall he Godfrey, the lord of Lorraine, who shall recover the true cross. And synwe be corownde kynge, withkrysomeenoynttede; Salle no duke in his dayes siche destanye happyne, He siche myschefe dreghe, whene trewthe salle be tryede ! ffore-thy ffortune the fetches to fulfille the nowmbyre, Arthur is needed J ** to make up the Alls nynne of the nobileste namede in erthe; 3439 SiHe^Tb?ost^° This salle in romance be redde with ryalle knyghttes, Rekkenede and renownde with ryotozzs kynges, And demyd one domesdaye, for dedis of armes, 3442 ffor the doughtyeste that euer was duelland in erthe : So many clerkis and kynges salle karpe of 301110 dedis, And kepe joure conquestez in cronycle for euer! Bot the wolfes in the wode, and the whilde bestes, Are some wikkyd mene that werrayes thy rewmes, 3447 Es entirde in thyne absence to werraye thy pople, He shall be celebrated for ever as the doughtiest on earth. Many clerks shall tell of his deeds. The wolves in the wood and the wild beasts are wicked men that are warring on his people. Digitized by AnOOQle THE PILGRIM-KNIGHT ARRIVES. * 102 He wiil have some tidings within ten days. He is bid to repent and amend. The king rises and puts on his robes. He sees a man approaching in the garb [leaf 90] of a pilgrim. He asks him whither he is going, And alyenys and ostes of vncouthe landis. Thow getis tydandis I trowe, with-in tene dayes, 3450 That some torfere es tydde, sene thow fro home turnede; I rede thow rekkyne and reherse vn-resonahle dedis, Ore the repenttes fulle rathe alle thi rewthe werkes! Mane, amende thy mode, or thow myshappene, And mekely aske mercy for mede of thy saule 1” 3455 fTlhane rysezthe riche kynge, and rawghteone his wedys, A reedde actone of rosse, the richeste of floures, A pesane, and a paunsone, and a pris girdille; And one he henttis a hode of scharlette fulle riche, A pauys pillione hatt, that pighte was fulle faire 3460 With perry of the Oryent, and precyous stones; His gloues gayliche gilte, and grauene by the hemmys, With graynes of rubyes fulle gracious to schewe; His bede grehownde, and his bronde, ande no byerne elles, 3464 And bownnes ouer a brode mede, with breth at his herte; ffurth he stalkis a stye by the, stille enys, Stotays at a hey strette, studyande hyme one; Att the surs of the sonwe, he sees there commande, Eaykande to Eomewarde the redyeste wayes, 3469 A renke in a rownde cloke, with righte rowmme clothes, With hatte, and with heyghe schone homely and rownde ; With flatte ferthynges the freke was floreschede alle ouer, Manye schredys and schragges at his skyrttes hywnges, With scrippe, ande with slawyne, and skalopis i-newe, Both pyke and palme, alls pilgram hym seholde. 3475 The gome graytliely hym grette, and bade gode morwene; The kyng lordelye hym selfe, of langage of Eome, Of Latyne corroumppede alle, fulle louely hym menys,— “ Whedire wilnez thowe, wye, walkande thyne onwe 1 Qwhylles tli is werlde es o werre, a wawhte I it holde ; Here es ane enmye with oste, vndire 3 one vynes; And they see the, for-sothe, sorowe the be-tyddes; Bot 3 if thow hafe condethe of the kynge selfene, 3483 Digitized by AnOOQle HE DISCLOSES HIMSELF AS SIR CRADOK. 103 Knaues wille kille the, and keppe at thow haues; And if thou halde the hey waye, they hente the also, Bot if thow hastyly hafe helpe of his hende knyghttes.” rilhane karpes sir Cradoke to the kynge selfene, 3487 “I salle for-gyffe hym my dede, so me Gode helpe! Onye grome vndire Gode, that one this grownde walkes ! Latte the keneste come, that to the kyng langes, I salle encouwtire hyme as knyghte, so Criste hafe my sawle! 3491 ffor thow may noghte reche me, ne areste thy selfene, Thoffe thou be richely arayede in fulle riche wedys ; I wille noghte wonde for no werre, to wende whare me likes, 3494 Ne for no wy of this werlde, thsk wroghte es one erthe! Bot I wille passe in pilgremage this pas vn-to Rome, To purchese me pardonwe of the pape selfene; And of paynes of purgatorie be plenerly assoyllede; Thane salle I seke sekirly my souerayne lorde, 3499 Sir Arthure of Inglande, that auenazmt byeme ! ffor he es in this empire, as hathelle men me telles, Ostayande in this Oryente with awfulle knyghtes.” "Tiro qwyne come thoue, kene mane,” quod the kynge thane, 3503 “ That knawes kynge Arthure, and his knyghttes also! Was thoue euer in his courte, qwylls he in kyth lengede 1 Thow karpes so kyndly, it comforthes myne herte ! Well wele has thou wente, and wysely tfAou sechis, ' ffor thoue arte Bretowne bieme, as by thy brode speche.” “ Me awghte to knowe the kynge, he es my kydde lorde, And I calde in his courte a knyghte of his chambire; Sir Craddoke was I callide, in his courte riche, 3511 Kepare of Karlyone, vndir the kynge selfene; ! No we am I cachede owtt of kyth, with kare at my herte, And that castelle es cawghte with vncowthe ledys.” Than the comliche kynge kaughte hym in armes, 3515 Keste of his ketille-hatte, and kyssede hyme fulle sone, and tells him the dangers of the way. The stranger says that he fears no dangers. He is bound in pilgrimage to Rome. Then he has to find Arthur of England. The king asks him whence he comes, and whether he knows Arthur and his knights. He tells him that his name is Sir Cradok, a knight of Arthur’s chamber, and keeper of Caerleon. The king kisses and welcomes Sir Cradok. Digitized by Googje .104 HE TELLS THE VILL 4 INY OF MODRED. *. Sir Cradok tells Saide, “ welcome, sir Craddoke, so Criste mott me helpe! Dere cosyne of kynde, thowe coldis myne herte ! How faris it in Bretaynrce, with alle my holde herynns ? Are they brettenede, or brynte, or broughte owte of lyuel Kene thou me kyndely whatte caase es be-fallene; 3521 I kepe no credens to crafe, I knawe the for trewe.” “ Sir, thi wardane es wikkede, and wilde of his dedys ; [leaf 90 , back] ffor he wandreth has wroghte, sen £7ioua-waye passede ; deeds of Modi ed. ^ castelles encrochede, and corownde hym seluene, TF/ <a i Kaughte in alle the rentis of the Kownde Tabille; He devisede the rewme, and delte as hym likes ; 3527 Dubbede of the Danmarkes, dukes and erlles, Disseueride them sondirwise, and cites dystroyede, To Sarazenes and Sessoynes, appone serehalues, He has gathered He has semhlede a sorte of selcouthe berynes, 3531 forces of paynims and outlaws, Soueraynes of Surgenale, and sowdeours many, Of Peyghtes, and payny?7ims, and prouede knyghttes Of Irelande and Orgaile, owtlawede berynes ; Alle thaa laddes are knyghttes that lange to the mowntes, And ledynge and lordechipne has alle, alls theme selfe likes; 3536 And there es'sir Childrike a cheftayne holdyne, That ilke cheualrous mane, he chargges thy pople; who rob the re- They robbe thy religeous, and ravische 1 thi no/mes, 3539 ligious and ravish J J the nuns. And re( jy pyddis with his rowtte to rawnsone the pouere; ffro Humhyre to Hawyke he haldys his awene, He has seized the And alle the cowntre of Kentt he couenawnte entayllide; whole of England ~- and all Arthur’s T} ie com ii c he castelles that to the corowne langede, castles# The holttes, and the hare-wode, and the harde bankkes, A lie that Henguste and Hors hent in theiie tyme; Ho has a fleet of Att Southampton on the see es seuene skore chippes, at Southampton, ffrawghte fulle of ferse folke, owt of ferre landes, 3547 1 But, worst of all, he has taken l Guinever, and \ holds her as his wife! ffor to fyghte with thy ffrappe, whene thow theme assailles. Bot ptt a woide witterly, thowe watte noghte the werste ! He has weddede Waynore, and hir his wieffe holdis, 1 MS. ravichse Digitized by <^.OOQLe Arthur’s grief. 105 And wonnys in the wilde bowndis of the weste marches, And has wroghte hire with childe, as wittnesse tellis ! Off oMe the wyes of this worlde, woo motte hym worthe, Alls wardayne vnworthye womene to ^eme ! Thus has sir Modrede merrede vs alle ! 3555 ffor-thy I merkede over thees mowntes, to mene the the sothe.” Than the burliche kynge, for brethe at his herte, And for this botelesse bale alle his ble chaungede ! “ By the rode,” sais the roye, “ I salle it revenge ! 3559 Hym salle repente fulle rathe alle his rewthe werkes ! ” Alle wepande for woo he went to his tentis ; Ynwynly this wyesse kynge, he wakkenysse his berynes, Clepid in a clariourae kynges and othire, 3563 Callys theme to concelle, and of this cas tellys,— “ I am with tresone be-trayede, for alle my trewe dedis I Amd alle my trauayle es tynt, me tydis no bettire ! Hym salle torfere be-tyde, this tresone has wroghte, And I may traistely hym take, as I am trew lorde! This es Modrede, the mane that I moste traystede, Has my castelles encrochede, andcorownde hyme seluene, With renttes and reches of the Rownde Table; 3571 Has made alle hys retenewys of renayede wrechis, And devysed my rewme to dyverse lordes, To sowdeours and to Sarazenes owtte of sere londes! He has weddyde Waynore, and hyr to wyefe holdes, And a childe es eschapede, the cliaunce es no bettire ! They hafe semblede on the see seuene schore chippis, ffiille of ferrome folke, to feghte with myne one ! ffor-thy to Bretayne the brode buske vs by-houys, 3579 ffor to brettyne the berynwe that has this bale raysede ! Thare salle no freke men fare, bott alle one fresche horses, That are fraistede in fyghte, and floure of my knyghttez: Sir Howelle and sir Hardolfe here salle be-leue, 3583 To be lordes of the ledis that here to me lenges ; Lokes in-to Lurabardye, that thare no lede chaunge,— Arthur la overcome by the tidings, and vows revenge. He calls a council and tells them tlie ill news. [leaf 91] They must proceed to Britain with all speed. Sir Howell and Sir Hardolf sit all remain behind to govern Rome and Italy. I Digitized by L.ooQle 106 HE DISCOVERS THE ENEMY’S FLEET. And tendirly to Tuskayne take tente alls I byde; Eesaywe the rentis of Eome qwene they are rekkenede; Take sesyne the same daye that laste was assygnede, Or elles alle the ostage, with-owttyne the wallys, 3589 , Be hynggyde hye appone hyghte alle holly at ones ! ” Arthur and his ‘VT o we bownes the bolde kynge with [his] beste knyghtes, towards Britain ^ Gers trome and trusse, and trynes forth aftyre; Tumys thorowe Tuskayne, taries bot littille, 3593 Lyghte noghte in Lumbarddye bot whene the lyghte failede ; Merkes ouer the mowntaynes fulle mervaykwe wayes, Ayres thurghe Almaygne evyne at the gayneste; 3596 fferkes evynwe in-to fflawndresche with hys ferse knyghttes ; in fifteen days his With-in fyfteno dayes his flete es assemblede, He embarks and And thane he schoupe hyme to chippe, and schownwes | no lengere, 3599 Scherys with a charpe wyndo ouer the schyre waters; By the roche with ropes he rydes one ankkere, I He discovers the Thare the false mene fletyde, and one flode lengede, I fleet of the enemy armed and pre- With chefe chaynes of chare chokkode to-gedyrs, obOo I pared for fight. J ° Charggede evyne chekefulle of cheualrous knyghtes; And in the hynter one heghte, helmes and crestes, Hatches with haythene mene hillyd ware thare vndyre, Prowdliche purtrayede 1 with payntede clothys, 3607 Iche a pece by pece prykkyde tylle other f Dubbyde with dagswaynnes dowblede they seme ; And thus the derfe Danamarkes had dyghte alle theyre chippys, 3610 That no dynte of no darte dere theme ne schoulde. Than the roye and the renkes of the Eownde Table / Then he makes Alle ryally in rede array es his chippis ; for L battief* That daye ducheryes he delte, and doubbyde knyghttes, Dresses dromowndes and dragges, and drawene vpe stonys; 3615 1 MS. prutrayede. Digitized by ^.ooQle THEY PREPARE FOR THE BATTLE. 107 The toppe-castelles he stuffede w itli toyelys, as hym lykyde, Bendys howes of vys brothly tfAare-aftyre; Tolowris tentyly takelle they ryghttene, Brasene hedys fulle brode buskede one flones, Graythes for garnysones gomes array es; 3620 Gryme gaddes of stele, ghywes of iryne, St^ttelys 1 steryne one sterynne with styffe mene of armes; Mony lufliche launce appone lofte stonndys, Ledys one leburde, Iordys and other, 3624 Pyghte payvese one porte, payntedo scheldes, One hyndire hurdace one highte helmede knyghtez. Thus they scheftene foreschotys one thas schire strandys, like schalke in his schrowde, fulle scheene ware the ire wedys. 3628 The bolde kynge es in a barge and a-bowtte rowes, Alle bare-heuvede for besye with beueryne lokkes; And a beryne with his bronde, and ane helme betyne, Mengede with a mawncelet of maylis of siluer, 3632 Compaste with a coronalle, and couerde 2 fulle riche; Kayris to yche a cogge, to comfurthe his knyghttes: To Clegys and Cleremownde he cryes one lowde,— “ 0 Gawayne ! 0 Galyrane ! thies gud mens bodyes.” To Loth and to Lyonelle fulle louefly he melys, 3637 And to sir Lawncelot de Lake lordliche wordys,— “ Lat ys con ere the kythe, the coste es owre ownne ; And gere theme brotheliche blenke, alle 3 one blod-hondes ! Bryttyne them witA-in bourde, and brynne theme tha re afbyre! 3641 Hewe downe hertly 3 one heythene tykes ! Thay are harlotes halfe, I hette 30 W myne honnde ! ” Than he coueres his cogge, and caches one ankere, Kaughte his comliche helme with the clere maylis; Buskes baners one brode, betyne of gowles, With corowns of clere golde clenliche arraiede $ 3647 1 MS. Stirttelys. 2 MS. cou^rerde. The tool-men righten the tackle. grim goads of steels and gyves of iron. [leaf 01 , backj The bold king in a barge rows about bareheaded. He cries aloud to Cleges and Cleremound, to Lionel and Lancelot, ** let us recover our land and make yon bloodhounds blench; hew down heartily the heathen hounds.” He reaches his ship, takes his helmet and mail, and displays his banners. Digitized by ^.ooQle THE FIERCE BATTLE ON THE SEA. ) 108 His chief device is a picture of our Lady and the Child. | The sailors busy themselves to get the ships under weigh. They strike across the stream and the strife begins. There is great dashing together of ships. Grapplings are thrown out. A mighty struggle ensues. Masts foil and kill the mariners. [leaf 92] Boardings are made and handto-hand fights take place. Bot thare was chosene in the chefe a chalke-whitto maydene, And a child© in hir arme, that chefe es of hevynne : With-owttene changynge in chace, thies ware the cheefe armes 3650 Of Arthnre the auenawnt, qwhylles he in erthe lengede. Thane the marynerse mellys, and maysters of chippis, Merily iche a mate menys tille other ; Of theire termys they talke, how thay ware tydd, Towyne trvsselle one trete, trvssene ype sailes, 3655 Bet bonettez one brede, bettrede hatches; Brawndeste browne stele, braggede in trompes ; Standis styffe one the stamyne, steris one aftyre ; Strekyne oner the streme, thare stryyynge be-gynnes. ffro the wagande wynde owte of the weste rysses, 3660 Brethly bessomes with byrre in berynes sailles ; With hir bryngges one burde burliche cogges, Qwhylles the bilynge and the beme brestys in sondyre; So stowttly the forsteme one the stain hyttis, 3664 That stokkes of the stere-burde strykkys in peces ! Be thane cogge appone cogge, krayers and other, Castys crepers one crosse als to the crafte langes : 3667 Thane was hede-rapys hewene ^Aat helde ype the mastes; Thare was conteke fulle kene, and crachynge of chippys ! Grett cogges of kampe crasseches in sondyre ! Mony kabane cleyede, cabilles destroyed© ! 3671 Knyghtes and kene mene killide the braynes ! Kidd castelles were coryene with alle theire kene wapene, Castelles fulle comliche, that coloured ware faire ! Ypcynes eghelynge thay ochene tftare-aftyre, 3675 With the swynge of the swerde sweys the mastys; Oyyre-fallys in the firste frekis and othire, firekke in the forchipe fey es byleuefede! Than brothely they bekyre with boustouse tacle, 3679 Bruschese boldlye one burde brynycde knyghtes, Owt of botes one burde was buskede with stonys, Bett downe of the bcste, brystis the hetches; Digitized by ^.ooQle MODRED'S FLEET IS UTTERLY DEFEATED. 109 Som gomys thourghe-gyrde with gaddys of yryns, Gomys gayliche clede 1 englaymous wapens ! 3684 Archers of Inglande fulle egerly schottes, Hittia thourghe the harde stele fulle hertly dynnttis ! Sonne hotchene in holle the hvtherme knyghtes, Hurte thourghe the harde stele, hele they neu er ! 3688 Than they falls to the fyghte, ffoynes with sperys, Alls the frekkeste one frownte that to the fyghte langes; And ilkons frechely fraystez theire strenghes, 3691 Were to fyghte in the flete with theire fells wapyns. Thus they dalte that daye, thire dubbide knyghtes, Tills alls the Danes ware dede, and in the depe throwens ! Than Bretonss brothely with brondis they hewens, Lepys in vp one lofte lordeliche berynes; 3696 When ledys of owt-londys leppyns in waters, Alls oure lordes one lowde laughens at ones ! Be thane speris whare spronngens, spalddyd chippys, Spanyolis spedily sprentyde oust burdez ; 3700 Alls the kene mens of kampe, knyghtes and other , Killyd are colde dede, and castyns ousr burdez ! Theire swyers sweyftly has the swete leuyde, Helens heuande on hatche in the r ha we ryses, 3704 Synkando in the salte see seuens hundrethe at ones ! Thane sir Gawayne the gude, he has the gree wonnens, And alls the cogges grete he gafe to his knyghtes, 3707 Sir Geryns, and sir Grisswolde, 2 and othir gret lordes; Garte Galuth, a gud gome, girde of Maire hedys ! Thus of the false flete appons the flode happenede, And thus tf?eis feryne folke fey are beleuede ! 3711 Jitt es the traytowre one londe with tryede knyghttes, And alls trompede they trippe one trappede stedys, Schewes thems vndir schilde one the schire bankkes ; He ne schownttes for no schame, hot schewes fulls heghe! Sir Arthure and Gawayne avyede thems bothens 3716 To sexty thosandez of mens, that in theire syghte houede. Be this the folke was fellyde, thane was the flode passede; 1 Or clade. ? MS. Giifswolde. The archers of England make havoc among the heatnen knights. The Danes of Modred’s fleet are all slain. Arthur’s lords laugh to see their foes leap into the water. All Modred’s \ keen men are \ killed. Sir Gawalne gives the ships to his knights. Thus befell the false fleet. But Mod red the traitor has a land army of tried knights. Digitized by AnOOQle 110 Arthur waits for the tide to rise before he lands. Sir Gawaine wades ashore. [leaf 92, back] He bids his standard-bearer advance against Modred's host. “We shall fell S on false men, te field shall be ours.’* He and ills little band charge the whole army. SIR GAWAINE RASHLY WADES ASHORE. Thane was it slyke a slowde in slakkes fulle hugge, That, let the kyng for to lande, and the la we watyre ; ffor-thy he lengede one laye for lesynwg of horsesys, To loke of his lege mene, and of his lele knyghtes. Jif any ware lamede or loste, life 3 ife they scholde. Than sir Gawayne the gude a galaye he takys, 3724 And glides vp at a gole with gud mene of armes; Whene he growndide, for grefe he gyrdis in the watere, That to the girdylle he gos in alle his gylte wedys ; Schottis vpe appone the sonde in syghte of the lordes, Sengly with hys soppe, my sorowe es the more ! With baners of his bagys beste of his armes, 3730 He braydes vp-on the banke in his bryghte wedys; He byddys his baneoure, “ buske ^ow be-lyfe To 3 one brode batayle that one 3 one banke hones ; And I ensure 30 W sothe I salle 3 owe sewe aftyre; 3734 Loke 30 blenke for no bronde, ne for no bryghte wapyne, Bot beris downe of the beste and bryng theme o-dawe! Bees noghte abayste of theiro boste, abyde one the erthe; 3 g haue my baneres borne in batailles fulle hugge; We salle Mle 3 one false, the fende hafe theire saules I ffightes faste with the frape, the felde salle be owres; May I that trayto ure ouer-take, torfere hyme tyddes, That this tresone has tymbyrde to my trewe lorde! Of siche a engendure fulle littylle joye happyns, 3743 And that salle in this jowmee be juggede fulle euene ! ” How they seke ouer the sonde ^is soppe at the gayneste, Sembles one the sowdeours, and settys theire dyntys; Thourghe the scheldys so sehene schalkes the y towche, With schaftes scheueride schorte of th&s sehene launces; Derfe dynttys they dalte with daggande sperys; One the danke of the dewe many dede lyggys, 3750 Dukes, and duszeperis, and dubbide knyghttys; The doughttyeste of Danemarke vndone are for euer ! Thus thas renkes in rewthe rittis theire brenyes, And rechis of the richeste vn-rekene dynttis; 3754 Thare they thronge in the thikko, and thristis to the erthe Digitized by Google HE STRIVES TO REACH MODRED. Ill Of the thraeste mene thre hundrethe at ones ! 3756 They slay three — hundred of the Bot sir Gawayne for grefe myghte noghte agayne-stande, brav est. Vmbegrippys a spere, and to a gome rynnys, That bare of gowles fulle gaye, with gowces of syluere; He gyrdes hym in at the gorge with his gryme 1 launce, J%at the growndene glayfe graythes in sondyre! 3761 sir Gawaine kills ° the king of Goth- W ith that boystous hrayde he bownes hym to dye ! land - The kynge of Gutlande it was, a gude mane of armes. Thayre avawwarde than alle voydes ^are-aftyre, The vanguard of Alls venqueste verrayely with valyant berynes ; 3765 Metis with medilwarde, that Modrede ledys ! Cure mene merkes theme to, as theme myshappenede— Gawaine rashly advances against ffor hade sir Gawayne hade grace to halde the grene hille, He had wirchipe i-wys wownnene for ju er! 3769 othe^^eKrd"! 1 Bot thane sir Gawayne i-wysse, he waytes hym wele To wreke hyme on this werlaughe, that this werre mouede ; And merkes to sir Modrede amonge alle his beryns, With the Mownttagus, and other gret lordys. Than sir Gawayne was greuede, and with a gret wylle Gawaine puts a 1 good spear in \ ffewters a faire spere, and freschely askryes,— 3775 ! “ ffals fosterde foode, the fende haue thy bonys! proaches. ffy one the, felone, and thy false werkys ! Thow salle be dede and vndone for thy derfe dedys. Or I salle dy this daye, $if destanye worthe ! ” 3779* T hane his enmye, with oste of owtlawede berynes, peafss] J . The host of the Alle enangylles abowte oure excellente knyghttez, enem^number. That the tray to ure be tresone had tryede hym seluene ; “SndGawSSe Dukes of Danemarke he dyghttes fulle sone, 3783 little And leders of Lettowe, with legyons inewe, Ymbylappyde oure mene with launcez fulle kene, Sowdeours and Sarazenes owte of sere landys, Sexty thosande mene semlyly arrayede, 3787 Sekerly assembles thare one seuenschore knyghtes, Sodaynly in dischayte by tha salte strandes. Thane sir Gawayne grette with his gray eghene, Gawaine weens and laments for ffor grefe of his gud mene that he gyde schulde; 3791 thedangerofhis 1 growne struck out, and gryrru? written instead . Digitized by Google 112. He comforts them with promises of blessings in heaven. They shall sup with prophets, patriarchs, and apostles. He that yields unslain, be he nevermore saved or succoured of Christ! Then Qawaine grimly grips his weapon, and rushes into the fray. He performs He peri mighty deeds of arms. SIR QAWAINE FIGHTS LIKE A MADMAN. He wyste that th&y wondyde ware, and wery forfoughttene; And what for wondire and woo, alle his witte faylede. And thane syghande he saide, with sylande terys,— “We are with Sarazenes be-sett appone sere lialfes ! I syghe noghte for my selfe, sa helpe oure Lorde; 3796 Bot for to [see] vs snpprysede, my sorowe es the more. Bes dowghtty to-daye, 3 one dukes schalle be 3 oures ! ffor dere Dryghttyne this daye, dredys no wapyne. We salle ende this daye aHs excellent knyghttes, 3800 Ayere to endelesse joye with angelles vnwemmyde. Thoie we hafe vnwittyly wastede oure selfene, We salle wirke alle wele in the wirchipe of Cryste. We salle for 3 one Sarazenes, I sekire 30 W my trowhe, Souppe with oure Saueoure solemply in heuene, In presence of that precious, prynce of alle other 3806 With prophetes, and patriarkes, and apostlys fulle nobill Be-fore his freliche face that fowrmede vs alle I 3 ondire to 3 one 3 aldsones, he that 3 eldes hyme euer, Qwhylles he es qwykke and in qwerte vnquellyde with handis, Be he neuer mo sauede, ne socowrede with Cryste, Bot Satanase his sawle mo we synke in-to heHe! ” 3812 T han grymly sir Gawayne gryppis hys wapyne, Agayne ^Aat gret bataille he graythes hym sone; Badly of his riche swerde he reghttes the cheynys, In he schokkes his schelde, schouwtes he no lengare; Bot alls ynwyse, wodewyse, he wente at the gayneste, Wondis of thas wedirwyns with wrakfulle dynttys, Alle wellys fulle of blode, thare he awaye passes ; 3819 And thofe hym ware fulle woo, he wondys bot lyttille, Bot wrekys at his wirchipe the wrethe of hys lorde ! He stekys stedis in stoure, and sterenefulle knyghttes, That sterynemene in theire sterapes stone-dede thay lygge 1 He ryvys the ranke stele, he rittes the mayles; 3824 Thare myghte no renke hym areste, his resone was passede ! Digitized by AnOOQle SIR GAWAINE IS SLAIN BY MODRED. 113 He feUe in a fransye for fersenesse of herte, He feghttis and fellis downe that hyme be-fore standis ! ffelle neuer fay mane sicbe fortune in ertbe ! 3828 In-to the hale bataile hedlyngs he rywnys, And hurtes of the hardieste that one the erthe lenges ! Letande aHs a lyone, he lawnches theme thorowe, Lordes and ledars, that one the launde houes ! 3832 Jit s ir Gawayne for wo wondis hot lyttille, Bot woundisof thaswedirwynes vtith wondirfulle dyntes, Alls he that wold wilfully wastene hyme selfene ; And for wondsome and wille alle his wit failede, 3836 That wode aHs a wylde beste he wente at the gayneste; Alle walewede one blode, thare he a-waye passede ; Iche a wy may be warre, be wreke of an-o ther ! 3839 thorowe; Bot the schalke for the scharpe he schownttes a littille, He schare hyme one, the schorte rybbys a schaftmonde large! 3843 The schafte schoderede and schotte in the schire beryne, That the schadande blode ouer his schanke rynnys, And schewede one his schynbawde, that was schire bumeste! 3846 And so they schyfte and schove, he schotte to the erthe; With ^elussche of ^elauncehe lyghteonehysschuldyrs, Ane akere lenghe one a launde, fulle lothely wondide. Than Gawayne gyrde to the gome, and one the groffe fallis; 3850 AHs his grefe was graythede, his grace was no bettyre ! He schokkes owtte a schorte knyfe schethede with siluere, And scholde haue slottede hyme in, bot no slytte happenede; His hand sleppid and slode o slante one the mayles, And the to ther slely slynges hym vndire : 3855 With a trenchande knyfe the trayto ure hym hyttes, MORTE ARTHURE. 8 He fights like a madman. [leaf 98, back] Mad as a wild beast, he leaves all wallowing in blood where he passes. He wounds Modred in the side. Modred falls to the earth. Gawaine strikes at him with a knife, but misses his blow. The traitor hits him Digitized by ^.ooQle 114 MODRED DESCRIBES GAWAINE’s CHARACTER. through the helmet and the Gawaine is gone, the good man of arms! King Frederick asks who he was. Modred tells him that he was Sir Gawaine the good, the merriest, the kindliest, and the bravest of knights! The hardiest of hand, the happiest in arms, the most courteous in hall! Modred weeps and curses his destiny^ , Thorowe the helme and the hede, one heyghe one the brayne : And tlius bit Gawayne es gone, the gude man of armes, With-owttyne reschewe of renke, and rewghe es the more ! Thus sir Gawaymze es gone, that gyede many othire ; firo Gowere to Gemesay, alle the gret lordys 3861 Of Glamour, of Galys londe, this galyarde knyghtes, ffor glent of gloppynyrcg 1 glade be they neuer! K yng firoderike of Fres faythely ^are-aftyre, 3864 ffraynes at the false mane of owre ferse knyghte ; “ Knew thow euer this knyghte in thi kithe ryche, Of whate kynde he was comenel be-knowe now the sothe; Qwat gome was he this with the gaye armes, 3868 With this gryffouwe of golde, that es one growffe fallyne ? He has grettly greffede vs, sa me Gode helpe ! Gyrde downe oure gude mene, and greuede vs sore! He was the sterynneste in stoure that euer stele werryde, fibre he has stonayede oure stale, and stroyede for euer!” Than sir Mordrede with mouthe melis fulle faire; 3874 “ He was makles one molde, mane, be my trowhe ; This was sir Gawayne the gude, the gladdeste of othire, And the graciouseste gome that vndire God lyffede, Mane hardyeste of hande, happyeste in armes, 3878 And the hendeste in hawle vndire heuene riche; The lordelieste of ledynge q why lies he lyfie myghte, fibre he was lyone allossede in londes i-newe ; Had thow knawene hym, sir kynge, in kythe thare he lengede, 3882 His konynge, his knyghthode, his kyndly werkes, His doyng, his doughtynesse, his dedis of armes, Thow wolde hafe dole for his dede the dayes of thy lyfe! ” \ Jit that traytowr aHs tite teris lete he falle, 3886 Tumes hym furthe tite, and talkes no more, Went wepand a-waye, and weries the stowndys, \ 1 MS. gloppyngnywg. Digitized by Googl< GUINEVER BECOMES A NUN. 115 TlidX euer his werdes ware wroghte siche wandrethe to wyrke : Whene he thoghte on tfMs thynge, it thirllede his herte; ffor sake of his sybb blode sygheande he rydys ; 3891 When that renayede renke remembirde hym seluene, Of reuerence and ryotes of the Rownde Table, He remyd and repent hyme of alle his rewthe werkes, Rode awaye with his rowte, ristys he no lengere, 3895 ffor rade of oure Tiche kynge, ryve tha,t he scholde. Thane kayres he to Comewaile, carefulle in herte, Be-cause of his kynsemane that one the coste ligges : He taries tremlande ay, tydandis to herkene. 3899 Than the traytowre treuntede the Tyseday taar-aftyre, Trynnys in with a trayne tresone to wirke, And by the Tambire that tide his tentis he reris, And thane in a mette-while a messangere he sendes, And wraite vn-to Waynor how the werlde chaungede, And what comliche coste the kyng was aryuede, 3905 One ffoode foughtene with his fleete, and fellyd theme o lyfe; Bade hir ferkene oo ferre, and fflee with hir childire, Whills he myghte wile hyme awaye, and wyne to hir speche, 3908 Ayere in-to Irelande, in-to thas owte-mownteS, And wonne thare in wildemesse witA-in the, wast landys. Than cho 3 ermys and 3 ee at Jorke in hir chambire, Gronys fulle grysely with gretand teres, 3912 Passes owte of the palesse with alle hir pryce maydenys, Towarde Chestyre in a charre thay chese hir the wayes, Dighte hir ewyne for to dye with dule at hir herte; Scho kayres to Karelyone, and kawghte hir a vaile, Askes thare the habite in the honoure of Criste, And alle for falsede, and frawde, and fere of hir louerde! B ot whene oure wiese kynge wiste that Gawayne was landede, 3919 He al to-wrythes for woo, and wryngande his handes, that ever he was fated to work such woe. He repents of his wickedness and retreats. goes into Cornwall, and pitches his tents by the Ta- and from thence writes to Gui never. bidding her fly into Iceland. But she goes to Caerleon and takes the veil. Arthur is grieved Digitized by Google 116 ARTHUR FINDS THE DEAD BODY OF GAWAINE. for Gawaine’s rash landing, and follows him wading through the water. He hastens to the field where ten thousand of the traitor's men and seven score of his own knights lie dead. [leaf 94, back] Arthur slays dukes and earls; he seeks lor the knights of the Round Table, and finds Sir Gawaine lying dead. With groans and tears he kisses the body. He bitterly laments the good knight. Gers lawnche his botes appone a lawe watire, Londis als a lyone with lordliche knyghtes, Slippes in in the sloppes o-slante to the girdylle, Swalters ype swyftly with his swerde drawene, 3924 Bownnys his bataile and baners displayes, Buskes oner the brode sandes with breth at his herte, fferkes frekkly one felde thare the feye lygges; Of the traytowrs mene one trappede stedis, 3928 Ten thosandez ware tynte, the trewghe to acownt, And certane on owre syde seuene score knyghtes In soyte with theire souerayne yn-sownde are beleuede ! T he kynge comly ouer-keste knyghtes and othire, Erlles of Awfrike, and Estriche berynes 3933 Of Orgaile and Orekenay, the Iresche kynges, The nobileste of Nor way e, nowmbirs fulle hugge, Dukes of Danamarke, and dubbid knyghtes ; And the guchede kynge in the gay armes 3937 Lys gronande one the grownrcde, and girde tlioroweevene! The riche kynge ransakes with rewthe at his herte, And vp rypes the renkes of alle the Bownde Tabylle; Ses theme alle in a soppe in sowte by theme one, 3941 With the Sarazenes vn-sownde enserchede a-bowte ; And sir Gawayne the gude in his gaye armes, Ymbegrippede the girse, and one grouffe fallene, 3944 His baners braydene downe, betyne of gowlles, His brand and his brade schelde al blody be-rouene; Was neuer oure semliche kynge so sorowfulle in herte; Ne that sanke hyme so sade, hot that sighte one. 3948 T han gliftis the gud kynge, and glopyns in herte, Gronys fulle grisely with gretande teris ; ELnelis downe to the cors, and kaught it in armes, Kastys ype his vmbrere, and kyssis hyme sone, 3952 Lokes one his eye-liddis, that lowkkide ware faire, His lippis like to the lede, and his lire falowede ! Than the corownde kyng cryes fulle lowde,— “ Dere kosyne o kynde ? in kare £im I leuede ! 3956 Digitized by L.ock : HIS OVERPOWERING GRIEF. 117 ffor nowe my wirchipe es wente, and my were endide ! Here es ^o hope of my hele, my happynge of armes ! My herte and my hardynes hale one hym lengede! My concede, my comforthe, fh&t kepide myne herte ! Of alle knyghtes the kynge that vndir Criste lifede, ' Thou was worthy to be kynge, thofe I the corowne hare! My wele and my wirchipe of alle this werlde riche 3963 Was wonnene thourghe sir Gawayne, and thourghe his witt one ! Allas! ” saide sir Arthure, “ nowe ekys my sorowe ! I am vttirly vndone in myne awene landes! A dowttouse derfe dede, ^ou duellis to longe ! 3967 Why drawee thou so one dreghe ? thow drownnes myne herte! ” Than swe[l]tes the swete kynge and in swoune fallis, Swafres vp swiftely, and swetly hym kysses, Tille his burliche berde was hlody be-rowne, 3971 Alls he had hestes hirtenede, and hroghte owt of life; He had sir Ewayne comene, and othire grete lordys, His holde herte had hroustene for bale at th&t stownde! “"Dlyne,” sais thies holde mene, “ thow blondirs thi ■D selfene, 3975 This es botles bale, for bettir bees it neuer ! It es no wirchipe i-wysse to wryng thyne hondes, To wepe als a womane it es no witt holdene ! Be knyghtly of contenawnce, als a kyng scholde, 3979 And leue siche clamoure for Cristes lufe of heuene ! 99 “ ffor blode,” said the bolde kynge, “ blyne salle I neuer, Or my brayne to-briste, or my breste other ! ■ Was neuer sorowe so softe that sanke to my herte, Itt es fulle sibb to my selfe, my sorowe es the more ! Was neuer so soro wfulle a syghte seyne with myne eyghene! He es sakles supprysede for syne of myne one ! ” Downe knelis the kynge, and kryes fulle lowde; 3987 With carefulle contenawnce he karpes thes wordes,— “ 0 rightwis riche Gode, this rewthe thow be-holde ! It was through his wit that all his conquests were made. Arthur swoons for grief; then starts up and kisses the dead knight. His beard is smeared in the blood of Gawaine. Sir Ewaine and his knights restrain him. [leaf 95 ] He excuses himself on account of the greatness of the grief. Digitized by <^.ooQle 118 SIR GAWAINE IS CARRIED TO WINCHESTER. This ryalle rede blode ryne appone ertlie; It ware worthy to he schrede and sehrynede in golde, ffor it es sakles of syne, sa helpe me oure Lorde! ” 3992 He collects Ga- Downe knelis the kyng with kare at his herte, waine’s blood in J 0 7 a helmet, Kaughte it vpe kyndly with his clene handis, and carries away his body. Then he makes a solemn vow that he will take no pleasure in the chase till Gawaine be avenged. H' Keste it in a ketille-hatte, and eouerde it faire, 3995 And kayres fnrthe with the cors in kyghte theie he lenges. ["ere I make myn avowe,” quod the kynge thane, “ To Messie, and to Marie, the mylde qwenwe of heuene, I salle neuer ryvaye, ne racches vn-cowpylle At roo ne rayne-dere, that rynnes apponwe erthe ; 4000 Neue?* grewhownde late glyde, ne gossehawke latt flye, Ne neuer fowle see fellide, that flieghes with wenge; ffawkone ne formaylle appone fiste handille, Ne 3 itt with gerefawcone rejoyse me in erthe; 4004 Ne regwne in my royaltez, ne halde my Eownde Table, Tille thi dede, my dere, be dewly reuengede! Bot euer droupe and dare, qwylles my lyfe lastez, Tille Drightene and derfe dede hafe done qwate theme likes !” 4008 The stndghtto Than kaughte they vpe the cors with kare at theire hertes, winchester, Karyed [it] one a coursere with the kynge selfene; The waye vn-to Wynchestre th&y wente at the gayneste, Wery and wandsomdly, with wondide knyghtes; 4012 Thare come the prior of the plas, and professide mownkes, ceMion of m a 0 nk? -^P as ^ P^cessione, and with the prynce metys; And he be-tuke theme the cors of the knyghte noble. Arthur gives orders that all honour should be paid to the dead. “ Lokis it be clenly kepyd,” he said, “ and in the kirke holdene, 4016 Done for derygese, as to the ded fallys, Menskede with messes, for mede of the saule : Loke it wante no waxe, ne no wirchipe elles, And at the body be bawmede, and one erthe holdene, 3iff thou kepe thi couent encroche any wirchipe 4021 At my comyng a-gayne, $if Crist wille it thole ; Digitized by Google ARTHUR WILL NEVER SLEEP TILL MODRED BE SLAIN. 119 A-byde of the beryenge tille they be brought© vndire, That has wroghte vs this woo, and this werre mouede.” T /zan sais sir Wychere the wy, a wyese mane of armes, “ I rede $e warely wende, and wirkes the beste; Soiorne in this cet 6 , and semble thi berynes, 4027 And bidde with thi bolde mene in thi burghe riche : Get owt knyghttez of contres, that castelles holdes, And owt of garysons grete gude mene of armes, ffor we are faithely to fewe to feghte with theme alle, That we see in his sorte appone the see bankes.” 4032 With krewelle contenance thane the kyng karpis theis wordes,— “ I praye the kare noghte, air knyghte, ne caste thou no dredis! Hadde I no segge bot my selfe one vndir sone, 4035 And I may hym see with sighte, or one hym sette hondis, I salle evene amange his mene malle hym to dede, Are I of the stede styre halfe a stede lenghe ! I salle [stryke] hym in his stowre, and stroye hymefor euer, And ^are-to make I myne avowe devottly to Ciyste, And to hys modyre Marie, the mylde qwene of heuene ! I salle neuer soiowme sounde, ne sawghte at myne herte, In cete ne in subarbe sette appone erthe, 4043 He 3 itt slomyre ne slepe with my slawe eyghne, Tille he be slayne that hym slowghe, 3 if any sleyghte happene: Bot euer pwrsue the payganys that my pople distroyede, Qwylls I may pare theme and pynne, in place thave me likes.” 4047 Thare durste no renke hym areste of alle the Bo wnde Table, He none paye that prynce with plesande wordes, He none of his lige mene luke hym in the eyghne, So lordely he lukes for losse of his knyghttes ! 4051 Thane drawes he to Dorsett, and dreches no langere, Derefulle dredlesse with drowppande teris; Kayeris in-to Komewayle with kare at his herte, Sir Wvcher advises that he should stay in Winchester and rally his forces. [leaf 95, back] Arthur declares that though he be alone, if he may see Mod red he will mall him to death among all his men. He will never sojourn in citv or town till Mo • dred be slain. None of his liege men dare look him in the eyes. Digitized by ^.ooQle 120 HE EXHORTS HIS KNIGHTS TO BRAVE DEEDS. Arthur follows Modred into Cornwall and attacks him. A vast host of aliens assault Arthur’s men. I There were sixty / thousand against I eighteen hunV di ed. Arthur on a charger arranges his men. He beseeches them to do well that day and not to fear. [leaf 90] The trays of the traytowre he trynys fulle euen?ie; 4055 And tumys in he the Trejntis the traytowre to seche, ffyndis hym in a foreste the Frydaye there-aftire; The kyng lyghttes one fott, and freschely askryes, And with his freliche folke he has the felde noramene! N ow isschewis his enmye vndire the wode eynys, With ostes of alynes fulle horrebille to schewe! Sir Mordrede the Malebranche, with his myche pople, ffoundes owt of the foreste appone fele halfes, 4063 In senene grett batailles semliche arrayede, Sexty thowsande mene, the syghte was fulle hugge, Alle fyghtande folke of the ferre lanndes, Ifaire fettede one frownte be tha fresche strondes! And alle Arthurs oste was amede with knyghtes 4068 Bot awghtene hundrethe of alle, entrede in rolles ; This was a mache vn-mete, bot myghttis of Criste, To melle with that multitude in those man londis. Than the royalle roy of the Rownde Table 4072 Rydes one a riche stede, arrayes his beryns, Buskes his avawmwarde, als hym beste likes; Sir Ewayne, and sir Errake, and othire gret lordes, Demenys the medilwarde menskefully thare-aftyre, With Merrake and Meneduke, 1 myghtty of strenghes; Idirous and Alymere, thive auenaunt childrens, Ayers with Arthure, with seuene score of knyghtes ; He rewlis the rerewarde redyly thare-aftyre, 4080 The rekeneste redy mene of the Rownde Table, And thus he fittis his folke, and freschely askryes, And syene comforthes his mene with knyghtlyche wordes— “ I be-seke 30 W, sirs, for sake of oure Lorde, 4084 That 3 e doo wele to-daye, and dredis no wapene ! fiighttes fersely nowe, and fendis 30 ure seluene, ffellis downe 3 one feye folke, the felde salle be owrs ! They are Sarazenes 3 one sorte, vn-sownde motte they worthe! 4088 1 Or Menyduke. Digitized by ^.ooQle THE FIGHT BEGINS. 121 Sett one theme sadlye, for sake of oure Lorde ! if they are slain * they will be taken 3 if vs be destaynede to dy to-daye one this erthe, up to We salle he hewede vn-to heuene, or we be halfe colde ! Loke 30 lett for no lede lordly to wirche ; 4092 Layes 3 one laddes lowe be the layke ende ! Take no tente vn-to me, no tale of me rekke, Bes besy one my baners with 3 oure brighte wapyns, That they be strenghely stuffede with steryne knyghtes, And holdene lordly one lofte ledys to schewe; 4097 Jif any renke theme arase, reschowe theme sone. Wirkes now my wirchipe, to-daye my werre endys ! To-day his war Je wotte my wele and my woo, wirkkys as 30 W likys ! Crist comly with crowne comforthe 30 w alle, 4101 ffor the kyndeste creatowrs that euer kynge ledde ! I gyffe 30 W alle my blyssyng with a blithe wille, He givwthem^ And alle Bretowns bolde, blythe mote 3 e worthe ! ” ing - They pype vpe at pryme tyme, approches theme nere, Pris mene and priste proues theire strenghes; Bremly the brethemen bragges in tronmppes, 4107 In comettes comlyly, whene knyghttes assembles, And thane jolyly enjoynys the is jentylle knyghttes; A jolyere joume ajuggede was neuer, Whene Bretones boldly enbraces theire scheldes, 4111 The Britons at- ^ tack the enemy. And Cristyne encroyssede theme, and castis in fewtire ! without delajr - ham sir Arthure oste his enmye askryes, And in they schokke theire scheldes, schontes no lengare; Schotte to the schiltrones, and schowttes fulle heghe, Thorowe scheldis fulle schene schalkes they touche ! Redily thas rydde mene of the Rownde Table 4117 With ryalle rannke stele rittys theire mayles; Bryneys browddene they briste, and burneste helmys, Hewes haythene mene downe, halses in sondre ! ffyghtande with fyne stele, the feye blod rynnys, 4121 Of the frekkeste of frounte, vn-fers ere be-levede. Ethyns of ATgayle and Irische kynges Enverounes oure avawmwarde with venymmos berynes; Th « wgwrd is Digitized by ^.ooQle 122 surrounded by the enemy, and many of them slain. Arthur bids Sir Idras rescue his [leaf 96, back] father, Sir Ewaine. Sir Idrus replies that his father has commanded him not to leave the king. “ If he be destined to din, Christ keep his soul! ” MUCH BLOOD OF BOLD BRITONS IS SPILT. Peghttes and paynymes with perilous wapyns, 4125 'With speres disspetousely disspoylles oure knyghttes, And hewede downe the hendeste with hertly dynttys! Thorow the holle batayle they holdene theire wayes; Thus fersly they fyghte appone sere halfes, 4129 That of the bolde Bretones myche blode spillis. Thare durste non rescowe theme, for reches in erthe, The steryne ware thaveso stedde, and stuffede wit[h] othire : He durste noghte stire a steppe, hot stodde for hyme seluene, 4133 Title thre stalis ware stroyede be strenghe of hyme one! “ Idrous,” quod Arthure, “ ayre the by-houes ! I see sir Ewayne ouer-sette with Sarazenes kene ! 4136 Iiedy the for rescows, arraye thee sone ! Hye the with hardy mene in helpe of thy ffadire ! Sett in one the syde, and socoure 3 one lordes ; Bot they be socourrede and sownde, vnsawghte be I neuer!” 4140 Idrous hyme ansuers emestly ^ are-aftyre,— “ He es my fadire in faithe, for sake salle I neuer, He has me fosterde and fedde, and my faire bretherene, Bot I for-sake this gate, so me Gode helpe, 4144 And sothely alle sybredyne bot thy sfelfe one; I breke neuer his biddynge for beryne one lyfe, Bot euer bouxvme as beste blethely to wyrke ! He commande me kyndly, with knyghtly wordes, 4148 That I schulde lelely one the lenge, and one noo lede elles; I salle hys cowimandement holde, $if Criste wil me thole! He es eldare thane I, and ende salle we bothene ; He salle ferkke be-fore, and I salle come aftyre : 4152 Jiffe hyme be destaynede to dy to-daye one this erthe, Criste comly with crowne take kepe to hys saule ! ” T /ian remys the riche kynge with rewthe at his herte, Hewys hys handys one heghte, and to the heuene lokes,— 4156 “Qwythene hade Dryghttyne destaynede at his derewille, Digitized by <^.OOQLe MODRED DISGUISES HIMSELF. 123 That he hade demyd me to-daye to dy for 30 w alia ! That had I leuer than be lorde alle my lyfe tyme, 4159 Off alle that Alexandere aughte qwhilles he in erthe lengede ” Sir Ewayne and sir Errake, thea excellente beryns, Enters in one the oste, and egerly strykes ; 4162 The ethenys of Orkkenaye and Irische kynges, Thay gobone of the gretteste with growndene swerdes, Hewes one thas hnlkes with the ire harde wapyns, Layed downe thas ledes with lothely dynttys ; 4166 Schuldirs and scheldys thay schrede to the hawnches, And meddles thourghe mayles thay merkene in sondire ! Siche honoure neuer aughte none erthely kyng At theire endyng daye, bot Arthure hyme seluene! So the droughte of the daye dryede theire hertes, 4171 That bothe drynkles they dye, dole was the more ! Now mellys oure medille-warde, and mengene to-gedire. Sir Mordrede the Malebranche with his myche pople, He had hide hyme be-hynde wttA-in thas holte eynys, With halle bataile one hethe, harme es the more ! 4176 He hade sene the conteke al clene to the ende, How oure cheualrye cheuyde be chaunces of armes! He wiste oure folke was for-foughttene, that th&re was feye leuede; To encowntere the kynge he castes hyme sone, 4180 Bot the churles chekyne hade chaungyde his armes; He had sothely for-sakene the sawturoure engrelede, And laughte vpe thre lyons alle of whitte siluyre, Passande in purpre of perrie fulle riche, 4184 ffor the kynge sulde noghte knawe the cawtelous wriche! Be-cause of his cowardys he keste of his atyre; Bot the comliche kyng knewe hym fulle swythe, Karpis to sir Cadors thes kyndly wordez,— 4188 “I see the traytowre come jondyr trynande fulle 3 erne; Jone ladde with the lyones es like to hyme selfene ! Hym salle torfere be-tyde, may I touche ones, 4191 Arthur wishes that he might die instead of his knights. Sir Ewaine and Sir Errak perform great deeds of valour before they are overpowered and slain. The centre of Arthur’s army en¬ gages. Sir Modred has been watching the battle, and preparing to attack the king. But first he changes his arms to conceal himself. Peaf 97] But Arthur knows him at once, and points him out to Sir Cador. Digitized by ^.ooQle 124 MODRED IS WOUNDED. The two famous swords, Clarent and Caliburn, shall this day be tried one against the other. Arthur recognizes his sword which he had left at Wallingford under the care of the Queen. Sir Marrik fights with Modred and is foiced to withdraw, for Sir Marrik was marred with old age. ffor alle his tresone and trayne, alls I am trew lorde ! To-day Clarente and Caliburne salle kythe theme to-gedirs, Whilke es kenere of kerfe, or hardare of eghge ! ffraiste salle we fyne stele appone fyne wedis. 4195 Itt was my derlynge daynteuous, and fulle dere holdene, Kepede fore encorownmentes of kynges enoynttede, One dayes when I dubbyde dukkes and erlles ; It was burliche borne be the bryghte hiltes; I durste neuer dere it in dedis of armes, 4200 Bot eu er kepide clene, be-cause of my seluene. ffor I see Clarent vn-clede, tha,t crowne es of swerdes, My wardrop of Walyngfordhe I wate es distroyede ; Wist no wy of wone bot Waynor hir seluene, 4204 Scho hade the kepynge hir selfe of that kydde wapyne, Off cofres endosede that to the crowne lengede, With rynges and relikkes, and the regale of ffraunce, That was ffowndene one sir ffrolle, whene he was feye leuyde.” 4208 Than sir Marrike in malyncoly metys hym sone, With a mellyd mace myghtyly hym strykes ; The bordoure of his bacenett he bristes in sondire, That the schire rede blode ouer his brene rynnys! 4212 The beryne blenkes for bale, and alle his ble chaunges, Bot $itt he byddys as a bore, and brymly he strykes ! He braydes owte a brande bryghte als euer ony syluer, That, was si?* Arthure awene, and Ytere his fadirs, 4216 In the wardrop of Walyngfordhe was wonte to be kepede; Thare-with the derfe dogge syche dynttes he rechede, The to ther wit^-drewe one dreghe and durste do none other ; ffor sir Marrake was mane merrede in elde, 4220 And sir Mordrede was myghty, and [in] his moste strenghis; Come none witA-in the compas, knyghte ne none o ther, WitMn the swyng of swerde, that ne he the swete leuyd. That persayfes oure pry nee, and presses to faste, 4224 Digitized by <^.OOQLe HE WOUNDS ARTHUR, AND 18 KILLED. 125 Strykes in-to the stowre by strengbe of hys handis; Ai^im-forowhu Metis with air Mordrede, he melis vn-faire,— “ Tume, traytoure yntrewe, the tydys no bettyre; 4227 and upbraids Be gret Gode, thow sails dy with dynt of my handys ! The schalle reseowe no renke ne reches in erthe-! ” The kyng with Calabume knyghtly hym strykes, The cantelle of the clere schelde he kerfes in sondyre, In-to the schuldyre of the schalke a schaftmonde large, Thai the schire rede blode schwede one the maylys ! He schodirde and schrenkys, and schontes bott lyttills, Bott schokkes in scharpely in his schene wedys ; 4235 The ffelonwe with the flyns swerde freschely he strykes, The ffelettes of the fferrere syde he flassches in sondyre, Thorowe jopowne and jesserawnte of gentille mailes ! The freke fichede in the flesche an halfe fotte large; That derfe dynt was his dede, and dole was the more That eu er that doughtty snide dy, hot at Dryghttyns wylle! 4241 Jitt with Calybume his swerde, fulls knyghttly he strykes, Kastes ine his clere schelde, and coueres hym fulls faire; Swappes of the swerde hande, als he by glentes, 4244 Ane inche fro the elbowe, he ochede it in sondyre, That he swounnes one the swarthe, 1 and one swym fallis; Thorowe bracer 2 of browns stele, and the bryghte mayles, That the hilte and the hande appons the hethe ligges ! Thane frescheliche the freke the ffente ype rererys, Brochis hym in with the bronde to the bryghte hiltys, And he brawles one the bronde, and bownes to dye. u In faye,” says the feye kynge, “ sore me for-thynkkes That eusr siche a false theefe so faire an ende haues.” Then he strikes him with Caliburn and cuts through his shield and into the shoulder. [leaf 97, hack] Mod red, though wounded, strikes Arthur and gives him a terrible wound in the side. Arthur with Calibum cuts off the sword-hand of Modred, and pierces him with his sword. Arthur declares that his end is too good for him. Qwene they had ffenyste thia feghte, thane was the felde wonnene, 4254 And the false folke in the felde feye are by-leuede! Tille a fforeste they fledde, and felle in the greuys, 1 MS. swrathe. 2 MS. brafcr. Digitized by ^.ooQle 126 ARTHUR MOURNS OYER HIS DEAD KNIGHTS. Modred’g men are defeated and pursued. Arthur finds the dead bodies of his knights. He swoons for sorrow, and bitterly grieves over his knights. [leaf 98] Now he may weep and wring his hands, for his worship is gone for ever. And fers feghtande folke folowes theme aftyre; Howntes and hewes downs the heythene tykes, Mourtherys in the mowntaygnes air Mordrede knyghtes; Thare chapyde neuer no childe, cheftayne ne other, Bot choppes theme downs in the chace, it chargys hot littylle! 4261 B ot whens air Arthure anons s?> Ewayne he fyndys, And Errake the auenawnt, and other grett lordes, He kawghte vp sir Cador with care at his herte, Sir Clegis, sir Cleremonde, the a clere mene of armes, Sir Lothe, and sir Lyonelle, sir Lawncelott, and Lowes, Marrake and Meneduke, Mat myghty ware euer ; 4267 With langoure in the launde thare he layes theme togedire, Lokede one theyre Mghames, and with a lowde steuene, Alls lede Mat liste noghte lyfe and loste had his myrthis; Than he stotays for made, and alle his strenghe faylez, Lokes vpe to the lyfte, and alle his lyre chaunges, 4272 Downne he sweys fulle swythe, and in a swoune fallys, Vpe he coueris one kneys, and kryes fulle oftene,— “ Kyng comly with crowne, in care am I leuyde ! Alls my lordchipe lawe in lande es layde vndyre ! 4276 That me has gyfene gwerdones, he grace of hym seluene, Mayntenyde my manhede be myghte of theire handes, Made me manly one molde, and mayster in erthe; In a tenefulle tyme this torfere was rereryde, 4280 That for a traytoure has tynte alle my trewe lordys ! Here rystys the riche blude of the Rownde Table, Rebukkede with a rebawde, and rewthe es the more ! I may helples one hethe house be myne one, 4284 Alls a wafulle wedowe Mat wanttes hir beryne ! I may werye and wepe, and wrynge myne handys, ffor my wytt and my wyrchipe awaye es for euer ! Off alle lordchips I take leue to myne ende! 4288 Here es the Bretones blode broughte owt of lyfe, And nowe in this joumee alle my joy endys ! ” Digitized by <^.OOQLe ARTHUR 18 SHRIVEN AND HOUSELED. 127 Thane relyes the renkes of alle the Rownde Table, To the ryalle roy thay ride ^am alle; 4292 Than assembles fulle sonne senene score knyghtes, In sighte to theire sonerayne, thet was vnsownde leuede; Than knelis the crownede kynge, and kryes one lowde,— “ I thanke the , Gode, of thy grace, 'with a gud wylle; That gafe vs vertue and witt to vencows this beryns; And vs has granntede the gree of theis gret lordes ! He sent vs neuer no schame, ne schenchipe in erthe, Bot euer ^it the ouer-hande of alle other kynges : 4300 We hafe no laysere now these lordys tb seke, ffor 3 one laythely ladde me lamede so sore ! Graythe vs to Glaschenbery, vs gaynes none other; Thare we may ryste vs w? tA roo, and raunsake oure wondys. Of this dere day werke, the Dryghttene be lonede, 4305 That vs has destaynedeand demyd to dye in oure awene.” Thane they holde at his heste hally at ones, And graythes to Glasschenberye the gate at the gayneste; Entres the lie of Aueloyne, and Arthure he lyghttes, Merkes to a manere there, for myghte he no forthire : A surgyne 1 of Saleme enserches his wondes, 4311 The kyng sees be asaye that sownde bese he neuer, And sone to his sekire mene he said theis wordes,— “ Doo calle me a confessowr, with Criste in his armes; I wille be howselde in haste, whate happe so be-tyddys; Corastantyne my cosyne he salle the corowne here, 4316 Atisbe-commyshymof kynde^ife Criste wille hym thole ! Beryne, fore my benysone, thowe berye 3 one lordys, That in baytaille with brondez are broghte owte of lyfe; And sythene merke manly to Mordrede childrene, 4320 That they bee sleyghely slayne, and slongene in watyrs; Latt no wykkyde wede waxe, ne wrythe one this erthe; I wame fore thy wirchipe, wirke aHs I bydde ! I fore-gyffe alle greffe, for Cristez lufe of heuene ! 4324 3ife Waynor hafe wele wroghte, wele hir be-tydde ! ” The remnants of his men rally round him. He thanks God for the victory, and all the glory which he and his knights had won. He desires to be taken to Glastonbury. He enters the Isle of Avelon and is taken to a manor there; for he could go no further. A surgeon examines his wounds. Arthur sends for a confessor. He appoints Constantine, his kinsman, his heir. He orders Modred’s children to be slain, and slung in waters. ** If Guinever have well wrought, well her betide." r V ■v ; 1 MS. susgyne. V Digitized by ^.ooQle 128 HIS SPIRIT PASSES AND HE SPEAKS NO MORE ! Then he says ^in He saide In manu8 with mayne onemolde wharehe ligges, Bpirit pa sses And thus passes his speryt, and spekes he no more ! [leaf 98, back] The baronage of Bretayne thane, bechopes and othire, The barons of Britain bury Arthur at Glastonbury. Great mourning was made at his ftmeraL Graythes theme to Glaschenbery with gloppynnande hertes, To bery thare the bolde kynge, and brynge to the erthe, With alle wirchipe and welthe that any wy scholde. Throly belles thay rynge, and Requiem syngys, 4332 Dosse messes and matyns with moumande notes: Relygeous reueste in theire riche copes, Pontyficalles and prelates in precyouse wedys, Dukes and dusszeperis in theire dule-eotes, 4336 Cowntasses knelande and claspande theire handes, Ladys languessande and lowrande to sehewe; Alle was buskede in blake, birdes and othire. That schewede at the sepulture, with sylande teris; Whas neuer so sorowfulle a syghte seene in theire tyme! Thus endis kyng Arthure, as auctors alegges, 4342 This was the end That was of Ectores blude, the kynge sone of Troye, of Arthur of the . andofPriwuus Sl#r Pryamo^? the prynce, praysede in erthe; of Troy. ffro thethene 1 broghte the Bretons alle his bolde eldyrs In-to Bretayne the brode, as the Bruytte tellys. 4346 et c\ explicit. Hicjacet Arthurus, rex q\u\ondam rex gue futurus. > ^ 1 rnbrs Itortt torUene ha ULohrrt at Sfymttone. $ London bktog qwi fttripsri sit beneltitlus. Qmw 1 1 Or thythen*. JOHN CHILDS AND SON, FBINTEBS. Digitized by ^.ooq Le 129 INDEX OF NAMES. Absolone, 2868. Achinour, 1824. Acres, 903, Acre. Affrike, 574, Affryke, 1869, Aufrike, 2607, Awfrike, 3933, Africa . Akyne, 496, Aix-la-Cliapelle. Aladuke, 1739, Alidoyke of Towelle, 1916, Alyduke, 1824. Alexander,, 2634, Alexandere, 3408, 4160, Alexandire, 2602, Alexander. Alexandere, 2607, Alysaundyre, 672, Alexandria. Algere, 2837, 2847. Alidoyke. See Aladuke. Almaygne, 3596, Almayne, 45, 496, 655, 618, 2387, 3210, Germany. Alyduke. See Aladuke. Alymere, 4078. Alysaundyre. See Alexandere. Amazonnes, 584. Ambyganye, 572. Antele, 2829, 2837. Anyone, 42, Aniane {in France). Araby, 1175, Arraby, 576, Arabia. Argayle, 4123, Argyle . Arthur, 26, 496, Arthure, 172, 288, 305, 470, &c. Askanere, 1739. MORTE ARTHURE. Asye, 574, Asia. Aueloyne, lie of, 4309, Isle of Avelon. Aufrike. See Affrike. Aungers, 288. Awguste, 1967, Augsburg. Lat7 Augusta Vindelicorum. Babyloyne, 586, Babylon. Baldake, 586, Bagdad. Bareflete, 629, 1182, 1223, Barflete, 835, Barfleur. Lat. Barofludum. Barouns, 1908. Basille, 907. Bawdewyne, 277, Bawdwyne, 1606, 2384. Bayone, 38, 2379, Bayonne. Bayous, 587. Bedvere, 893, 1170, Bedwar, 2384, Bed were, 1162, 1264, 1606, 1744, 2238, 2379. Bedwyne, 1408. Probably a mistake for Bedwere. Belyne, 277. Berade, 2384. Berelle, 1605, 1775, 1914, Berille, 1264, 1771, Berylle, 1433. Bemarde, Mounte, 566. Boice, 1263, 1426, 1433, 1456, Digitized by <^.OOQLe 130 INDEX OF NAMES. Boyce, 1483, 1485, 1605, Boys, 1378. Borghte, 1698. A mistake for Brut. Boyce, Boys. See Boice. Brabane, 36, Brabant Bremyne, 277. Bretayne, 2095, 2330, 2362, &c., Bretaynne, 3519, Bretayne the brade, 106, B. the broae, 3579, 4346, B. the braddere, 55, 1699, B. the more, 1018, Britain . Bretayne, 852, B. the lesse, 36, B. the ly tty lie, 304, Brittany. Bretones, 1011,1484,1617,4111, Bretons, 1403, 1407, Bretouns, 1348, Bretowns, 4104, Britons. Bretowne, sg. t 3508. Brut, 1695, Brutus. Bruytte, the, 4346, the Brute. Bryane, 1606. Burdeux, 38, Bordeaux. Burgoyne, 36, 1018, 1241, 2383, Burgundy. Cador, 247, 1718, 1724, 1777, &c., Cadore, 481,1602, 1637,1707> Cadors, 4188, Cadour, 259. Caerlyone, 61, Karelyone, 3916, Karlyone, 3512, Caerleon. Calaburne, 4230, Caliburne, 4193, Calyburne, 4242, Caliburn , Arthur's sword. Came, 2380, 2385. Capados, 580, Cappadocia. Capatoylle, the, 2353, Capitoile, 280, Capytoile, 96, the Capitol . Cardyfe, 2498, Cardiff. Carelele, 480, 839, Carlelele, 64, 476, Carlisle . Castelle Blanke, 1225. Catrike, 482. Cay me, 1311, Cain. Cayous, 156, 209, 892, 1864, 1997, Kayous, 1152, 1194, 2157, &c., Kay> Arthur’s chief butler. Chartris, 1619, Chartres. Chastelayne, 2952, Chasteleynne, 3028. Cheldrike, 2954. Chestyre, 3914, Chester . Childrike, 3537. Christofre, 2390. Clarent, 4202, Clarente, 4193, Arthur’s best sword. Clarybalde, 2497. Clarymownde, 2497. See Cleremonde. Clegis, 1604, 1638, 1649, 1671, &c., Clegys, 1692, 3635. Clemente, 1828. Cleremonde, 1603, 4265, Cleremownde, 3635, Cleremownnde, 1638. Cleremus, 1603, 1638. Clowdmur, 1604. Clyme, the close of, 1639. Collbrande, 2123, 2201, one of Arthur’s swords, perhaps = Caliburn. Colome, 623. Combe, 3110, 3128,3149, Como. Constantyne, 282, an emperour of Rome Constantyne, 4316, Arthur’s heir. Constantyne, 628, 848, Costantyne, 2373 Constantyne landez, 1187. Cordewa, 1866, Cordova » Cornett, 600, Comette, 1909, Cometo. Cornewaile, 1848, 2002, 2262, 3897, Cornewale, 1791, Cornewalle, 1637, Cornewayle, 247,1777, Kornewayle, 4054, Cornwall. Craddoke, 3511, 3517, Cradoke, 3487. Digitized by <^.OOQLe INDEX OF NAMES. 131 Crasyne, cowntas of, 3045. Creette, 200, Crete, 204, 580s. Crist, 136, 467, 482, &c., Criste, 227, 285, 296, &c., Cryste, 257, 308, 346, &c., Christ. Cyrus. See Cirquytrie in Glos sary. Cyprys, 596, Cyprus. Damaske, 578, Damascus. Damyat, 578, Damietta. Danamarke, 3936, Danemarke, 3752, 3783, Danmarke, 46, Benmark . Danamarkes, 3610, Danmarkes, 3528, iDanes, Danes, 3694. Danuby, 622, the Danube. Dauid, 3416. Dolfinede, 2653, Dauphin6 (?). Dolfyne, 3023, Dolphyne, 2970. Dorsett, 4052. Douere, 3066. Duche-men, 1251, Duche-mene, 2030, 2101, 2653, 2834, Germans, Ector, 2603, 2635, 3409, 4343, Hector. Egipt, 576, 2200. Elamet, 575. Ermonye, 573, Armenia, See The Ramans of Partenay , 11. 1637, 5321, 5372, &c.; where it is spelt Hermeny. Ermyngalle, 1825. Errake, 4075, 4161, 4263. Eruge, 42. Esexe, 1740, Essex. Estriche, 45, 3933, Austria. Ewandre, 1868, Ewandyre, 1622, Ewaynedyre, 1904. Ewayne, 357, 1572, 3973, 4075, &c., Ewayne fytz Henry, 1558, Ewane fytz Yryenee, 337, Ewayne fytz Yriene, 2066. Ewfrates, 573, Euphrates . Ewrope, 574. Famacoste, 2761, Famagosta in Cyprus. See The Romans of Par - tenay i 1.1299, and Mr Skeat’s note thereon. Federike, 2899. Feltemour, 1382. Feraunt, 2760, 2765, Ferawnt, 3404, Ferawnte, 2421. Ferrer, 2421, Ferrere, 2432. ff. Names beginning with ff are entered under single F. Flaundres, 495, Flaundrez, 34, 494, Flawndresche, 3597, Flanders. Florent, 2735, 2762, 2764, 2797, &c., Florente, 2483, 2729. Florent, 2232, Lucius’s sword. - Floridas, 2755, 2778, 2780, 2803, 3018, 3112, Florydas, 2490. Forawnt, 2490. Rqad Feraimt. France, 2365, Fraunce, 34, 110, 367, 435, &c. Fraunche-mene, 2484, Frenchmen. I Fres, 3864. Freselannd, 110, Friselande, 367, Fryselande, 2765, Friesland. Froderike, 3864. Froille, 3404, Frolle, 3345, 4208, Frollo. Fryselande. See Freselannd. Galele, 592, Galilee. Galuth, 1387, 1470, 3709, Galuthe, 2558, Gawayne’s sword. Galyrane, 3636. Galys londe, 3862, Wales. Gary ere, 592. Gawayne, 1265,1352,1368,2218, Digitized by <^.OOQLe 132 INDEX OF NAMJKS. &c. Gawaynne, 2979, 3860, Gaweayne, 1468, Gaywayne, 233, Wawayne, 964, 1302, 1342,1744, 2953, Arthur’s nephew. Gaynour, 84, 705, Waynor, 3904, 4204, 4325, Waynore, 3550, 3575, Waynour, 233, 652, 657, 697, Arthur’s wife. Gayous, 1346, 1385, uncle of Lucius. Geene, 559, 843, 863, Genne, 2897, Iene, 2889, 2909, Genoa. Gerarde, 2896. Gernaide, 2943, Granada. Gemesay, 3861, Guernsey. Gerone, 863. Geryne, 3708. Glamorgane, 59. Glamour, 3862. j Glaschenbery, 4303,' 4329, Glasschenberye, 4308, Glastonbury. Godarde, 562, 2655, Goddarde, 3104, Mount Goddarde, 497, Mount St Gothard. Godfraye, 3430. Golapas, 2124. Golyas, 3419, Goliath. Gothelande, 37, Gutlande, 3763. Gowere, 3861. Grece, 37, 1000, Greke, 1463, Greece. Grekes, 602. Grekkes See, 594, the eastern part of the Mediterranean. Grisswolde, 3708. Gryme, 1265. Gutlande. See Gothelande. Gyane, 37, Guienne. Hamptone, 3031, Southampton. Hardelfe, 1741, Hardolfe, 2974, 3583. Hawyke, 3541. Henawde, 35, Hainault. Henguste, 3545, Hengist. Herygalle, 1742. Herylle, 1742. Hillary, 625. Holaund, 35, Holland. Hors, 354 5 y Horsa. Howelle, 1180, 1741, 3583. Humbyre, 3541. Iaffe, Porte, 1520, 1544, 2039, Jaffa, the ancient Joppa. Idirous, 4078, Idrous,4135,4141. Idrus, 1439, 1510, Idrus fitz E wayne, 1490, 1498. Iene. See Geene. Ienitalle, 2112. Ierante, 2890. Ierusalem, 3415, 3433. Iewe, 2895. Ihesu, 863, Jesus . Inde, 573, India. Inglande, 1412,2359,3500, 3685, Ynglande, 283, 710, 724. Ioatalle, 2877. Iolyan, 2889. Ioneke, 1739, 1868, 1905. Iosephate, vale of, 2876. Iosue, 2605, 3414, Joshua . Irelande, 31, 2359, 3534, 3909. Irritayne, 575. Iudas, 2605, 3412, Judas Maccabeus. Iulius Gesar, 115, Iulyus Cesare, 3410. Iulyus, 2877.. Karelyone, Karlyone. See Caerlyone. Karolus, 3423, Charlemagne. Kayone, 2380, a mistake for Digitized by Google INDEX OF NAMES; Kayous, caused by the word Bayou in the line before. Kayous. See Cayous. Kentt, 3542. Komewayle. See Comewaile. Lancelott, 1720, Launcelot, 2073, Launcelott, 368, Launcelotte, 1999, Lawncelot de Lake, 3638, Lawncelott, 4266. Lebe, 1767, 1781, 1803, 1817, 1827, 1900. Leo, 1971. Lettow, 605, Lettowe, 2167, 3784, Lithuania, Lewlyne > 1826. Londone, 2418. Lorayne, 350, 1460, 2398, &c. Lorrayne, 429, 2418, 2531, &c. Loth, 2081, 3637, Lothe, 4266, Lott, 1999. Lottez, 382. Lo welle, 1516. Lowes, 4266. Lucerne, 3Q94. Lucius, 128, 251, 383, &c. Lucyus, 23, Lucius Iberius, 86. Lumbarddye, 3108, 3594, Lum- ' bardye, 2406, 2654, 2997, 3585, Lumberddye, 498, Lumberdye, 135, 350, 429, 1972, Lombardy . Lusscheburghe, 2388, Luxemburg. Lyonelle, 1516, 2227,3637, 4266. Macedone, 603. Makabee, 3413. Marie, 2869, 3998, 4041. Marrake, 4220, 4267, Marrike, 4209, Merrake, 4077. Marschalle de Mowne, 1397. Mawrelle of Mauncez, 1918. Mawrene, 1918. Mees, 2950, Meyes, 2417, Metz. 133 Melane, 3134, 3144, Meloyne, 351, 428, Milan. Meneduke, 4077, 4267, M. of Mentoche, 1919. Merrake. See Marrake. Messie, 3998, Messiah. Meyes. See Mees. Mighelle, Saynt, 940, Seynt M., 1069, Mygheile, 1166, St Michael . Mighelle Mount, Seynt, 899, St MichaeVs Mount. Modrede, 679, 3555, 3569, 3766, 3772, 3840, Mordrede, 645, 711, 3874, 4221, 4226, &c. Mordrede the Malebranche, 4062, 4174. Mownttagus, 3773. Mygheile. See Mighelle. Naueme, 44, Navarre. Nazarethe, 591. Normandye, 834, Nonnaundye, 44. Norwaye, 44, 3935. Nylus, 591, the Nile. Orcage, 572. Orgaile, 3534, 3934, Orgayle, 30. Origge, 1825. Orkenay, 30, Orekenay, 3934, Orkkenaye, 4163, Orkney . Owghtreth, 234. Pamphile, 588, Pamphilia. Paradice, 2706, Paradyse, 2039. Paresche, 1340, 1888, 2647, Parys, 1609,1631, Pam. Paule, 2413. Pavy, 3141, Pavye, 568, Pavia . Pawnee, 3140. Peghttes, 4125, Peyghtes, 3533, Piets. Perce, 588, 1520, Perse, 1377, 1544, Persia . Digitized by <^.OOQLe 134 INDEX OP NAMES. Peter, 2413, 2724, 2883, Petire, 2646, Petyr, 1256, the apostle. Peter, 1476, 1519, 1631, Petir, 1610, Petire, 1543, Petyr, 1419, a senator. Petyrsande, 352. Peyghtes. See Peghttes. Peyfcers, 40, Poictiers. Porte Iaife. See Iaffe. Portyngale, 1028, Portugal Pounte Tremble, 327, 352, Pownte T., 3140. Preter Iobne, 588, Prester John . Prewsslande, 2788, Pruyslande, 604, 2835, Prussia. Priamous, 2698, 2724, 2811, 2836, 2916, Priamus, 2595, 2646, 2690, Gawayne’s prisoner. Prouynce, 40, Provynce, 2647, Provence. Pruyslande. See Prewsslande. Pryamous, 4344, Priam. Pulle, 604, Apulia. Pys, 352, Pyse, 3141, Pisa. Pawlaunde, 1607, Eowlande, 1745. Raynalde, 1607,1995, Raynallde, 1745. Raynalde of the Rodes, 2785. Reone. See Rone. Reynes, 853. Riclleere, 1745, Richere, 1607, 1995, 2790. Romayne, 310, 1704, 1733, Roman; pi. Romaynes, 120, 174, 221, &c. Romaynez, 1761, 1877, &c. Romayns, 1291, 1361, &c. Rome, 23, 80, 86, 93, &c. Rone, 1338, Reone (] Roone), 424, Phone. Roodes, 597, Rhodes. Rowlande, 1745. Rowne, 1996, Rouen. Salarne, 2586, Saleme, 4311, Salerno. Sandewyche, 447, Sandwyche, 490, 635, 720. Sarazene, 2277, Saracen; pi. Sarazenes, 624, 1846, 1911, &c. Sarazenez, 1960, Sarezenes, 599, 607, Sarzanez, 1854, Sarzynes, 1626. Satanase, 3812, Satan . Sayne, 1336, Seine. Scottlande, 32, 292. Segramoure, 1871. Sessoyne, 1977, 2657, 2907, Sexone, 1964, Saxony . Sessoynes, 3530, Saxons . Sexone. See Sessoyne. Sextenour, 1700, Sextynour of Lyby, 1625. Soone, 2482, Saone. Sotere. See Sutere. Southampton, 3546. Spanyolis, 3700, Spaniards. Spayne, 999, 3162. Spolett, 3161, Spoleto . Spruyslande, 3162. Surgenale, 3532. Surry, 608, 1687, 1844, Ac. Surrye, 590, 1626, 3312, Surylande, 2657, Syria . Sutere, 1627,1910, Sotere, 1871 Suters (?), 501. Swaldye, 57. Swetherwyke, 47. Swyane of Swecy, 2958. Swynne, 47. Tambire, 3902, Tamar . Tartary, 582. Thebay, 583. Tholus, 39, Tolouse, 1567, Toulouse. To welle, 1916. Digitized by <^.OOQLe INDEX OP NAMES. 135 Treyntis, (?) 4056. Troye, 887, 1696, 2603, 2635, 3409, 4343. Troys, 1629, Troyes. Turkayne, 2408. Read Tuskayne. Turky, 582, Turkey. Turkys, 1917, Turks. Turoyne, 39, Touraine. Turry, 234. Tuschayne, 431, Tuskane, 3150, Tuskayne, 328, 499, 3586, 3593, Tuscany . Valence, 41. Valewnce, Viscownte of, 2047. Valyant, 2064, V. of Vyleris, 1982. Venyce, 204, Venyse, 2025. Vertennone vale, 3169. Viterbe, 326, 353, 2025, 2048, 3164, Viterbo. Vnwyne, 2868. Vryelle, 1744. Vryenee. See Ewayne. Vter, 29, Vtere, 521, 1310, 4216, Arthur’s father. Vtere, 1904, mistake for Vtolfe (?). Vtolfe, 1622, 1868. Vyenne, 41, Vienne (in France ). Wade, 964. Walchere, 2680. Wales, 33, 56,Walis, 2890, West Walys, 322. Walsclielande, 334, Wales. Waltyre, 2495. Walyngfordhe, 4203, 4217. Watlyng-strette, 450, Wattingstreet. Wawayne. See Gawayne. Way nor, Waynore, Waynour. See Gaynour. Wecharde, 2495. Westfale, 2826, Westuale, 2656, Westwale, 621, Westphalia. Whycher, 2678, Wychere, 2680, 4025. Wyghte, 334, the Isle of Wight Wynchestre, 4011. Ynglande. See Inglande. Jorke, 636, 3911, York . Digitized by <^.OOQLe 136 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. A, conj. and, 2522, 2797. A, int. ah ! 320, 1671, 1791. Abaischite, p.p. abashed, 255. Abaiste, Abayste, p.p. cast down, 1423, 3737. Abbayes, s. pi. abbeys, 3403. Abillere, adj. comp, abler, 2635. Abouen, 903, 904, Abouenn, 564, Aboune, 511, Abowene, 823, Abowne, 2060, Abwene, 775, prep, and ado. above. A.S. abufan . Accorde, v. agree, 344; p.p. accordide, 3133. Accountes, v. 3 8. reckons, 1102 ; 1 8. acounte, make account of, care for, 405 ; inf. acownt, tell, 3929. Actone, 8. acton, 902, 3457; pi. aketouns, 2626. Affraye, 8. fright, terror, 3226. Affrayede, ??. pret. frightened, 2804; p.p. affrayede, 2256. Aftire, Aftyr, Aftyre, after, 64, 82, &c. Agaste, adj. aghast, afraid, 2442, 2728. Agayne, Agaynes, Agaynez, Agayns, prep, against, towards, 774, 1268, 2681. Agayne-stande, v. resist, 3757; pi. ajayne-stondes, 3126. Ajonrnede, p.p. adjourned, put off, 340. Ajuggede, p.p. judged, deemed, 862, 1658, 3411, 4110. Ake, 8. oak, 1096. A.S. dc. Akere, 8. acre, 3849. Aketouns. See Actone. Aide, 13, 986, Awlde, 279, adj. / old. Alegges, v. pi. allege, 4342. Alet, 8. ailette, shoulder-plate, 2505. Alfyne, 8. 1343, a term of reproach; it literally means the bishop in chess. See Promptorium Far - vulorum . Algarde, 8. a kind of wine, 202. Alkyne, Alkyns, adj. of every kind, 928, 1730, 3244. Allblawsters, 8. pi. crossbow-men, 2426. Alle-weldand. See Alweldande. Allone, adj. alone, only, 541,2312. Allossede, p.p. renowned, esteemed, 3881. Alls. See Als. Alofede. Read Alosede, p.p. praised, renowned, 2418. Alouer, adv . all over, 2027. Alowe,r. praise, 1036; 3*.alowes, 396. Als, Alls, conj. as, 845, 1701, 19S9, 1590; also, 1194. Digitized by <^.OOQLe GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 137 Alweldande, 397, Alle-weldand, 1059, adj. all-ruling, all-powerful. Alynes, 8. pi. aliens, 4061. Amange, prep, among, 4037; adv . at times, sometimes, 1238. Ame = am, 2606, 2642, &c. Amede, p.p. estimated, 4068. “Aesmer, aasmer, aemer, aumer, easmer: Juger, estimer, comparer, croire, penser, etre d’avis.”— Roquefort. Lat. astimare. Ancestres, Auncestres, 8. pi. ancestors, 276, 521,1310. And = an, if, 134, 339, 1023. Arie, adj. an, a, 1079, 1148,1661. Anely, Anly, adv. only, alone, 98, 1499, 1981. Anentis, prep, against, 2568. Anes, adv. once, 360. See Ones. Angerde, p.p. angered, angry, 265, 1938,1957. Angers, impers. v. Me angers = I am angry, 1662, 2838, 2848. Ankkere, s. anchor, 3601 ; pi. , ankers, 740, ankyrs, 493. Anlace, 8. a sort of dagger, 1148. “Besides the dagger, Chaucer, in his Canterbury Tales, mentions the anelace, which was broad bladed, but lessening from the hilt to a sharp point, and having a sharp edge on each side.” Meyrick, Critical Inquiry into Antient Armour, vol. ii. p. 100. Anly. See Anely. Anone, adv. anon, soon, 2716. Ansuere, v. answer* 98, 306; pret. answarde, 288. Ansuere, s. answer, 1324. Anter. See Awnter. Anterous, adj. adventurous, bold, 2524. A pas, adv . with measured step, 4014. Apone, 195, Appone, 262, Apponne, 4000, prep. upon. Appairelles, v. pi. apparel, dress, 500; p.p. appayrellde, 2461. Apparant, Apparaunt, adj. apparent, 1944, 2606. Apparaylle, s. apparel, 3365. Apperte, adj. open, 688. Appertly, 1478, Appertlyche, 589, adv. openly. Appone. See Apone. Approches, ref. v. pi. draw near. 4105. Ar, Are, adv. $ conj. before, 254. 331, 1722. Arase, v. snatch away, 4098. Araysede, p.p. raised, drawn up, 1677. Arborye, 8. trees, 3244. Ardant, Ardauunt, adj. burning, 193, 1087. Are. See Ar. Are, conj. or, 1944. Areste, v. arrest, stop, capture, 633; pret. areste, 329, arestede, 1429. Areste, 8. arrest, 1456, 1473 $ place of meeting, 311, 548. Arowes, s. pi. arrows, 2105. Arrabyes, Arrabys, s. pi. animals of some kind, perhaps Arabian horses, 2288, 2337. Arryfede, 835, Aryefede, 600, Aryuede, 3905, p.p. come to shore. As armes, (Fr.) to arms ! 2717. Asawte. See Assawte. Asaye, 2615, Assaye, 2347, v. try. Asaye, 8. trial, examination, 4312. Ascente, Assente, v. assent, 644, 1506, 1963. Ascryez, 1367, Askryes, 2245, v. 3 8. shouts, cries out; pi. ascriesr, 1768. Asches, v. 2 8. askest, 343 ; 3 & askys, requires, 157; pret. aschede, asked for, 715. / Digitized by <^.OOQLe 1-38 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Assawte, Asawte, Asawtte, 8. assault, 1697, 3012, 3053. Assemble, 8. assembly, 1578,1852, 1962. Assingnez, v. pi. assign, 727 ; pret. assingnyde, 240. Assoyllede, p.p. absolved, 3498. At = to (with the infinitive), 1165. At = that = what, 1842, 3484. Atheliste, adj. noblest, 1593. A. S. atyele. Attamede, v. pret broached, pierced, 2175. “ He Jet atame hys pyement tuwne To make his gode gestis glad.” Royal MS. 18 A x, leaf 130, bk. “ Attamyn a wesselle wyth drynke, or abbrochyn. Attamino, depleo.” Promptorium Parvulorum. At-vndere, adv. down, 3180. Atyre, 8. attire, 4186. Auctors, 6 . pi. authors, 4342. Auditoure, s. auditor, 1673 ; pi. audytours, 661. Aughte, Awughte, adj . eight, 278, 2627, 3188. Aughte, v. See Awe. Aughtende, adj. eighth, 462. Auncestres. See Ancestres. Auntire, Auntyre. See Awnter. ' Austerene, Austeryne, adj. stem, 306, 414, 571, &c. See Austerne in Pricke of Conscience , 1. 6181. Auantid, v. pret. praised, 1594; p.p, avauntede, 2864. Avanttwarde, 324, Avawewarde, 2051, Avawmewarde, 2024,Avawmwarde, 2829, 3168, Avawwarde, 3764, 8 . vanguard. Avawmbrace, s. vambrace, a piece of armour for the forearm, 2568. Auenaunt, adj. becoming, graceful, 2626, 3188, 3208, 3500. Aventailo, 8. “a moveable front to a helmet which covered the face, and through which the wearer respired or drew in the air, qu& ventus hauritur.” (— Meyrick, Glossary of Military Terms , under Ventaculum) 910, 2572. Auenture, s. adventure, chance, fortune, 642. Avires, v. turns towards, directs, 3164. O. Fr. virer, turn. Avisemente, s. advice, counsel, 148. Avissely, Auyssely, adv. advisedly, prudently, 2699, 3165. Avowe, s. vow r , 296, 308, 347. Avowe, v. vow, 357 ; p.p. avowede, 369. Auoyeddyde, v.pret. quitted, 2051. Avyede, v. pret. showed the way, or made their way towards, 3716. “ Avier: Montrer le chemin a quelqu’un.” Roquefort. “ Acoier -, aveier , diriger, indiquer la route, mettre en cnemin, en bon chemin, exciter, irriter; s’avoier, se mettre en route, dans la bonne route, se diriger, s’occuper dequelquechose.” Burguy. Awe, v. owe, 99; pi. awes, 455, ought; pret. aughte, owned, possessed, 29, 276, 521, &c.; pret. subj. aughte, oughtest, 289; ‘ aughte/ as an impersonal verb, 1583,1595, 3340, awghte, 3509. Me aughte =1 oughf. Awene, adj. own, 709, 997,1594* Awghtene, adj. eighteen, 4069. Awke, adj. perverse, contrary, 13. Awkewarde, Awkwarde, adv. awry, transversely, 2247, 2564. ., Awlde. See Aide. Awncestrye, 8. ancestry, 1907. Awntere, Auntire, Awntire, s. ad* venture, chance, risk, 1905, 2617 2244; pi. awnters, 1967; at awntere, at random, 2543. Digitized by <^.OOQLe GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 139 Awntere, Anter, Auntyre, v. adventure, 360, 1596,1660; 3 s. anters, 1498; pi. awnters, 1596. Awntrende, adj. adventuring, bold, 2717. Awntrouseste, adj. most adventurous, 1624. Awughte. See Aughte. Ayele, 8. grandfather, 2603. Ayere, Ayre, 8. heir, 279, 283, 2634; pi. ayers, 3146. Ayere, Ayre, v.go, 455,470,1591; 3 s. ayerez, 617; pi. ayres, 1329 ; i.p. ayerande, 2830. Ayther, Aythere, Aythyre, adj. either, each, 939,1991, 2830. Ay-ware, adv. everywhere, 614. Azoure, Azure, s. blue, 193, 765, 3355. A 3 ayne, adv. again, 2713. A 3 aynes, A^aynez, adv. against, 786, 2117, 2791. See Agayne. A 3 ayne-stondes. See Agaynestande. Bacenett, s. cap of steel or other metal, sometimes worn under the helm, 906, 2695, 2770; pi. bacenetez, 1754. “He hutte hi m on )>e helm on hiht, In-to he Brayn J?orw Bacinet hriht; Thus is his seruyse ^olde.” The Kyng of Tars (Vernon MS., leaf 306, b.) Bachelors, Bachellers, 8. pi. novices in arms, 68, 567,1424. Bade, v. pret. abode, 2383. Bagis, Bagys, 8. pi. badges, 2303, 3730. Baiste, p.p. downcast, afraid, 2856. Baite, v. feed, 2694. Bake, 8. back, 2203, 3257. Bakene, p.p. baked, 3166. Bakhalfe, s. backpart, back, 1482. Balde, adj. bold, 1968. Baldly, adv. boldly, 630. Bale, s. harm, grief, sorrow, 805, 3976 ; adj. hurtful, 1483. A.S. bealu. Balefulle, adj. hurtful, 791 ; sorrowful, wretched, 1029, 1136. Bale-fyre, 8. a large fire, properly a fire lighted as a signal of distress, 1048. Baltyrde, v. pret. danced about, capered, 782. See Balteres , Alliterative Poems (Reprint), p. 102, 1. 459. Banarettez. See Banerettes. Bandez, s. pi. bonds, 1485 ; used metaphorically for “ distress,” 1180. Baneoure, 8. bearer of a banner, 3732. “Banyowre.orbannerberere. Vexillarius , vexillifer , primipilus.” Promptorium Parvulorum. Banerettes, Banerettez, Banarettez, s. pi. knights of the higher order, 68, 567, 1403, 1424, 2855. Banke, 8. shore (of the sea), 728, 3731; pi. bankkes, 3714. Barayne, adj. barren, 224. Barbours, s. pi. barbers, 2331, 2577. Barbycane, 8. outer fortification or defence, fortress at the outlet of a city, 1183, 2470. Bare. See Bere. Bare, 8. boar, 3123. Barefote, adj. barefoot, 2309. Bareheuedys, s. pi. boarheads, 177. Bare-heuvede, adj. bareheaded, 3630. Bare-legyde, adj. barelegged, 2122. Baronage, s. company of barons, 587, 1242. Barowes, 8. pi. swine, 191. A.S. bearh. Barrers, 8. pi. barriers, 2469. Digitized by <^.OOQLe 140 GLOSS ARIAL INDEX. Basschcdo, p.p. cast down, 2121. Bataile, 783, Batelle, 316, Batayle, 2458, Bataylle, 3107, Baytaille, 4319, «. cattle; body of troops ; pi. baitailles, 1425, batailles, 4064. Baterde, p.p. battered, 189. Bathe, conj. both, 19, 34, 352, &c. Bawmede, v. pret . embalmed, 2298; p.p. bawmede, 980, 4020. Baye, adj. bay, brown, 918. Baytaille. See Bataile. Baytand, i. p. baiting, 2516; baytaynde, 2671. Be, Bee, prep, by, 60, 164, 174, &c. Be, Bee, v. be ; ind. pres. pi. bez, 97, bene, 2850; fut. 1. be (= shall be), 981, 2631, 4140; 2. bees, 1688, 2667, beese, 2663 ; 3. bees, 3976, bese, 1017, 4312; imp. pi. 2. bes, 3798, 4095, bees, 2856, 3737, bez, 222. Beblede, v . pret. made bloody, 2250. Bechene, adj. beechen, 1713. Bechopes, s. pi. bishops, 4328. Becommys, v. becomes, is proper for, 4317. Bedde, Bede, 8. bed, 758, 805, 2858. Bede, adj. craving, hungry, lean, 3464. See Beddy in Jamieson. A.S. biddan , to ask. Bedes, v . pi. offer, 505. Bedgatt, s. going to bed, 1030. Bee. See Be. Beerynes. See Berne. Bees. See Be, v. Begynnande, i. p. beginning, 2963. Behalde, v. behold, 2517; t.p. bekaldande, 3107. Bekez, v. 3 s. bakes, warms, 1048. Bekende, v . pret. committed, en¬ trusted, 2340, 2355 ; bekennyde, 482. Beknowe, v. acknowledge, confess, 3867. Bekyre, v. contend, fight, 3679 ; pi. bekyrs, 2425; pret. bekerde, 2096. Bekyne, 8. beacon, 564. Belde, v. dwell, 8; pi. bieldez, 1242 ; pret . beldytt, inhabited, occupied, 38; p.p. beyldede, occupied, 566. Belefede, 1250, Beleuede, 3405, Beleuefede, 2380, p.p. left. Beleue, v. remain, 3583. Belyfe, Belyue, adv. quickly, 1263, 2068, 2336, 3732. Berne, 8. beam, 3663. Beneyde. Bead Bendyde, v. pret. bent, 2424. Bente, s. field, plain, 915, 1054, 1067. Benysone, s. blessing, 4318. Berde, 8. beard, 1012 ; pi. berdez, 1002. Bere, 8. bear, 775, 790, 802. Bere, v. bear, 51,615; pret. bare, 291, 893 ; p.p. borne, 3738. Berkes, v . 3 s. barks, 1351. Bemakes, 8. pi. barnacle geese, 189. Berne, 962, Beryne, 116,Berynne, 3580, Bierne, 1094, Byeme, 2202, s. man; pi. bernes, 255, Jberyns, 148, beerynes, 1050, biemez, 1483, byernez, 2022, byerns, 1391. A.S. beorn. Berouene. Read Beronene, p.p . run over with, covered, 3946; berowne, 3971. “ On me [the cross] lay fe lambe of love, I was pi a ter, hys body above, Whan flessche and vevnes si\e toclove, 'With blood T was bironne Royal MS. 18 A x, leaf 128. Digitized by AnOOQle GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 141 See Beronen in Percifs Folio MS. ed. Hales and Furnivall, vol. i. p. 213, L 31, and vol. iii. p. 63, 1. 172. Berye, v. bury, 4318; 3 s. beryes, 2379; p.p . beryede, 980. Beryelle, s. burial, 1776, 2188. Peryenge, s. burying, 2377, 4023. Bes. See Be. Besauntez, s. pi. bezants, 3256. Bese. See Be. Bessomes, v. 3 8. besoms, i. e. sweeps, 3661. Besy, adj. busy, 4095. Besye, 8. business, 3630. Beseke, v. beseech; 3 s. besekys, 305; pi. besekes, 127; pret. besoghte, besoughte, 1234, 1438, 3137. Bestaile, 8. beasts, cattle, 1050. Beste, 8. beast, 107, 811. Betakyns, v. 3 8. betokens, signifies, 822, 824. Bet, v. pret. set in order, adjusted; lit. improved, 3656.. A.S. betan. Beteche, v. hand over, deliver, commit, 1611; 3 s. beteches, 714 ; pret. betoke, 1889; betuke, 3190, 4015. A.S. betcecan. Betoke. See Beteche. Betrappede, p.p. entrapped, 1630. Betuke. See Beteche. Betwyx,^7’ep. betwixt, 801,2798. Betydde, v. betide, 4325; 3 s. betyddes, 3482; betyddys, 4315 4 Bett, v. pret. beat, 2470, 3682. Bettes, v. ind. pres . pi. beat, 2808. Betyne, adj. beaten; hence, adorn- • ed with beaten gold, or other such material, 3631, 3646, 3945. Beueryne = bevering, quivering, 3630. O.E. biver y tremble. A.S. bifian. Or perhaps beueryne = beaver-coloured; compare beuer hwed in Sir Gatoayne and the Green Knight , 1. 845. Bewe, v. bow, 3366. Bewes, s. pi. boughs, 3366. Bewells, s. pi. bowels, 2175, 2203. Bewschers, 8. pi. (?) the lower parts of the body, 1047. A.S. scam , bowels, &c.; bew = bel, beau, fine, perhaps. Beyldede. See Belde. Bez. See Be. Bidde, v. bide, remain, 4028. Biddis, v. ind. pres. pi. offer, 2310. Bieldez. See Belde. Bierdez. See Birde. Bilynge, 8. probably the part of the ship about the bill or rostrum , 3663. A.S. bil, bill, beak, — forepart of a ship. (See Bosworth.') Birdes, 2190, Birdez, 1029, Bierdez, 1052, Byrdez, 999, s. pi. women, ladies. A.S. bryd, bride, wife, woman. Birenne, 2519. Mistake f r “outene.” Birtenede, 3972. See Brittene. Blake, adj. black, 775, 1090, 4339. Blanke, 8. horse, 1799 ; pi. blankes, 1860. See Blonke. Blasons, 8. pi. shields of arms, 1860. See Blasoun in Sir Gatoayne and the Green Knight , 1. 828. Blawe, v. blow, 2662. Blawene, p.p. blown, 1286. Blawnchede, p.p. whitened, 3039. Ble, Blee, s. colour, complexion, 2576, 3332, 3558, 4213. Blemeste, p.p. blemished, hurt, 2578. Blendez, v. 3 8. blends, is mingled, 1799. Blenke, v. blench, wince, 3640, 3735 ; 3 s. blenkes, 4213 j cause to blench, overcome, 2857. Digitized by AnOOQle 142 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Bleryde, v. pi'et. mouthed, made wry faces, 782. “Deuels sal gadir obout hym f>an, And grymly gryn on hym and blere And hydus braydes mak hym to fere.” Hampole’s Pricke of Conscience, 1. 2226. Blethely, adv. blithely, cheerfully, 4147. Blod, 4121, Blode, 175, 392, Blude, 3235, 4282, s. blood. Blode-bande, s. blood-hand, a bandage to stop bleeding, 2576. Blod-hondes, s. pi. bloodhounds, 3640. Blody, Blodye, adj . bloody, 793, 3946. Blondirs, v. 2 8. blunderest, 3975. Blonke, 8. horse, steed, 453; pi. blonkes, 615, blonkkes, 1634. A.S. blanca , blonca. Blude. See Blod. Blyne, v. cease, 1931, 2578, 3975. A.S. blinnan. Blyschit, v. pret. looked, 116. See blusched, Alliterative Poem, p. 29, 1. 980. Blysse, s. joy, 1485. Blyssyng, 8. blessing, 4103. Bonettez, 8. pi. additional pieces of sail, 3656. “Bonnet ( bonnette , Fr.), an additional part made to fasten with latchings to the foot of the sails of small vessels with one mast, in moderate winds. It is exactly similar to the foot of the sail it is intended for. They are commonly one-third of the depth of the sails they belong to.” (Falconers Marine Dictionary , ed. Burney.) Borde, 79,171, 630, Bourde, 730, 3641, Burde, 1930, s. board, table; board (of a ship). Bordoure, 8. border, 4211 ; pi. bordurs, 907. Bordyrde, p.p. bordered, 1002. Bore, 8. boar, 188, 4214. Borne, 2519. Perhaps a mistake for beme. Borne, p.p. See Bere. Bosturs, 8. pi. boasters, 1393. Bot, Bott, Botte, conj. but, 10, 70, except, 516, 521, unless, 1925; bot if, bot 3 if, bot jife, 356, 486, 250, unless ; prep, without, 4070. Bote, 1786, Botte, 1837,/?. amends, recompense. A.S. bot, butu. Bothen, Bothene, both, 35, 2547, 2691, 2997, 3716, 4151. Botelesse, 981,3558, Botles, 3976, Butelesse, 1014, adj. without remedy, cureless. Bottes, 8. pi. boats, 748. Botures, s. pi. bitterns, 189. Probably miswritten for Betures; see Betoiore in lohn Russell's Boke of Nurture , ed. Furnivall, 11. 421, 541, 696 Boune, Bowne, v. make ready, prepare, hasten, go, 936, 1013, 1034; 3 s. bownes, 3591, bounnez, 783. Bourde. See Borde. Bourdene, v. pi. pres. ind. jest, 3122 ; bouredez, 3 s. pres. ind. 1170. Boure, 8. bower, 2190. A.S. bur. Boustous, 2175, Boustouse, 2425, 3679, Boystous, 3762, Bustous, 615, 775, 783, 1379, adj. rude, rough, harsh, violent. Bouxome, 2858, Bouxvme, 4147, adj. obedient. Bouxsomly, adv. obediently, 107. Bowes, v. 3 8. turns, 2251; pi. bowes, go, 69, 2310. Bowes, 8. pi. shoulders, 188; boughs, 1711, 3247. A.S. boh, arm, back, shoulder, branch, bongh. {Bosworth.') Bowndene, p.p . bound, 3316. Bowne, v. See Boune. I Bownne, adj. ready, 1633, 2331. Digitized by <^.OOQLe GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 143 Box, 8. stroke, blow, 1111. Boyes, 8. pi. 2122, 2856, 3122. Boystous. See Boustous. Brace, v. fasten, fix, 1182; 3 8. bracez, puts on his arm, 914. Bracer, 4247, 8. brassart, a defence for the arm; pi. brasers, 1859. Brade, adj. broad, 106,914,1094; comp, braddere, 55, 1699. Bragge, v. blow (in a trumpet); pi. pres. ind. braggene, 1484, bragges, 4107 ; pret. braggede, 3657. Braggers, 8. pi. boasters, braggarts, 1348. Brand, 3946, Brande, 893, 914, Brannde, 2239, s. sword. A.S. brand , brond brand, torch, sword. Brankkand, i. p. branking, i e. bridling, checking, curbing, repressing, 1861. See Brank and Branks in Jamieson. Braste. See Briste. Brathely, adv. hastily, violently, fiercely, 1771, 3219. Braunchers, s . pi. young hawks, 190. Braundesche. See Brawndysche. Brawle, Brawlle, v. 2349, 2362 ; 3 s. brawles, 1349. Brawlynge, s. confusion, 2176. Brawnclies, s. pi. branches, 3367. Brawndysche, v. brandish, 3359 ; 3 s. braundesche, 1056; pret. braundyschte, 782, brawndeste, 3657. Brawne, 8. boar, 1095. Brayd, v. drive, thrust, dash, draw, 1172; 3 s. braydes, 2695, braydez, 2069, 2073, brayedez, 906; p.p. braydene, cast, 3945. Brayde, 8. thrust, 3762. Brede, 8. bread, 2715. Brede, 8. roast meat, 79, 190, 1052; pi. bredez, 1049, bredis, 2715. A.S br<H*. Brede, 8. breadth, 1224, 2011, 2273,3656. A.S. brdedo. Bredes, v. 3 s. breeds, 224. Bregaundez, s. pi. brigands, 2096. "These foot-soldiers were clothed in jackets, which were quilted, and had pieces of iron within, hence called brigandines. Such jackets were worn in the time of Elizabeth and James I. by the English archers.” Meyrick, Glossary of Military Terms , under Brigantii. Breke, v. break, 4146; 3 8. brekes, 3124. Breklesse, adj. without breeches, naked, 1048. Breme, adj. fierce, 1380. Bremly, adv. fiercely, 4107. Bren'e, 2253, 4212, Breny, 1482, 8. cuirass; pi. brenyes, 3753, brenys, 1525, 1858, bryneys, 4119. See Brini in the Glossary to Havelok , ed. Skeat. Brenyede, 316, Brynyede, 3680, adj. armed with a cuirass. Breste, 8. breast, 2253, front of an army, 1990 ; pi. brestez, 191. Brestys. See Briste. Brethe, s. wrath, anger, 107,117, 2213. Brethly, adv. angrily, 3661. Brettened, Brettyne. See Brittene. Brigge, 3124, Brygge, 2470, 8. bridge. Briste, v. burst, break, 214; 3 8. bristez, 805, brystez, 1135, 1482; pi. bristez, 1859, brestys, 3663; pret . braste, 2176, 2271; pret. pi. broustene, 2544; p.p. brustene, 2771, broustene, 3974; weak pret. brystedde, 1129. Brittene, 963, Brettyne, 3580, Bryttyne, 106,1350, v. cut. or dash in pieces, destroy completely; pret. brettened, 1487, brittenyde, 802, bryttenede, 2212; p.p. brettenede, 3520, brittenede, 1067, birtenede. Digitized by <^.OOQLe 144 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 3972. A.S. bryttian, brytnian , to divide into fragments, distribute. Broche, v. pierce, stab, 1172; 3 8. brocbes, 2202, brochez, spurs, 918 ; l. brochez, spur, 1449; pret . rochede, broached, tapped, 2714; p.p. brochede, spitted, 1050, 1067. Brochez, 8. pi. spits, 1029. Brode, adj . broad, 116,792, 1047. See Bradc. Broght, 3358, Broghte, 802, v. pret . brought; p.p. broghte, 1013, 1017.' Brokbrestede, adj . having a breast variegated, spotted or streaked with Dlack and white, 1095. See Brocked. in Jamieson . Compare “ Brock-faced, a white longitudinal mark down the face like a badger.” Brockett . Bronde, 8. sword, 2566, 3631 ; pi. brondes, 2309. See Brand. Broth eliche, 3640, Brothely, 1408, 1449, 1753, 1862, 2095, Brothly, 3617, adv. hastily, violently, fiercely. Brothy, adj. (?) foamy, frothy, 1090. Browddene, 2807, 4119, Browdene, 1858, adj. woven. See Brawden in Sir Gawayne and the Green J£night> 11.177, 580. A.S. brogden , broden , p.p. of bregdan , to weave, braid, &c. The “brenyes” were probably made of small metal rings woven one into the other. Bruchez, 8. pi. brooches, 3256. Bruschese, v. pi. brush, dash, 3680. Prustils, 8. pi. bristles, 1095. Bryddes, a. pi. birds, 181. Brydille, 453, Brydylle, 2085, s. bridle. Brygge. See Brigge. Bryrnly, adv. fiercely, 117, 4214. JJryne, 106, Brynne, 564, v. burn; 3 s. brynnez, 1241; pret . brynte, 117; p.p* brynte, 3520. Bryneys. See Brene. Brynyede. See Brenyede. Brystedde, Brystez. See Briste. Bryttenede, Bryttyne. See Brittene. Burde. See Borde. Burgesse, 3082, s. burgess, citizen ; pi. burgeys, 857. Burghe, 8. city, 1968, 2424, 3083; pi. burghes, 1241. A.S. burh. Burliche, 2190, Burelyche, 304, Burlyche, 586, 730, 1002, 1111. 2010, adj. tall, stately, grand. Burliche, adv . grandly, 4199. Bumeschte, 906, 1011, 2123, Burneste, 2272, 3846, Burnyscht, 1113, Burnyste, 177, 1859, pp. burnished, polished. Bus, impers. v. behoves, 2576. Ys bus = we must. Buscayle, 895, Buskayle, 1634, s. bushes.. Buschede. See Buske, v. Buschement, 8. ambush, 3124. See Enbuschement. Buskayle. See Buscayle. Buske, 8. bush, wood, 453, 918; pi. buskez, 1142. Buske, v. make ready, prepare, arrange, dispose, manage, hasten, proceed, go; 3 8. buskes, 1223, 2829, buskez, 2073; pi. buskes, 1754, buskez, 729, 1618 ; pret. buskede, 1633; imp. 2 s. buske, 1263; imp. 2 pi. ouskes, 2855; p.p. buskeae, arrayed, dressed, 2517, 3332, 4339, buschede, furnished, 567; buske vpe, raise, 3072. Bustous. See Boustous. Butelesse. See Botelesse. Byd, Bydde, Byde, v. ask, bid, 433, 1181, 2188,4323; 3 j.byddez, 1776, byddis, 2361. Digitized by <^.OOQLe GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 145 Byddynge, 8. bidding, command, 1030, 1931. Byde, v. remain, abide, tarry, 8, 936, 1968 ; 3 8. byddys, 4214; pi. byddes, 2808, byddez, 1030, await, wait for; imp. 2 pi. byddez, 629. Byems, Byeryne. See Berne. Byggly, adv. bigly, strongly, 1376. Byhalue, s. behalf, 1674. Byhoues, 4135, Byhonys, 3579, Byhowys, 1715, impers. v. behoves. Byhyndene, adv. behind, 694. Bylefede, 1538, Byleuede, 2145, 2366, Byleuefede, 3678, Byleuyde, 1557, 1885, p.p. left. Bynne, prep, within, 804. A.S. binnan. Byrdez. See Birdes. Byrre, 8. impetus, violence, 3661. Byswenkez, v. 3 8. toils, 1128. A.S. beswincan , to labour. Byttes, v. 3 8. bites, 791. Caas, 261, 1892, Caase, 3521, Case, 2719, Cas, 3564, 8. hap, occurrence. Cabane, 757, Kabane, 3671, s. cabin; pi. cabanes, 73£ Cabilles, 8. pi. cables, 3671. Cachede, p.p. chased, 3513. Cachene, v. pi. catch, seize, take, 834; pi. catchez, 480; pret. caughte, 1105, kaghtc, 2636, kaught, 3951, kaughte, 3378, kawghte, 3916; p.p. cawghte, 3514, kaughte, 2995. Caffe, 8. chaff, refuse, 1064. Caire. See Cayre. Cantelle, 8. comer, quarter, lump, piece, 4231. “ Chantel , Cant el, coin, quartier, morceau, chanteau.” Burguy. Capitayne, 1864, Captayne, 2263, 8. captain; pi. capytaynez, 838. Captyfe, 1589, 8. captive, prisoner; pi. captifis, 1580. MORTE ARTHURE. Care, 859, Kare, 1838, 8. sorrow. Carefulle, adj. unhappy, 957, sorrowful, 1777. Caremane, s. male, man, 957. A.S. carl man. Carffes, 8. pi. cuts, 2713. Carle, s. fellow, 1063,1107,1165. A.S. carl. Carpe, 2750, Karpe, 1929, 2126, v. talk, speak; 3 s. carpys, 132; pret. carpede, 143,220. “ Carpyn’, or talkyn\ Fabulor , confabulor , garrulo. PromptoriumParvulorum. Carpynge, 8. talk, 1672. Caryage, 8. luggage, 2355. Caste, v. cast, consider, purpose; 2 s. castes, 261; 3 8. castes, 1998; castis, 1769; pret. kest, 3384, keste, 118, 280, 943; imp. 2 s. k&ste 3406; p.p. castyne, 819, 3240. Castelles, s. pi. castles, 27, 849. Cawtelous, adj. full of artifices, artful, cunning, sly, 4185. Fr. cauteleux. Cayre, 877, Caire, 1192, Kaire, 641,1319, Kayere, 627, Kayre, 6, 444, v. go; 3 s . eayres, 243; pi. cayers, 480. The original meaning was turn. A.S. cyrran , c err an, to turn. Certane, 3930, Certayne, 817, adv. certainly. Certez, 1162, 1342, Certys, adv. surely, certainly. Certyfye, v. tell, inform, 1555. Cetd, 601, 2012, Cetee, 440, 488, s. city; pi. cetees, 2609, cetese, 1337. Chaas, 8. chace, 2269. Chalange, v. contest, dispute, 1322, challenge, 2524, 3397, claim, 3326. “ Chalonger , .... demander, contester, provoquer, attaquer, d4fendre, refuser, prohiber, hlamer; de calumnia fausse accusation, chicane/’ Burguy under Chalonge. Champayne, s. champaign, level Digitized by AnOOQle 146 GL0SSAR1AL INDEX. country, 1226, 1362; pi. cliampanyse, 1822. Changene, v. inf\ change, 1405, chawnge, 2301; jp/. changene, 2989, chaungene, 168 ; pret. chaungede, 3382, chawngyd, 2701, chawngide, 2964; i. p . chawngawnde, 2523, chawngynge, 3267. Chapes, s. pi. metal tips of swordsheaths, 2522. “ Chape of a schethe. Spirilla” Prompt. Part. “The chape of a sword was a badge assumed by the De la Warr family, in memorial of the part taken by Sir Roger de la Warr, at Poitiers, 1356, in the capture of John, King of France, when he took possession of the royal sword.” Way in Prompt. Pare. Chapyde, v. pret. escaped, 4260. Charbokle, 3326, Charebocle, 2523, 3267, s. carbuncle. Chare, 8 . (?) 3603. Chare, v. (?) carry, 1886. Charge, v. load, burden, charge, molest, &c.; 3 s. chargges, 3538; pret. chargede, 1540, chargyde, 1406; p.p. chargede, 1549, charegyde, 1552, chargegid, 3136, charggede, 3604, chargegide, 2731. Chargour, 1026, s. dish; pi. chargeours, 185. Charitee, s. charity, 1019, 1542. Charottez, s. pi. chariots, 1552. Charpe, adj. sharp, 3600. Charre, 8 . car, 3914. Charry, adj. (?) dear, cherished, 2964. Fr. cher % dear; cheri, cherished. Chasse, 8. chace, 2368. Chasse, v. chase, 2237. Chastye, v. chastise, correct, 1019; p.p. chastyede, 690. Chasynge-spere, 8 . hunting-spear, 1823, 2955. Chauffede, p.p. heated, excited, 2236. Chaunce, s. chance, hap, 1749, fortune, 2999; chawnse, 2368; pi. chauncez, 531, 2956. Chauncelere, 169, 1551, Chaunchelere, 1541, s. chancellor. Chawffe, v. become heated, 2301. Chawmbyrs, s. pi. chambers, 3041. Chayere, 8. chair, seat,3266, 3329, 3347. Cheefe, s. chief (Her.), 2523. Cheefe, adj. chief, 1363, 1404. Cheekke. See Chekke. Cheese. See Chese. Chefede. See Cheue. Cheftans, 18, Cheftanes, 1872, Cheftaynes, 1323, 1406, s. pi. chieftains. Chekefulle, adj. chockfull, 3604. Chekke, 1539,2956,Cheke, 3000. Cheekke, 1986, s. check, repulse; but applied to the enemy, and therefore equivalent to success. In line 1986 it seems to mean the force which checks the enemy. Chekyne, s. chicken, 4181. Chekyrde, p.p. chequered, 3267. Chele, s. cold, 3391. Chere, 8. face, countenance, 2069, 2964. Chese, 1619, Cheese, 682, v. choose; hence, choose a way, go towards; 3 s. cheses, 2954, chesez, 1225 ; pi. chesene, 1873; p.p. chosene, 2731. Cheualere, 8. knight, 208, 1551; pi. cheualers, 2116. Cheualrous, 1362,1540, Cheuallrous, 1399, adj. chivalrous. Cheualrye, 18,169,1404,Cheuallrye, 531, s. chivalry, knighthood, knights. Cheuede, 1117, 1841, Chefede, 869; pp. fared, thriven, succeeded. Cheuede, v. pret. attained, 3329. Cheueride, p.p. shivered, 3391. Digitized by AnOOQle GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 147 Chewyse, v. save, 1750. “Chevir, venir a bout de quelquechose, sortii d’une affaire, se tirer d’embarras .” Burguy . Cheynes, s. pi. chains, 2522. Chiftayne, 8. chieftain, 2732. Childe, s . applied to a grown person, 2952, 4260; pi. chUdire, 1821, childre, 1025, childrene, 4078, childrenne, 3188, childyre, 845, 1051, childyrene, 3208. Chillande, i. p. chilling, cold, 2965. Chippe, 8. ship, 3599; pi. chippes, 3546. Chippe-bnrdez, 8. pi. shipboards, 1699. Chis, (?) 2217. Cho, prm. she, 655, 659, 715, &c. See Scho. Chokkefulle, adj. cliockfull, 1552. Chokkes, v. 3 8. (?) thrusts, 2955; p.p. cliokkode, 3603. Chullede, p.p. 1444. “Cliulle. To bandy about.” Halliwell. Churles, adj. churlish, 4181. Chymn^s, 3041, Chympn^s, 168, 8. pi. brasiers, or other receptacles for fire, fireplaces. Chyne, 8. chine, backbone, 3390. Cirquytrie, 3399, Cyrqwitrye, 2616 (wrongly printed Cyr us witrye), s. pride, arrogance. Citd, 1696, 1979, Citde, 60, 5 . city. See Cet6. Clappyde, 956, Clappide, 1137, v.ptet. smote together. Clarioune, 3563, Claryoune,27l8, s. clarion, war-trumpet; pi. clarions, 1758. Claspande, i. p. clasping, 4337. Clasppis, 8. pi. clasps, 909. Clathe-sekkes, 8. pi. cloth-sacks, 733. Clauer, 8. clover 3241. Clauerande, i. p. clawing, 3324. Clede, v.pret. clothed, 2713 \p.p. cledde, 3334, clede, 3241, 3684, cleede, 217, clothed, clad. Clefe, v . pret. clave, split, 2559. Cleffe, v. cleave, stick, cling, 1312. Clekes, 1865, Clekys, 1164, 2123, v. 3 8. clutches, seizes. Clene, adj. clean, pure, 201, 217, bright, fair, good, 1197, 1603. Clenkkede, v.pret. clanked, 2113. Clenliche, Clenly, Clenlyche, adv. well, 216, 628, 654,1586, entirely, quite, 581, 673, 850, 2125. Clepid, v. pret. called, 3563. A.S. clypian. Clere, adj. clear, bright, 819, 883, 909, illustrious, *1559, clear, free from obstacles, 1640. Clereworte, 8. 3241. Perhaps = A.S. clafer-wyrt , small clover. Clergialle, adj. skilful, 1758. Clergyally, adv. cleverly, 200. Clergye, s. learning, 809. Clerkis, 3444, Clerkkes, 2391, 8. pi. clerics, scholars. Clewes, 1639, Clewez, 2019, Kleuys, 2396, Cloughes, 941, s. pi. cliffs. Clewide, v. pret . cleaved, clung, 3268. Close, v. enclose, 1165, 2003. Close, s. prison, 1586, enclosed space, enclosure, 1639, 3240. Closse, adj. secret, 1196. Cloughes. See Clewes. Clowez, 8. pi. claws, 783. Clyfe, 883, Clyffe, 2158, 8. cliff; pi. cleyffez, 2019. Clymbande, i. p. climbing, 3324, 3422. Clynges, v. 3 8. presses, 1865. Coblez, 8. pi. cables, 742. Digitized by <^.OOQLe 148 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Coferez, 733, Cofirs, 2283, Cofres, 4206, s. pi. coffers, chests. Cogge, s. ship, 476, 756, 3634; pi. coggez, 738. “ Cairet on the colde ythes cogges & other.” The Destruction of Troy , E. E. T. S., 1. 3242. Coldis, v. 2 8. makest cold, chillest, 3518. Colurez, 8. pi. colours, 819. Comandez, 2392, Comaundez, 1637, Commaundez, 71, v. 3 s. pres. ind. commands; pret. comande, 1218, comaunde, 2356, comaundyd, 1602, commande, 156, 4148; imp. comaunde, 1585. Come, v. inf. 1584; 3 s. pres, ind. comes, 1818, commes, 799, comez, 841, commez, 1439; pi. commez, 1545 : pret. come, 80, 176, 2119; i.p. commande, 3468; p.p. comene, 582, 865, commyne, 1419, comyne, 987. Come, 8. coming, 1203, 1565, 1812. Comelyche, 1318,Comliche,3335, Comly, 1203, 3259, Comlyche, 71, 1053, adj. comely. Comes, impers. v. becomes, befits, 1579. Comforth, 830, Comforthe, 944, 1839, Comfurthe, 696, v. comfort, strengthen; 3 s. comfourthes, 3131. Comforthe, 8. comfort, 3960. Comlyli, 3047, Comlyly, 4108, adv. in a comely manner. Commande, See Come. Comone, v. converse, 1580. Comouns, 725, Comowns, 2353, s. pi. commons. Compas, 8. outer part (of an enclosure), 3240, (of a wheel), 3268, 3325, compass, reach, 4222. Compaste, p.p. surrounded, 3633. Concelle, 259, &c. See Counsaile. Concelle, 243, 2395, Consayle, 1959, 8. council. Condethe, 3148, 3483, Coundyte, 475, Cundit, 444, s. safe conduct. Condethes, s. pi. conduits, 201. Condycyone, s. condition, 1511. Confundez, v. 3 s. confounds, 1922; p.p. confundede,1153. Connygez, 8. pi. conies, rabbits, 197. Conquerid, 284, Conqueryd, 24, v. pret. won, gained; p.p. conqueryde, 402. Consayle. See Concelle. Constable, s. 1585, 1590. Contek, Conteke, 8. strife, 2721, 3669, 4177. Contenance, Contenaunce,#. countenance, manner, behaviour, 123, 222, 542, 2120, 4033. Contr4, 623, 676, Contree, 848, 1640, Counts, 223,2304, Cowntr6, 3542, 8. country \pl. contres, 3425, contreez, 27. Conuaye, v. convey, 1589, 1604. Conynge, adj. cunning, skilful, 3202; superl. conyDgeste, 809; konyngeste, 3177. Cope-borde, 8. cupboard, 206. Copes, 8. pi. 4334. Coppe, 8. cup, 2750 Coppe-fulle, s. cupful, 3378. Corage, 8. heart, 536,1725,1922. Corenalle. See Coronalle. Corkes, 8. carcase, 1091. Corne, (?) 1786, 1837. Cornettes, 8. pi. 1758, 4108. Comuse, s. pi. horns, 1809. Lat. cornu. Coronalle, 908,1108, 3633, Corenalle, 3258, s. ; a kind of ring or crown round a helmet; also, part of a lady’s head-dress. Corone, 291, Coroune, 28, Corowne, 3543, Crowne, 3426, 4202, Crownne, 3352, s. crown; pi. corowns, 3269, crounes, 51. Digitized by <^.OOQLe GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 149 Coroune, 678, Crowne, 3185, v. crown; p.p. corounde, 142, corounede, 125, corownde, 1654, 2447, 3525, crowned, 3213, crownede, 3049, crownnede, 3407. Corroumppede, p.p. corrupt, 3478. Cors, 1779, 2380, Corse, 1389, a. corpse, body. Corsaunt, 8 . holy body, body of a saint, 1164. See Corsant in English Gilds , p. 97, 1. 3, and Corseynt , English Gilds , p. 188,1. 1. Corvene. See Kernes. Coseri, a. (?) 1582. Coste, s. coast, 834, 877, 1787. Cosyne, 8. cousin, kinsman, 338, kinswoman, 864; pi. cosyns, 50, Cote, 1690, 3334, Cotte, 1194, 8. coat. Couaitte. See Coueite. Couatys, 8 . covetousness, 1580. Couaunde. Bead Conannde, adj. cunning, skilful, 558. Couched, p.p . set, 909. Coueite, 1191, Couaitte, 51, Couette, 3325, v. covet; 2 s. pres. couettes, 1321; p.p. cowayte, 2397. Couenawnte, 8. covenant, 3542. Couent, e. convent, 1220, 4021. Couer, Couere, v. recover, 859, 1246, win, 3425,3434; 3 s. coueres, 3644, coueris, 941, reaches; coueris vpe, gets up, 4274; pret. couerde, won, 274,280, reached, 858; couerd vp, got up, rose, 124, coueride, got up, 2195; p.p. couerede, won, 28, 3085. Couere, v. cover, 1886 ; 3 s. pres. couers, 1110; pret. couerde, 3378, 3995; p.p. couerde, 1770, 2115, couerede, 3047, 3098. Couerte, adj. sheltered, 1780, secret, 1196. Coundyte. See Condethe. Counge, s. leave, 479. Fr. congL Counsaile, 291, Concelle, 144, 259, 1023, s. counsel, advice. Counsayles, v. 3 s. advises, 305. Countere, v. encounter, 1274; 3 s . cownterez, 1848; p.p. cownterede, 1893. ’ Countre. See Contrd. Coupable, adj. blameable, guilty, 1317. Coupes. See Cowpe. Coupylde, v. pret. coupled, fastened, 2336. Coursere, 8. 1388, 2166. Courtays. See Curtais. Coutere,s. elbowpiece(in armour), 2567. Sir Gawayne and the Green Knight , 1. 583. Couthe, v. pret. knew, 21, Cowthe, couldst, 3340. Cowardys, 8. cowardice, 1693. 4186. Cowayte. See Coueite. Cowchide, v. pret. lay down (as hounds); and hence, became meek and submissive, 122. Cowle, 8. a large tub, 1051. “Cowle, vesselle. Tina, Cath.” "Prompt. Pare. In English Gilds , ed. Toulmin Smith, pp. 371, 382, Cowle is used for a tub, or some such vessel to measure ale with. Cowntas, s. countess, 3045 ; pi. cowntasses, 4337. Cowntere, 8. accountant, 1672. Cownterez. See Countere. Cowpe, s. cup, 209; pi. cowpes, 210, 237; coupes, 3375. Cowpez, v. 3 8. smites, strikes, 799, 2059; pi. cowpene, 2543. Cowthe. See Couthe. Crachynge, 8. crashing, 3669. Crafe, v. crave, 1681, 3522. Crafte, 8. skill, art, 752, 3667 ; pi. craftez, 284, craftys, 24. Digitized by Google 150 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Craftely, 3351, Craftyly, 196, adv. skilfully. Crafty, adj. skilfully made, 211. Crage, 8. crag, 876. Cramede,^. crammed, 477,1051. Crasseches, v. pi. pres. ind. crush, 3670; pret. craschede, 2114,crasschede, 1109. Crauaunde, adj. craven, 133. Crayers, 738, Rrayers, 3666, s. pi. small vessels. “And, for the Kevictallyng and Refresshyng of the said Shippes with Water and other Necessaries, the said Admirall shall, over and above the said Shippes, have Two Crayers, the one being of the Portage of Thre Score and fvfty [? fifteen] Tonnes, wherein shall be the Master Twelve Mariners and One Boye, and the other Crayer shall be of the Portage of fifty five Tonnes, wherein shall be the Maister with Ten Maryners and one Boye ”. Indentura inter Dominum Regem Sp Rdwardum Howard Capitaneum Generalem Armatce super Mare (a.d. 1512). Rymer, Fvedera , tom. xiii. p. 328, col. 2. Craysed, p.p. broken, 2150. Fr. ecrase. Creatoure, 8. creature, 534, 859; pi. creatours, 4102. Credens, 8. credentials, 88, 3522. Creest, Creeste, 8. crest, 1108, 1133, 1185. Creette, 8. a kind of wine, 200. Crepers, 8. pi. grapnels, 3667. ( Halliwell .) Cresmede. See Crysmede. Cretoyne, 8. 197. “A sweet sauce.” Halliwell. Compare “ Cretons : Lard coup6 menu qu’on fait frire dans la poele.” Roquefort. Crewelle, 132, 1909, Crouelle, 118, Crowelle, 2541, 3424, Cruelle, 43, 88, adj. cruel, fierce, angry, &c. Crispid, p.p. 1003. Cristene, Cristyne, adj. Christian, 3429 j sb. 1187, 2786, 4112. Cristenly, adv. like a Christian, 1208. Cristyndome, 8. Christendom, 2036. Cristynmesdaye, 8. Christmas-day, 70. Cristynmese, 64, Cristymesse, 839, Crystynmesse, 544, s. Christmas. Cronycle, s* chronicle, 3445; pi. cronycles, 3218. Crose, 3428, Crosse, 3335, s. cross; one crosse, across, 3667. Crosse-dayes, 8. pi. 3212* Crosselettes, 8. pi. 3336. Crouelle. See Crewelle. Crounes. See Corone. Crowelle. See Crewelle. Crownnede. See Coroune, v. Cruelle. See Crewelle. Cruschene, v. inf. crush, 1134. Cryande, i.p. crying, 1137. Crysmede, 1051, Cresmede, 1065, Krysomede, 3185, adj. anointed with chrism. Crystenede,Crystnede,^p. christened, 3337. Crysume, 142, Krysome, 2447, 3435, s. chrism. Cukewalde, 8. cuckold, 1312. Cundit. See Condethe. Cunvayede, v. pret. convoyed, 482. Cure, 8. care, 673. Curius, adj. curious, 61. Curlues, s. pi. curlews, 196. Curtais, 2394, Curtaise, 209, 417, Curtays, 125,1318, Curtayes, 481, Courtays, 21, adj. courteous. Curtaisie, s. courtesy, 1274,1681. Cury, 8. cookery, 1063. Digitized by <^.OOQLe GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 151 Dagges, v. pi. pierce, 2102 ; i. p. daggande, 3749. Dagswaynnes, 8. pi. garments “ of frize, or some material with long thrums like a carpet,” 3609. See Baggysweyne and notes thereon in Promptorium Parvulorum. Dalte, Daltene. See Dele. Damesels, 8. pi. young ladies, 3044. Dampnede, p.p. damned, condemned, 3277, 3299. Danke, Dannke, adj, dank, damp, 313, 3750. Dare, v. lie hid, lie still, 4007; 3 8. dares* 3225. “ Daryn\ or drowpyn*, or prively to be hydde. Jjatito , lateoy Cath.” Promptorium Parvulorum. Darielles, s. pi. a kind of dish, 199. See the recipe For darials in Liber Cure Cocorum y ed. Morris, p. 38. Dauncesynge, s. dancing, 2030. Daungere, Dawngere, 8. power, 579, 3067, danger, 1935, 2935. Daweyng, 8. dawn, daybreak, 1601. Dawez, 8. pi. days; done of dawez, killed, 2056. Daynteez, s. pi. dainties, 199. Daynteuous, adj. dainty, 4196. Daynttehely, adv. daintily, 723. Debles, 2934. Dede, 8. deed; pi. dedes, 48, dedys, 13. Dede, adj. dead, 975, 1722. Dede, 8. death, 1253, 1935. Dede-thrawe, s. death-pang, 1150. Deesse, 8. dais, 218. Defadide, p.p. faded, 3304. Defawte, s. default, 2939. Defawtes, v. pi. are wanting, fail, 2928. Deffuse, s. prohibition, 256. Compare “ Defaix, deffais, deffois, deibis : Lieux dSfendus, ou il n’est pas permis de pecber ni de chasser; empechement, defense.” Roquefort . But it is more than probable that we ought to read “ deff[e]nse ” = forbidding, prohibition. Degr6, 8. degree, 84. Dele, v. deal, 1278 ; pret . delte, 49, 3088; pret. pi. daltene, 2101, dalte, 3693, 3749; pp. delte, 1216, 1277, 1564. Delygens, 8. diligence, 1934. Delytte, 8. delight, 1970. Delyuerede, p.p. set free, 1688, 2081. Demenys, v. 3 s. leads, 1988; pi. demenys, 4076. O. Fr. deme - ner . Demyd, Demyde, p.p. deemed, judged, 219, 1564, doomed, 4158. Depayntide, p.p. depicted, 3355. Depez, 8. pi. deeps, 750. Depnesse, s. depth, 746. Dere, v. hurt, injure, 1783, 3248, 3611, 4200; 3 derys, 2099. A.S. derian. Dere, adj. dear, 974, 1216. Derefulle, adj. 4053. Qu. for derjfulle , full of pain or care. Compare derf hardship, affliction, pain, m Stratmann , Dereliche, 3379, Derely, 1277, adv . dearly. Dere worthily, adv. preciously, 3251. Derfe, adj. hard, strong, severe, 312, 332, 811, 2052, 2102, 2652. Derflyche, adv. severely, 3277. Derke, adj. dark, 754. Derlynge, 8. darling, 4196. Derygese, s. pi. dirges, 4017. Despyne, 183. See Porke despyne. Digitized by AnOOQle 152 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Destanye, 3436, 3779, Desteny, 1563, s. destiny. Destaynede, p.p. destined, 664, 4090, 4153, 4157, 4306. Destruede, p.p. destroyed, 1181. Dener, 8. duty, 1940. Devisede, v. pret. divided, 3527. Deuorande, i. p. devouring, 2054. Deuotly, 296, Devottly, 347, adv. devoutly. Devyse, v. divide, 2400; pret . deujsede, 3083. Dewly, adv. duly, 4006. Deworyde, p.p. devoured, 851. Deynttely, adv . daintily, 2643. Diamawndis,#. pi. diamonds, 3297. Dictour, 8. spokesman, 712. Dighte. See Dyghte. Dischayte, 8. deceit, 3789. Discouerours, s. pi. scouts, spies, 3117. Diskoueres, v. ind. pres. pi. search, 3119 j imp.pl. 2. discoueres, 1641. Disseuere, v. separate, 1575 ; 3 s. disseuerez,1978; pret. disseueride, 3529. Disspite, s. spite, 3163. Disspyszede, p.p. despised, 269. Dogge-sone, s. dog-son, 1072, 1723. Dole, 3067, 3299, 3885, Dule, 256, 704, 2777, s. sorrow. Dolefulle, adj . sorrowful, 2054. Dolphyne, s. 2054. Doluen e, p.p. buried, 975. Domesdaye, s. day of judgment, 1278, 3442. Doo, v. do, 1934, 2322; 2 s. pres, ind. dosse, 1954; pi. pres. ind. dosse, 4333 ; p.p. donne, 1940. Doubbyd, 48, Doubbyde, 3613, v. pret. dubbed. Douce, adj. sweet, pleasant, 1251. Doughttily, adv. valiantly, 1939. Doughty, 20, Doughtty, 1738, 2777, Dowghtty, 3798, adj. valiant; superl. doughtyeste, 219. Dough tynes, 1563, Doughtynesse, 3884, s. valour. Dout, v. doubt, 3061. Dowbille, adj. double, 2834. Dowblede, p.p . doubled, 3609. Dowblettez, s. pi. doublets, 2625. Dowcherys. See Ducherye. Dowere, s. dowry, 3089. Downkynge, s. moisture, 3248. Dowte, Dowtte, s. doubt, 2043, fear, 3225. Dowtte, v. fear, 312. Dowttouse, adj. dreadful, terrible, 3967. Drafe. See Dryffes. Dragges, s. pi. drags, 3615. Dragouns, s. pi. dragons, 1252. Drawe-brigge, s. drawbridge, 2474. Drawes, v. 3 8. draws, proceeds, 1251; pi. drawene, 3615; p.p. drawene, 3924. Dreche, v. tarry, delay, abide, 1504; 3 8. drecbes, 2940, 4052; pi. dreches, 1254, 2154; pret. dreccliede, 754. Drechede, p.p. troubled, harassed, 811. “ Ac sathanas pe frecche pe saule wule drecche , Hwan be agult habbeK” Jesus Coll. MS. 29, lea/m. Drede, v. dread, fear, 829, 2235; pret. dredde, 20; p.p. dredde, 3298. Drede, s. dread, fear, 46, 754. Dredlesse, Dredlez, adv. without doubt, certainly, 1504,2043, 4053. Drefene. See Dryffes. Dreghe, 8. duration, continuance, 2915. Digitized by <^.OOQLe GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 153 Dreghe, one, adv. aside, back, 786, 787, 3968, 4219. Dreghe, v. suffer, endure, 3276, 3437. Dreghely, adv . enduringly, continually, 2028. Dremyd, impers. v. pret. 760. Hym dremyd *= he dreamed. Drenschene, v. inf. drown, 761. Drerely, Drerily, adv . drearily, 2154, 2969. Dresce, 550, Dresse, 1072, 2042, 2401, v. direct, arrange, adjust, dispose, prepare, array; 3 s. dresses, 2026, dresesse, 2833; pi. drisses, 2473; pret. dressede, 786, 1055, dresside, 579, drissede, 2052, dryssede, 46; pp. dresside, 1252, drissid, 218; dresses vp = rears. Dreuene, Drife. See Dryffes. Drightene, 4008, Dryghttene, 1278, Dryghttyne, 3799, s. the Lord; gen. Drygntyns, 664, Dryghtynez, 1564. A.S. Drihten. Drissede. See Dresce. Dromondaries, 8. pi. dromedaries, 2286. Dromowndes, s. pi. swift ships, 3615. “Dromon, dromont: Gondole, vaisseau de guerre.” Roquefort. “ Dromones, Naves cursoriae, expediti cursus navigia.” Ducange. Droupe, v. lie hid, lie still, 4007. See Dare. Drowghte, 8. dryness, 3249. Drowppande, i. p. falling, 4053. Drye, v . suffer, 704, 1546, 1632. Dryffes, v. pi. drive, rush, 2757; pret. drafe, 787, drife, 3276; pret. pi. dreuene, 2914; i. p. dryfande, 761, 816; p.p. drefenc, 3224. Dryghttene. See Drightene. Drynchene, v. inf. to drown, 816. Drynkles, adj. drinkless, 4172. Drynkyne, v. pi. drink, 2028. Dryssede. See Dresce. Dubbyde, p.p. adorned, 3609. Ducherye, 8. duchy, 2400, 2937; pi. ducher6s, 1728,ducheryes, 3614, dowcherys, 49. Duchez, s. duchess, 852, 974, 3044. Duelle, v. dwell, tarry, abide, 3067; pret . duellede, 3321, duellyde, 219; i. p. duelland, 3443; p.p. duellyde, 1200. Dukkes, Dukkez, 8. pi. dukes, 723, 2029. Dule. See Dole. Dule-cotes, s. pi. mourning garments, 4336. Dusperes, 66,1254, Duspers, 145, Dusseperez, 2029, Duzseperez, 723, Duszeperis, 3751, Dusszeperis, 4336, s. pi. peers; lit. twelve peers (Fr. douze pairs). Dussepere, sg. one of such peers, 2329, 2642. Duttez. Read Dinttez, 8. pi. strokes, 787. Dyaperde, adj. 3251. Dyghte, v. order, arrange, dispose, 1253 ; 1 s. dyghttes, 2625; pret . dyghte, 2970; p.p. dyghte, sent, 3066, dressed, 3251, dignte, adorned, 3353. Dyked, p.p. buried, 975. Dyme, adj. dim, 1723. Dyne, 8. din, noise, 2031 Dynned, v. pret. sounded, resounded, 2031. Dynnynge, 8. noise, 2030. Dynt, 1073, Dynte, 312, 1118,$. stroke, blow; pi. dynttez, 1127, dynttys, 332. Dysfegoures, v. 3 s. disfigures, 2769. Dyspens, 8. spending, 538. Dyssauyde, p.p. deceived, 683. Dyuerse, adj. divert various, 49, 1935. Digitized by <^.OOQLe 154 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Dyuysyde, v. pret. divided, distributed, 49, 1389. Efte, adv. again, 470, 529, 2349. A.S. eft. Egerly, 1125, 1148, 1411, 1591, Egyrly, 1499, adv. sharply, fiercely. Egge, 2567, 2958, Eghge, 4194, s. edge. A.S. ecg. Eghelynge, adv. edgewise, 3675* Eghene, 3790, Eghne, 116, 358, Eughne, 1920, Eyghene, 3985, Eyghne, 1083, 4044, Eyne, 3282, s. pi. eyes. A.S, edge, pi. edgan. Eghge. See Egge. Egle, 8. eagle, 2067, 2245. Egree, adj. sharp, eager, 507. Eke, conj . also, 44, 572. Ekkene, v. inf. increase, 2009 ; 3 8. pres, ind. ekys, 3965. Elagere, 2977, is certainly miswritten. The alliteration requires' si ....; perhaps we ought to read slegghte , skill, dexterity. Eldare, adj. comp, older, 4151. Elde, 8. age, 301, old age, 4220. A.S. yldo. Elders, Eldyrs, 8. pi. ancients, 13, ancestors, 99, 272, 293. Elfaydes, s. pi. animals of some kind, 2288. Elies, adv. else, 1191,1209, 2020. Emange, prep, among, 375,1917, 2060. See Amange. Erne, 8. nncle, 1347. A.S. earn. Enamelde, 2565, 3355, Enamelede, 2027, p.p. enamelled. Enangylles, v. 3 s. en-angles, i. e. surrounds by troops formed in an angular figure (?), 3781. Comp, en-circles. Enarmede, p.p . 910. Enhraces, v. pi. put on the arm, 4111; enbrassez, 1753; p.p. enbrassede, 2459, 2518. Enbuschement, s. ambush, 1407, 3115. Enbusches, v. 3 8. pres. ind. sets in ambush, 1981; p.p. enbuschede, 1712, enbuschide, 1403, ambushed. Enclesside. Read Enclossede, enclosed, 2396. Enclined, 479, Enclinede, 1706, v.pret. bowed. Enclines, 8. pi. bows, 83. Enclosez, v. 3 s. 1134; p.p. enclosede, 4206, enclosyde, 3238. Encontre, 1320, 1787, Encountire, 3491, Encowntere, 4180, v. encounter; pi. enconters, 2158; pret. encontrede, 1185. Encorownmentes, 8. pi. coronations, 4197. Encroche, v. seize, obtain, 3426 ; 3 s. encroehez, 1243; pret. encrochede, 2036$ p.p* encrochede, 3525. Encroyssede, v. pret. crossed, 4112. Endente, 3297, Endenttyd, 2052, pp. endented (Her.). Endittede, v. pret. indited, composed, 3420. Endordide, p.p. gilt, 199. Enewe, 2657, Enowe, 504, adv. enough. Enfeblesches, v. pi. pres, become weak, 2484. Enflureschit, p.p. flowered, 198. Enforce, v. exert; enforce 30W, endeavour, 225; enforsse, strengthen, reinforce, 364. Engenderde, p.p. begotten, 843. Engendure, 8. begetting, 3743. Engeynes. See Engynes. Englaymez, 1131, Englaymous, 3684, v. pi render slimy. “ Gleymyn’, or yngleymyn*. Pisco, invisco Promptorium Parvulorum. Engowschede, p.p. swollen, in- Digitized by <^.OOQLe GLOSS ARIAL INDEl. 155 flated, 2053. “Engousser: Enfler, grossir.” Roquefort . Engrelede, p.p. engrailed (Her.), 4182. Engynes, 2481, 3036, Engeynes, 2423, s . pi. engines. Engyste, v . assign lodgings, 445. “ Gister, giter : Assigner un gite.” Roquefort . Enhorilde, p.p. surrounded, 3244. See Enourled in Alliterative Poems (Reprint), B. 19 and Glossary. Enis. See Eynes. Enjoynes, 2897, Enjoynys, 4109, v. pi. join in battle; pret. enjoynede, 2087. Enkerly, adv. ardently, eagerly, 507, 2066, 2222, 2839. Enmy, Enmye, 8. enemy, foe, 519, 642, 1952; pi. enmyse, 1205, 1240. Ennelled, pp. enameled, 1294. Ennoyntede, 50, Ennoynttyde, 101, Enoyntede, 142, Enoynttede* 544, 2447, pp . anointed. Enowe, adv. enough, 504. Enpeyrede,^?*».impaired,damaged, 474. Enpoysone, 8. poison, 213. Ensege, 441, Ensegge, 1337, v. besiege; 3 s. enseggez, 623; p.p. ensegede, 1696. Enserchede, 3942* Read Enserclede, encircled. Enserches, v. 3 8. searches, examines, 4311; pi. enserches, 2466. Ensure, v . assure, 1689, 2324, 3734. Entamede, v. pret. cut, wounded, 2203; p.p. 1160, 2708. “ Entamer , entamer, trancher, blesser, leser, enlever l’int^gritA” Burguy. Entayllide, p.p. entailed, 3542. Entire, v. enter, 1967 ; ind. pres. 3 8. enteres, 2007, 2387; pi. entres, 4309; pret. enteride, 2805; pp. entirde, 3448, entrede, 4069, entyrde, 1691. Enverounes, v. pi, environ, surround, 4124; pret. enuerounde, went round or about, 2051, 2094; pp. enuerownde, surrounded, 3242. Enueryde, p.p. (?) 1694. Enuyous, adj. 2047* Enys. See Eynes. Er, v. pi. are, 166. Erberis, 8. pi. gardens, 3245. Ercheuesqes, 8. pi. archbishops, 67. Ere, v. pi. are, 1538, 1582, 2547. Ere, adv. before, 1840. Erie, s. earl, 1659 ; pi. erlez, 1904, erlles, 3528, 3933* Erledoms, 8. pi. earldoms, 42. Erles, 8. pi. earnest, deposit, 2687. Erne, s. pi. ears, 1086. Ernestly, adv. 2838, 2903. Errawnte, adj. arrant, 2895. Erthe, s. earth, 109, 161. Erthely, adj. earthly, 1664, 4169. Es, v. 3 8. is, 16, 88, 89; pi. es (= are)* 1666, 3448. Eschape, v. escape, 1020, 2957 ; pret. eschappede, 1881, escbappide, 2367; pp. eschapede, 1117, 3576. Escheffe, v. 2301. Escheue, v. attain, 3347; pret. escheuede, 3000, eschewede, fell out well, 2956, eschewede, met with good fortune, 1620; p.p. esclieuyde, 3021, eschewede, 1539, 3027. Eschewes, v. 3 8. draws back, retreats, 1116; pret. eschewede, 1881; imp. 2 pi. eschewes, 1750. “Eschiver , eskiver 3 escheveir t 6viter, fuir, esquiver.” Burguy. Ese, s. ease, 3208. Este, adj. east, 1740, 3210. Esterne, 1006, Estyre, 554, s. Eafeter. Digitized by <^.OOQLe 156 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Etene, p.p. eaten, 2716. Ethenys, 4163, Ethyns, 4122, 8 . pi. giants. See Etayn in Sir Ga - wayne and the Green Knight , 11.140, 723. A.S. eoten. Ettylle, v . purpose, 554; 3 8. ettelles, 520, etles, 3077. Euene, 2073, Euenne, 4055, Euyne, 78, Evyne, 3596, Evynne, 3597, Ewene, 762, Ewyne, 618, 1122, Ewynne, 2961, ado. even, straight, right, just. Euensange, 894, Euesange, 900, 8 . evensong, vespers. Eueriche a, 2037, Euer-ilk a, 212, adj. every. Euylle, ado. ill, 1117. Ewene. See Euene. Ewyne, 8 . evening, eve, 1006, 1788. Ewyne, Ewynne. See Euene. Ewyre, adv. ever, 8. Eye-liddis, s. pi. eyelids, 3952. Eyghene, Eyghne, Eyne. See Eghene. Eynes, 1283, 2308, Eynez, 1760, Eynis, 2516, Eynys, 1879, Eynyes, 2275, Enis, 2886,3376, Enys, 3466, 8.pi. narrow passages, passes. A.S. enge, narrow, Germ, enge, a narrow passage. Faa-mene, s. pi. foemen, 303. Fadire, 3432, Fadyr, 112, Fadyre, 1169, 8. father. Fadome, 8. fathom, 1103. Faees, 8. pi. foes, 403. Faghte. See Feghte. Faire, adv. well, 1110, 3247. Fairely, adv. nicely, 954. Faith, 8. 1155. Faithely, Faythely, adv. assuredly, 3864, 4031. Fakene, v. pi. coil, 742. “ Fake, one of the circles, or windings, of a cable, or hawser, as it lies disposed in the coil.The fakes are greater or smaller in proportion to the extent of space which a cable is allowed to occupy where it lies.” Falconer’s Marine Dictionary , ed. Burney. Sc .faik, a fold {Jamieson). Falle, v. betide, 1006; 3 8. falles, belongs, 2480. Falow, adj. pale, 1402. Falowede, £>.p. turned pale, 3954. Fals, adj. false, 1307. Falsede, 3918, Falssede, 2860, 8. falsehood, error. Falterede, v. pret. quivered, 1092. Fande. See Fynde. Fande, 557, 867, 984, Fannde, 656, v. endeavour. See Fonde. Fannge, v. seize, take, receive, 425; ind. pres. 3 s. fangez, 1005, 1249. See Fongene. Fare, v. go, 3581; ind. pres. 3 8. fares, proceeds, behaves, 788. Fare, 8. journey, course, 393. Fare-waye, s. course, 1357. Farlande, 8. foreland, 880, 984, 1188. Farly. See Ferly. Faucetez, 8. pi. taps, 205. Faughte, Faughtte, Fawghte. See Feghte. Fawcone, 788, Fawkone, 4003, s. falcon; pi. fawcouns, 925. Fawe, adj. variegated, particoloured, 747. A.S ./ah. Fawnelle, 2765. Read Fawuelle, s. a horse of a yellowish chesnut colour. " Fauvel, fauvau, fauvelle: De couleur rousse, fauve, tirant sur le j aune, Jlavus, fulvus .” Roquefort . Fawntkyne, 2440, 2736, s. little child, baby; pi. fawntekyns, 845. Fawte, 8. lack, 160, fault, 2737. Fax, 8. hair, 1078. A.S. feax. Digitized by <^.OOQLe GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 157 Fay, adj. fated to die, dead, 394, 438, 971,3828; fey, 121, 517, feye, 2847. Fay, Faye, 8. faith, 2842, 2860, 3073. Fayfully, adv. faithfully, 1715. Fayled, 3308, looks like a mistake through confounding this line with the next; qu. faldeae, folded. Fayne, adj . glad, 1160. Faythefully, adv. 1345, 1735, 1913. Faythely. See Faithely. Feble, adj . weak, bad, 226, 2929. Fecchede, v. pret. fetched, 169 ; p.p. fechede, 111, fechyde, 437. Feedde, p.p. fed, 2492. Feelde. See Felde. Feemene, 8. pi. herdmen, keepers of cattle, 2488. A.S.feoh, cattle. Feghte, 367,1715, Fyghte, 1345, 1735, v. fight; 3 *. feghttys, 789, fyghttez, 2091; pi. feghttes, 1495, feghttez, 2163, feghttene, 2555; pret. faghte, 1174, faughte, 2164, faughtte, 1898, fawghte, 2799; t. p. fcghtande, 4257, fyghtande, 4066, 4121; p.p. foghtene, 3019, foughtene, 1535, foughttene, 2365. Feghte, 8 . fight, 4254. Fegure, 8. figure, shape, 781, 3301. Fekille, adj. false, 2860. Felde, 972, 985, Feelde, 1432, 8. field. Fele, adj. many, 845,1247, 1496. Fele, v. hide, conceal, 3237. See felen in Stratmann. O.N. fela, M. Goth .filhan. Fele, v. feel; pret. felede, 1874. Feletez, 1158, Felettes, 2174, 4237, s. pi. fillets. Felewes, v. pi. follow, 2758. Feleyghes, 8. pi. felly, circumference of a wheel, 3308. A.S .felge. Felle, 8. skin, 1081. A.S. fell. Felle, 8. mountain, 2489, 2509. Felle, v. fell, 1139; 3 8. fellez, 1247; p.p. fellide, 1851, fellde, 2376. Felle, adj. fierce, cruel, severe, 1401, 2769. Felly, adv. fiercely, 2141.* Felowez, 8. pi. fellows, companions, 1381. Felschene, v. inf. (?) renovate, 1975. Haliiweil has “Felsh. To renovate a hat/* Fende, 8. fiend, devil, 871, 954; pi. fendez, 843. Fente, 8. (?) 4249. Fenyste, p.p. finished, 4254. Ferant, 2259, Feraunte, 1811, 2140, Ferawnt, 2451, adj. seemly. Fercostez, 8. pi. ships of some kind, 743. “Farkost, Navis.” Verdins, under the word Kost. See Farcost and Fercost in Jamieson. Ferde, p.p. afraid, 403, 526, 3227; *. fear, 1875, 3069. Ferdnesse, 8. fear, 121, 2258. Fere, 8. fear, 3918. Fere, 8 . companion; pi. feres, 1608, ferez, 1789, feris, 1578, ferys, 2126. A.S. gefera. Fere, 1232. See Ferre. Fere, adj. sound, unhurt, 2796, 3017. Ferke, v. move, go, 984, 1037; ferkke, 4152 ; 3 s. ferkez, 933,949 ; inf. ferkene, 3907; t. /?. ferkand, 1452, ferkande, 2452. Ferly, 2842, Ferlyche, 925, adj. strange. Ferly, 2440, 2947, Farly, 2485, 8. strange thing, wonder. Fermes, 425, Ferrnez, 1005, 8. pi. rents, tribute. Fermysone, 8. (?) some kind of sauce, 180. Ferre, adj. far, distant, 3547; fere, Digitized by <^.OOQLe 158 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 1232 j be ferre = by far, |1176; comp . ferrere, further, 1496, 3068, 4237 ; superl. ferreste, furthest, 2741. Ferrers, 8 . a kind of wine, 2714. Ferriours, 2752. Read Forriours, foragers. Ferrome, adj. far, foreign, 3578; o ferrome = afar, 856, 934, 2100. Fers, 2161, Ferse, 1451, 1537, adj. fierce. Fersely, 1115, 3402, Fersly,1118, adv. fiercely. • Fersenesse, s. fierceness, 3826. Ferthe, adj. fourth, 3412. Ferthynges, s. pi. round spots, 3472. Feryne, adj . far, foreign, 3711. Ferynne, s. fern, 1875. Ferys. See Fere. Fesantez, 925, Fesauntez, 198, 8. pi. pheasants. Fesede, p.p. worried, 2842. Feste, adj. fast, 2142. Festenesse, v. 3 s. fastens, 1118; pi. festenez, 934. Fetche, v. 1188. Feteled, p.p. fettled, set in order, 2149. Fetheris, s. pi. feathers, 2098. Fette, v. fetch, 557. Fettede, p.p. fitted, ordered, arrayed, 4067. See Fitt. Feuei^ere, 8. February, 436. Fewle, s. fowl, bird, 2071; pi. feulez, 926. Fewtee, s. fealty, 112. Fewtere, 1791, Fewtire, 1769, Fewtyre, 1366, s. rest for a lance. Fewters, v. 3 8. lays in rest, 3775 ; p.p. fewteride, 1711, fewtrede, 1756, with spears in rest. Fey. See Fay. Feyede, v. pret. cleansed, wiped, 1114. Feyne, (?) foin, 1734. Feyne = fine, v. cease, 1147. Feyne, v. feign, 1913. Feynte, adj. faint, 1874. Feyntly, adv. faintly, 1734. ff. Words beginning with ff are entered under single F. Fichene, v. pi. fix, pierce, 2098; pret. fichede, 4239. Fif, adj. five, 1756. Fifte, adj. fifth, 3306. Fillez, 1402, Fillis, 1038, v. 3 s. fills; p.p. fillede, satisfied, 1032. Filsnez, v. 3 s. lurks, 881. Compare “Fylskni, Latibulum." Verelius. Filterede, 1078, 2149, Filtyrde, 780, p.p. matted, mixed. Firthe, s. wood, 1708, 2144. Fische-halle, adj. sound as a fish, 2709. Fitt, v. fit, set in order, array, 2139; 3 s. fittes, 1989, fittez, 1755, 2072 ; p.p. fittyde, 2455. Flammande, i. p. flaming, resplendent, 198. Flappes, v. strikes, 2781. Flawez, 773, Flawes, 2556, s. pi. blasts, gusts. Flawmande, i. p. flaming, 945, 1975, flashing, 1365, 1494. Flawmez, v. 3 s. flames, 1037; pi. flawmes, 2556. Flawnke, s. flank, 1158, 2174; pi. flawnkkes, 2100. Flay, v. frighten, terrify, 2779; p.p. flayede, 2441. Flayre, s. flame, 772. Flede. See Flee. Flee, v . 2021 ; pret. fleede, 494, 1432,2729, flede, 3236; p.p. flede, 2488. Digitized by AnOOQle GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 159 Fleete, v. float, 803 \ pret. fletyde, 3602. Flemede, 2738, Flemyde, 1155, pp. banished. Flemesche, adj . Flemish, 743. Flenges, v . 3 8. flings, 2762. Fleryande, i. p. gibing, scofling, 1088,2778. Sc .fleer. Flesche, 8. 1160, 2099. Fleschez, v. pi. flit about, 926. Flete, 8. fleet, 1189. Fleterede, pp. (?) fitted for flight, 2097. Flethe, 8. (?) 2482. Flieghes, v. 3 8. flies, 4002. Flitt, v. shoot (with arrows), 2097. Flode, 8. flood, 773, 803, 1189. Floke, s . flock, company, 2849. Floke - mowthede, adj. flukemouthed, having a mouth like a flat fish, 2779. Flones, 3619, Flonez, 2097 ,s.pl. arrows. A.S./<z, flan. Florenez, s. pi. florins, 885. Flores, s. pi. fields, plains, 2694, 3249. Floresche, v. flower, flourish, 2555; pret. floreschede, 3246; pp. floreschede, 771, 1708, 3472, floreschte, 924, 1366. Flour, 8. flower, 1709, 1990 ; pi. flourez, 970. Flourdelice, s. lily-flower, 3333. Flo we, v. pret. flew, 772, 2100. Floynes, 8. pi. a kind of small ships, 743. A. Jal in his Glossaire Nautique gives “ Flouin. Nomd’un petit navire pont6 qui pouvait naviguer a la voile et a raviron.” Flude, s. flood, 494. Fluke, s. flounder, or other flat fish, 1088. Fluriste, p.p. flowered, 180. Flyeande, i. p. flying, 2451. | Flyngande, i. p. flinging, dashing along, 2757. Flyschande, i.p. slashing, 2141. Flysches, v. slashes, cuts, 2768. Flyttynge, 8. shooting (with arrows), 2099. Foddenid,^.^. produced, 3246. Foghtene. See Feghte. Folde, 315, 2151, Foulde, 1071, Fowlde, 3302, s. earth. Foie, s. foal, 449, 2783. Folily, adv. foolishly, 2841. Folowes, v. 3 s. follows, 1118; pi. folous, 1360. Fomand, 3307, Fomande, 2233, Fomannde, 780, i. p. foaming. Fome, s. foam, 1079. Fonde. See Fynde. Fonde, 3370, (miswritten) Fonode, 205, v. try. Fondene. See Fynde. Fongene, v. pres. pi. take, 2799 ; fonngez, 2753 j pret. fongede, seized, 3308. Fonode. See Fonde. Foo, 8. foe, 1536, 3395. Foode, s. offspring, child, person, 3776. Foomene, 8. pi. foemen, 3020. Foonde, v. go, 366, 2489. Forbere, v. forbear, 1913. Forbrittenede, cut up, slaugh¬ tered, 2273, Forchipe, 8. foreship, 3678. Forcyere, adj. comp . stronger, 1176. Fordremyde, p.p. wearied by dreaming, 3392. Fore, prep, for, 256; conj. for, 1179. Fore-breste, 8. front, 1494, 1990. Fore-brustene, p.p. burst, 2272. Digitized by <^.OOQLe 160 GLOSS ARIAL INDEX. Foregyffe. See Forgyffe. Forejustyde. See Forjuste. Forelytenede, p.p. lessened, 254. Fore-maglede, p.p. mangled, 1534. Sc. magily maigil , to mangle {Jamieson). Forestayne, 8. prow of a ship, 742. Foretoppe, s. forehead, 1078. Fore-trauaillede, p.p. fatigued, 806. Forfette, v. forfeit, 557 ; p.p. forfetede, 1155. Forfoughttene, p.p. wearied with fighting, 3792, 4179. ForgyfFe, 3488, Foregyffe, 4324, v. forgive; p.p. forgeffene, 2184. Forheuede, s . forehead, 1080. Foijuste, 2895, Foqustede, 2088, 2134,2908, Forejustyde, 1398, p.p. overcome in a joust, defeated. Formaylle, 8. female hawk, 4003. Forraye, v. forage, 2489; 3 8. forrayse, 1247; pret. forrayede, 3017. Forreours, 8. pi. foragers, 2450, 2901. Forsake, v. refuse, 1686, 2734, deny, 1945, 4142. Forsesy, adj. strong, powerful, 3300, 3307. Forsett, 2012, 2018, Forsette, 1714, 1896, 1979, Foresett, 2161, p.p. Forsterne, 8. forepart of the stem, 3664. Fortethe, 8. front teeth, 1089. Forthermaste, adv. first, 1365. Forthes, 2827, Forthis, 1850, v. 3 s. proceeds. For-thi, 152, 225, For-thy, 1172, Fore-thy, 3009, Fore-thi, 3346, adv. therefore. Forthire, 261, Forthyre, 340, adv. further. Forthire, v . afford, furnish, 300, 1509. Forthirmaste, adj. first, 3330. For-thynkkes, 4252, For-thynkkys, 971, impers. v. repents; me f. = I regret, repent. Fortrodyne, p.p. trampled, 2150. Fote, 801, 1079, Fott, 4058, Fotte, 933, 1855, 8. foot. Fote-mene, s. pi. infantry, 1989. Foughtene, Foughttene. See Feghte. Foulde. See Folde. Found, 452, Founde, 495, 1189, v. go, proceed; pi. fowndes, 3112, fownays, 2756; pret. foundide, 1442. Foundene, Foundyne. See Fynde. Fourmede, v. pret. formed, 3808; p.p. 781, 861, 1061. Fourte, adj. fourth, 3300. Fourtedele, 8. fourth part, quarter, 946. Fowlde. See Folde. Fowle, 8. bird, 4002. Fowly, adv. foully, 1089. Fowndene. See Fynde. Fowndes. See Found. Foyle, 8. leaf, 2704. Foynes, v. pi. fence, thrust, 1494, 2141, 2163; pret. foynede, 1898. Fra yprep. from, 47, 591. Fraisez, 1248. Read Frayes, terrifies. Fraiste, Frayste, v. try, test, 435, 881, 3395 ; 3 s. fraystez, 1227; p.p. fraistede, 2774. Fraknede, adj. freckled, 1081. Franche, adj. French, 1250. Fransye, 8. frenzy, 3826. Frape, 2804, Frappe, 2163, 3548, s . company, troop. Frappez, v. 3 8. smites, 1115. Digitized by AnOOQle GLOSS ARIAL INDEX. 161 Frauncnez, 8. liberty, 1248. Frawghte, p.p. laden, freighted, 3647. Frawnke, 8, enclosure, 3247. Frayede, p.p. frightened, 2260. Fraynes, 507, Fraynez, 337, 954, 1441, v. 3 s. asks, inquires. Frayste. See Fraiste. Fre, Free, adj. noble, 1711, 3247. Frechely, adv. (?) boldly, (?) freshly, 3691. Freely, 3330, Frely, 970, Freliche, 2488, 3371, 3808, adj. noble. Freely, adv . 2072, 2140. Freke, 8. man, fellow, 557, 873, 973 ; pi. frekes, 742, frekkes, 1360, frykis, 2898. Freke, 2759, 2821, Frekk, 2139, Frekke, 2454, adj. bold; superl. frekkeste, 1536, 2164. Frekly, 1360, 1451, Frekkly, 3927, adv. boldly. Freliche, Frely. See Freely, adj. Fremdly, 2738, Fremedly, 1250, Fremydly, 3405, adv. strangely. Fremmede, adj . strange, foreign, 3343. Frenchepe, 8. friendship, 656. Frendez, 8. pi. friends, 1442. Frendely, adj. friendly, 3343. Frendles, adj. friendless, 3305. Freschely, 1367, 1441, Frescheliche, 4249, Frescly, 2097, Fresclyche, 2900, adv. freshly, briskly, vigorously. Freschene, v. refresh, 1452. Fresclyche, adj. fresh, 2502. Fresone, 8. (?) Friesland horse, 1365. Fretene, p.p. (?) adorned, 2142. A.S. fratwian , to adorn. Frette, p.p. (?) rubbed, 2708. Yx.fr otter, to rub. Fretted, p.p. 1364. MOBTB ARTHURS. 11 Fretyne, p.p. devoured, 844. Frithez, 8. pi. woods, forests, 924, Frithed, p.p. wooded round, hemmed in with forest, hedged, 3247. Occurs in Piers the Plowman, ed. Skeat, Text B, v. 590. Fro, prep, from, 3, 376, 1138. Fromonde, 8. (?) 1112. Froske, 8. frog, 1081. A.S. /rose. Frount, 1080, Frounte, 1711, 1756, Frownte, 2455, Frunt, 1112, Fronte, 1495, s. brow, forehead, front. Frountere, 2861, Frowntere, 2898, 8. front of an army. Frowarde, adj. perverse, 3345. Froyte, 8. fruit, 2492, 2707; pi. froytez, 3246. Frumentee, 8. a dish made of wheat and various other things, 180. See the recipe in Liber Cure Cocorum f ed. Moms, p. 7. Frunt. See Frount. Frusche, 8. dash, charge, swift attack, 2900. Fruschene, v. pi. dash, smite, 2804. “ Froisseryfiruisser, teaser, froisser, briser.” Burguy. Frykis. See Freke, 8. Frysthez, 1248. Read Frythez, spares. Frythes, v. pi. spare, 2159 ; imp. 2 pi. 1734; p.p. frythede, 656. Fude, 8. food, 160, 2486. Fulfille, r. fill up, 3438. Fulle, adv. foul, 1154, 2436. Fulsomeste, adj. foulest, 1061. Fundene. See Fynde. Furlange, 8. furlong, 873, 946, 1538. Furthe, adv. forth, 262, 632, 1229. Furthe, 8. path, ford, 1227, 1525, 1714, 1897, 2144. Digitized by AnOOQle 162 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Fute, 8. foot, 461. Fyche, v . fix, 2162. Fyfe, adj. five, 844, 856. Fyfte, adj. fifth, 3414. Fyghtande. See Feghte. Fygured, p.p. 2151. Fylede, p.p. defiled, 978. Fylth, 8 . foul lust, 1032, 1071. Fynde, v. find; pi fyndez, 1357; j oret. fande, 1160, fonde, 2775; p.p. fundene, 1176, fondene, 675, 808, foundene, 92, 163, foundyne, 435, fowndene, 3339. Fyrthe, v. spare, 3370. Fyrthe, s. wood, forest, 1409, 1850, 1875, 1897, 2159. Fysnamye, 1114,Fyssnamy,3331, 8 . physiognomy, face. Gaddes, 3621, Gaddys, 3683, s. pi. goads, pricks. Gaderide, p.p. gathered, 3295; pret. gadyrede, 594. Gadlynges, 2443, 2728, Gadlyngez, 2854, Gedlynges, 2884, s. pi. Fellows, worthless Fellows. “ So is mony gedelyng, godlyche on horse, and is beyh lutel wurp; wlonk oi pe glede, and vuel at pare neode.” The Proverbs of Alfred, Jesus Coll. MS. 29, leaf 264. A.S. gadeling , companion. Gafe, v. pret gave, 2628, gavest, 1018; gaffe, gave, 85. Galaye, 8. galley, 3724; pi galays, 3096. Galede, v. pret . sang, 927. A.S. galan. Galte, 8. swine, 1101. Galyarde, adj. gay, 721, 1265, 1279. Fr .gaillard. Gamene, 8. game, sport, 2811 ; pi gamnes, 1730, 3174. Ganggynge, 8. going, 706. Gardwynes, 8. pi guerdons, rewards, 1729. Garette, s. watch-tower, 562,3104. “pe garettes oboven pe yhates bryght Of pe cetd of heven, I lyken pus TylSpe garettes of a cet6 of gold, pat wroght war, als I before told. Of fyne curalL? and rych rubys. And of other stanes of gret prys,...” Hampole's Pricke of Conscience, 11.9101-9106. Gameschit, 722, Gamescht, 563, 1000, p.p. garnished, furnished. Gamisone, 3105, Gamysone, 2471, 2655, Garysone, 3007, garrison. Garte. See Gere. Gas. See Goo. Gate, s . going, 4144, road, 4308. Gavliche, Gaylyche, adv. gaily, 913, 2655, 3462, 3684. Gayne, v. avail, 165 ; 3 s. gaynes, 4303 j pi. gaynez, 1731. Gayneste, adj. nearest, 487, 1041, 3006. Gayspande, i.p. gasping, 1462. Geant, 3410, Geante, 2889, Gyaunt, 1122, 1222, s. giant; pi geauntez, 375, gyawntis, 2908; Gedlynges. See Gadlynges. Gedyre, v. gather, 592. Gemows, s. pi. hinges, 2893. “ Gymowe of a sperynge. Verti - nella, gemella.” Promptorium Parvulorum . See Way’s notes on this word. Genatours, 8. pi riders on jennets, light horsemen, 2897. “ G^netaire, genesteur, g^nete, g6nitaire : Sorte ae cavalier, suivant Philippe de Commines.” M Genitaires : Uavalerie 16gere.” Roquefort . Gentille, adj. gentle, well-born, &c., 987,1161,2088; superl. gentileste, 862. Digitized by Google GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 163 Genyuers, s. pi. (?) 375. Gere, v. make, cause, 3640 ; 3 s. gers, 3572, 3921; pret. garte, 1886, 3709, gerte, 1780, 1946, 1975; rte kepe hym == caused him to kept. Gere, 8. gear, tackle, 2539, 3008. Gerefawcone, 8. gerfalcon, 4004. Gers. See Gere, v. Gersoms, 8 . pi. treasures, 165, 1729. Gerte. See Gere, v. Gessenande, (?) 2521. Gesserawnte, 2892, Jesseraunt, 904, Jesserawnte, 4238; s. coat of jazeran; pi. gesserawntes, 2909. “ Jazeran. Particular kind of armour, so called from the Italian ghiazerino, being made of overlapping plates of iron rivetted on canvass covered with velvet, red, black, or blue, and ornamented externally with brass studs.” Meyrick , Glossary of Military Terms . " Jaserant, jazeranty .... cotte de petites mailles.” Burguy. Gestes, 8. pi. stories, 2876. Gettlesse, adj. without getting anything, 2727. Getyne, p.p. gotten, 886. Ghywes,s.£>7. gyves, fetters, 3621. Gife, 2630, Giffe, 2632, conj. if. Gife, 1179, Giff, 1060, Giffe, 2321, v. give; p.p. gifene, 1729. Glade. See Glydez. Glauerande, i.p. talking foolishly, 2538. Glayfe, s. 3761. “ Glaive. A weapon composed of a long cutting blade at the end of a staff....” Meyricky Glossary of Military Terms . Gledys, 8. pi. sparks, live coals, 117. Glent, 8. stroke, 3863. Glentes, 4244, Glentis, 2563, Glenttys, 2780, v. 3 s. glances, glides. Gleterande, i. p. glittering, 595, 1280,2853. Gliftis, 3949, Glyftes, 2525, v. 3 s. looks. Gloppynyng, 8. fright, amazement, 3863. ' Glopyne, v. terrify, 2580, be terror-struck, 3 s. glopyns, 3949; pret. glopnede, 1074; imp. pi. 2. gloppyns, 2853; i. p. gloppynnande, 4329. Glorede, v. pret. stared, 1074. Glotone, 8. glutton, 1074. Glydez, v. 3 8. glides, 1371 ; pret. glade, 2972; i.p. glydande, 799. Glyftes. See Gliftis. Gobbede, adj. full of gab or derision, 1346. Sc. gabbed , loquacious. Girde, v. smite, 3709; 3 a. girdez, 1792, gyrdes, 1370, gyrdez, 1470, gyrdis, 2563 •, pret. gyrd, 2971; pp. girde, 3938. Girdille, Girdylle, 8. girdle, 3458, 3923. Girse, 8 . grass, 3944. Gladchipe, 8. gladness, 59, 928. Gobelets, 8. pi. glove-ornaments of some kind, perhaps little cups, 913. Compare Gobelot de gland = acorn-cup. (. Roquefort .) Gobone, v. (?) 4164. Gode, adj . good, 3476. Gole, 8. 3725. “A ditch or small stream.” Halliwell . Gladdez, 2883, Gladdis, 2852, v. 3 s. gladdens, encourages; pi. gladdene, 928. Glade, adj. glad, 1386. Golet, 8. gullet, 1772. Gome, 85, 1209, Gume, 3409, s. man; pi. gomes, 1461, gomys. 3683, 3684. A.S. guma . Digitized by <^.OOQLe 164 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Goo, v. go, 213, 1279; 3 s. gas, 3006, gos, 3727, gosse, 3104; pi. gosse, 497; 2 pi. gose, 1266. Gorge, s. throat, 3760. Gorgere, s. gorget, piece of armour for the throat, 1772. Gorre, 8. gore, 1130, 1370. Gos, Gose. See Goo. Gosesomere, 8. gossamer, 2687. Gosse. See Goo. Gossehawke, s. goshawk, 4001. Gouemour, s. 1201. Gowces. Read Gowtes, drops, spots, 3759. Gowke, 8. cuckoo, 927. A.S. geac. Gowles, 3646, 3759, Gowlles, 3945, s. gules (Her.). Gracious, adj . 187. Grame, 8. anger, 1077,3008. A.S. Granes, v. groans, 2562. Grape, v. grope, search, 2725. Grassede, p.p. fattened, fat, 1091. Grauene, p.p. engraved, 3462. Graunt, 2820, Graunted, 1202, p.p. granted. Grayhondes. See Grehownde Graynes, 8. pi. 913, 3463. Graythe, v. make ready, prepare, equip, 1279, convey, 4303, proceed, hasten, go, 1266; 3 s. graythes, goes, 1353, 1384, 3761; p.p. graythede, equipped, 589, 602, graythide, 373. Graythelyche, 722, Graythely, 1369, 1384, 1387, Graythly, 1000, adv. readily, speedily. Graytheste, adj. readiest, promptest, 1201. Gre, 2748, Gree, 1936, 2645, s. will, pleasure. Gree, 8. (degree) ascendancy, 3706, 4298. Grees, s. grease time, the time when deer are fat and fit for killing, 658. See Grease in Halliwell. Greesse-growene, adj. grown over with fat, 1101. Grefe, 1077, Greefe, 1471, 2562, Greffe, 3007, 4324, s. grief, anger, vexation, pain, sorrow. Grefe, v. grieve, 705; p.p. grefede, hurt, 1282, greffede, 1463. See Greue. Grefes. See Greue, s. Grehownde, 3464, Grewhounde, 1075, Grewhownde, 4001, s. grayhound ; pi. grewhoundez, 1730, grayhondes, 252L Grekkes, adj. Greek, 594. Grene, adj. green, 1266, 1281. Grennede, v. pret. grinned, showed his teeth, 1075. Gresse, s. grass, 1131. Gret, 256, Grete, 207, Grett, 1, 165, Grette, 539, adj. great; comp. f retter, 3243 j superl. gretteste, 469. Grete, v. greet, 1282; 3 8. gretez, 1077; pi. gretes, 1233; pret. grette, 84, 3476. Grete, v. weep ; 3 s. gretes, 2962; pret. grette, 3790; i. p. gretand, 951, 3912. Gretez, v. 1774. Qu. gredez, calls. Greue, s. grove, 2540 ; pi. greues, 1874, greuez, 927, grefes, 2881. Greue, v. grieve, vex, annoy; pret. greuyde, was vexed, 1352; p.p. greuede, 134,266,1173, greuyde, 1022. Grewhounde, Grewhownde. See Grehownde. Gripe, v. seize, gripe, grasp, 3008; 3 #. grypes, 1163, 2526, gryppes, 1369. Grisely, 3105, Grysly, 1075, Grysely, 951, Gryeslye, 1469, Gry[s]- lycb, 1101, adj. horrible, gnsly. Digitized by Google GLOBSARIAL INDEX. 165 Grisely, 1462, 3950, Grysely, 3912, Gryselyche, 1373, adv. horribly. Groffe, 3850, Grouffe, 3944, Growffe, 3869, s. On g. = flat, sprawling. Grome, 8. groom, 2526, 3489. Gronande, i. j p. groaning, 1373, 3938. Grouche. See Gruche. Grouffe. See Groffe. Groundene, 1371, 2972, Growndene, 1281, Grundyne, 1461, p.p. ground, sharpened. Growffe. See Groffe. Growndene. See Groundene. Gruche, 706,2644, Grouche, 2819, v. be dissatisfied, grudge ; pret . grychgide, 2567 ; up. grucchande, 1076, 1353, 1462. Grundyne. See Groundene. Grychgide. See Gruche. Gryeslye. See Grisely. Gryffoune, 8. griflfin, 3869. Grygynge, e. (graying) dawn, 2510. Grylych, 1101. Read Gryslych, and see Grisely. Gryme, adj . grim, 3621, 3760; superl. grymmeste, 3419. Grymly, adv. grimly, fiercely, 1471, 2558, 3813. Grypes, Gryppes. See Gripe. Grysely, Gryselyche, Grysly. See Grisely. Guchede. Read Guthede = goutted, goutt6, bedropped, spotted, 3937. Gud, 2851,2853, Gude, 559, 563, adj. good. Gudes, 295, Gudez, 1213, 1249, s. pi. goods. Gudly, adv . well, 677, 3005. Gumbaldes, 8. pi. (1) dainties, 187. Gume. See Gome. Guschez, v. pi. gush, 1130. Guttes, 1130, Guttez, 1370, 8. pi. guts. Guyte, 8. child, 2963. See Get and Gyte in Jamieson. Gwerdones, 4277, Gwerddouns, 2820, s. pi. guerdons, rewards. Gyaunt, Gyawntis. See Geant. Gydes, v. 3 8. guides, 3005. Gydes, 8. pi. guides, 3006. Gye, v. guide, 4; pret. gyede, 3860. Gyf, 3058, Gyfe, 1598, Gyffe, 4, v. give; 3 s. gyffes, 1774; p.p. gyfene, 4277, gyffene, 1202 ; gyffes = makes account of, 539. Gyrd, Gyrdes, &c. See Girde. Haa, int. 133. Habite, 8. dress, 3917. Habydes, v. 3 8. abides, waits for, 596; pi. habyddez, remain, 1431. Hade. See Hafe. Hafe, 252, 286, Haffe, 1616, v . have; 2 s. has, 100,140, base, 1805; 3 s. has, 846; pi. has, 12, 369; pret. hade, 26, 52. Hailsez, v. 3 8. greets, salutes, 1058. Hakenayes, 484, Hakkenays, 2284, Haknays, 734, s.pl. hackneys. Halde, v. hold, 424 ; 3 8. haldes, 64, haldez, 1135; pret. lielde, 1196; p.p. haldene, 387, 1456. Hale, v. draw, haul, 748. Hale, 1260, 2108, Halle, 2651, adj. whole. Halely, 764, Hally, 1001, 1085, Holly, 748, adv. wholly, entirely. Halfe, 8. half, part, side ; pi. halfes, 1853, halfez, 1979, halues, 1966, 3530. Halowes, v. 3 8. shouts, hollas, 3319. Hals, 8. neck, throat, 764; pi. halses, 4120, halsez, 1798. Digitized by <^.OOQLe 188 GLOBSARIAL INDEX. Haly, 297, 309, Holy, 348, adj. Hame-liolde, adj. domestic, 1843. See Hamald in Jamieson. Hanclie, 1100, 1119, Hannclie, 1157, 8. haunch. Handez, 8. pi. hands, 1137. Handilez, v. pi. handle, feel, 1156. Handsomere, adj. comp . more handy, 2128. Hannde-brede, 8. handbreadth, 2229. Hansemane, s. henchman, page, 2662; pi. hansemene, 2743. See Henseman in Jamieson. Hape, 1937, Happe, 2446, a. hap. Happe, v. have good fortune, sueceed, 2630. Happene, v . 1269, obtain, 3433; p.p. hapnede, happened, 1154,3304. Happy, adj. fortunate, 1741,2974. Happynge, s. good fortune, success, 3958. Harageous, adj. 1645,1742,1834, 2248, violent, stormy. (Wright.) Harawde, 2294, 3029, Hawrawde, 3013, 8. herald. Harbergage, 8. quarters, 2475. Hardare, adj. comp, harder, 4194. Harde. See Here, v. Hardly, adv. closely, 1084. Hardynes, s. boldness, courage, 3959. Hare, 8. hair, 1001. Hare, 8. 2504. Harlotte, 8. ribald, rascal, low fellow, 2446; pi. harlottez, 2743. Not used in the modem sense. Harmes, 2437, Harmez, 1842, v. 3 s. harms. Hamayse, s. armour, 2629. Harrawnte, v. (?) 2449. Harske, adj. haish, hard, 1084. Has, Hase. See Hafe. Hastyly, adv. hastily, quickly, 167. Hathelle, adj. noble, 358, 1659, 1662; superl. hathelest, 988, hathelieste, 2109. Hawberke, s. hauberk, coat of mail, 1156, 2078, 2552. Ger, habberg . Hawe, 8. (?) 3704. Hawle, 8. hall, 3879. Hawrawde. See Harawde. Hawtayne, adj. haughty, 1058, 2612, 2910. Hawtayne, (?) 3029. Haylede, v. pret. projected, 2077. Haythemene, s. pi. (?) heathen men, 2295. Haythene, 1260, 2274, Hathene, 1284, Heythene, 2285, 3642, Hethene, 1834, adj. heathen. Hedde, v. behead, 2311. Heddys-mene, s. pi. headmen, chief men, 281. Hede. See Heuede. Hede-rapys, 8. pi. head-ropes, 3668. Hedire, adv. hither, 2614. Hedlyngs, adv. headlong, 3829. Hedoyne, 8. (?) 184. Hedyrwarde, adv. hitherward, this way, 25. Hedys. See Heuede. Heghe = hethe, heath, 2476. Heghe, 158, 167, 499, Heyghe, 3471, Hey, 3467, 3485, Hye, 39, 58, Hyghe, 3014, adj. high; superl. hegheste, 3369. Heghe, 1261, 1832, Hye, 194, 1119, adv. high. Heghe, 8. high place, height, 1146. Heghely, adv. hastily, 2294. Heghte = aughte, adj. eight, 2830. Heghte = hethe, 8. heath, 2295. Digitized by <^.OOQLe GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 167 Heghte, 1167, 2613, Higlite, 3626, *. height; pi. heghttez, 798. Hekes, 8. pi. horses, 2284. Heldede, v. pret. bowed down, inclined, 3368. Hele, 8. health, prosperity, 2630, 3958. Hele, v. hide, conceal, 3286; pret. hillid, 1120; pp. hillyd, 3606. Hele, v. heal, he healed, recover, 3688; 3 8. heles, 2209; pret. helyde, 1825; p.p. helyd, 3030. Helme, 8. helmet, 1832 ; pi. helmes, 380, 730, hellmes, 2551. Helmede, adj. having helmets, 1647, 3626. Helpene, v. inf. help, 1646; p.p. holpene, 2631, 2661. Helych, adv. loudly, 1286. Hemmes, 1359, 1648, Hemmys, 2219, s. pi. borders. Hende, adj. courteous, 167, 1135, 1283. Hente, v. seize, take, receive ; 3 8. hentez, 1132, hentes, 2917; pret. hente, 2973; p.p. hente, 1842,3319. Herbariours, s. pi. harbingers, men who went forward to find places for others, 2448. Herberde, p.p. harboured, lodged, 158,166, 2650. Herbergage, 8. lodgings, quarters, 1285, 2285. Here, v. hear, 12; pret. herde, 1285, harde. Herede, adj. haired, 1083. Heretyke, 8. heretic, 1307. Herkene, v. hearken, 1646, 3899 ; imp. 2 pi. herkenes, 25,herkynes, 15. Heme-pane, a. brain-pan, skull, 2229. Herte, s. heart, 251, 262. Herte, v. take courage, 1181. Hertelyche, 2551, Hertly, 1835, adj. severe. Hertly, 3642, Hertely, 2991, adv. heartily, severely. Heslyne, adj. of hazel, 2504. Heste, 8. command, 2294, 3368, 4307. Hetches, 8. pi. hatches, 3682. Hete, 2127, 3030, Hette, 2631, 3369,* v. promise, assure. Hethe, 1834, 2308, Heghe, 2476, Heghte, 2295, Heyghe, 2651, 8. heath. Hethely, adv. scornfully, 268. Hethynge, 8. scorn, 1843. Hette. See Hete. Heuande, t. p. rising, 3704. Heuede, 262, 1178, 1354, 8. head; chief, 1344; pi. hedys. Heuedede, p.p. beheaded, 463. Heuen, v. raise, 1937. See Jleuen in the Glossary to Alliterative Poems, ed. Morris. Heuene, 1167,1261, Hewene, 705, Hewyne, 2184, s. heaven. Hewe, 8. hue, colour, 207, 768, 2524. Hewede, adj. coloured, 3252. Hewene, v. pi. hew, 1860; p.p. hewene, 1825, 2663. Hewys, v. 3 8. raises, 4156; p.p hewede, 4091. Hey, adj. See Heghe. Hey, 8. See Hye. Heyghe, adj. See Heghe. Heyghe, 8. See Hethe. Heyly, adv. quickly, 464, 2663, 2920. Heyndly, adv. courteously, 15. Heynne, adv. hence, 2436. Heyi^ous, adj. heinous, 268. Heythene. See Haythene. Highte, p.p. called, named, 2899. Hillid, Hillyd. See Hele, v. Digitized by <^.OOQLe 168 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Hilte, 8. hilt, handle of a sword, 1121; pi. hiltes, 2239, hiltez, 1056, 1149. Hiltede, adj. 2274, 2911. Hir, 84, 980, Hire, 9 56,pron. her. Hirste, s. wood, forest, 3369. Hittez, v . 3 s. hits, 1112, 1125, 1149. Hode, 8. hood, 3459. Hodles, adj. hoodless, hareheaded, . 2308. Holdene, v. pi. hold, 4128 ; p.p. holdene, 1579, holdyne, 40, 160. Hole, adj. hollow, 1083. Hole, 1647, 2661, Holle, 3687, 4128, adj. whole, all. See Hale. Holly, adv. wholly, entirely, 748, 3368, 3590. Holpene. See Helpene. Holte, 8. wood, 1283, 1645; pi. holtez, 1259. Horn, adv. home, 3014. Homager, 8. one who does homage, 3147. Hondene, v. (1) serve with hands, 3209. Hondrethe, 844, Howndrethe, 2108, Hnndrethe, 930, s. hundred; pi. hundrethes, 281, hunndrethez, 1879. Honeste, adj. honourable, good, 3245. Honnde, 8. hand, 1807; pi. hondes, 2255, hondez, 1114. Honourliche, adj. honourable, 2298. Hope, v. suppose, 2209. Hopes, 8. pi. (1) 2503. Horde, 8. treasure; pi. hordes, 3145. Hore, adj. hoar, hoary, 1082. Homez, 8. pi. horns, 1286. Horsse, s. 463; pi. horsez, 734, horsesys, 3721. Horsede, 1179, Horsesede, 2944, Horsesyde, 1647, adj. horsed, mounted. Hostaye, v. lead a host, or make war, 555. Hotchene, v.pl. hack, chop, 3687. Houe, Hufe, 1688, v. tarry; 3 8. houys, 915, howes, 2010, hufes, 1260 j pi. houez, 1283, houys, 377, 2118 ; pret . houede, 2031 ; i. p. houande,* 1648. Hoursches, v.pl. (1) rush, 2110. House, v. dwell, 4284. Howes. See Houe. Howge. See Huge. Howndrethe. See Hondrethe. Howntes, v. pi. hunt, 4258. Howselde, p.p. houseled; be h.= receive the housel, or consecrated host, 4315. Howsynge, 8. dwellings, quarters, 1284, 2285. Hufe. See Houe. Huge, 1086, Hugge, 583, 1634, Howge, 2889, adj. huge. Hukes, 8. pi. 734. Miswritten for hakesi or hekes, horses. Huke-nebbyde, adj. hooknosed, . 1082. Hulke, 8. a great awkward fellow, 1058, 1085, 1121, 1149. Hunde-fisch, s. houndfish, 1084. Hundrethe, Hunndrethez. See Hondrethe. Hurdace, 8. fence, palisade, barrier, 3626. Hurdez, v. 3 8. (1) lurks, 1010. Hurles, v. 2 s. rushest, 262. Hurtez, v. 3 8. thrusts, 1772. Hy. See Hye. Hyde, 8. skin, 1157. Hydede, p.p. hided, skinned, covered, 1001. Digitized by <^.OOQLe GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 169 Hye. See Heghe. Hye, 463, 2108, Hy, 2109, Hey, 166, s. haste. Hye, v. hasten, 1645. Hyely, adv. hastily, quickly, (or perhaps) loudly, 1058. Hyene, adv. hence, 2582, 2744. Hyled, p.p. hidden, 184. See Hele. Hyme, pron. him, 1133, 1134. Hymlande, (?) 2503. Hyndire, 8. hindpart, 3626. Hynge, v. hang ; 3 8. hynnges, 3473; pret. hyngede, 281; i.p. hyngande, 1083; p.p. hynggyde, 3590. Hynter, 8. hindpart, 3605. Hyrdez, 8. pi. shepherds, 3245. Hyre, pron. her, 854. Hyttez, v . 3 s. hits, 1122, 1387. Iche. See like. Iche, v. sally forth, rush out, 1412. O. Fr. issir. Idene, (?) 3061. He = if, 420, 2438. He, 8 . isle, 4309; pi. ilez, 575, illes, 2359. Hkane, 279, Ilkone, 3691, pron. each one, each. Hke, adj. same, 65, 232, 1311. A.S. ilc. Hke, 1006, 1093, Ylke, 2460, 2480, Iche, 589, 1004, Yche, adj. each. Often followed by a : ilke a, 83,194, iche a, 2144, 3062, yche a, 3634. Hies. See He. Imangez, prep, amongst, 3169. In-come, 8. coming in, 2009,2171. Ine = in, 1797. Inewe. See Inowe. Inglisce, 8. English, 2529. , Inns, 8. pi. dwellings, 3041. Inowe, 3095, Inewe, 3161, Ynowe, 1626, Ynewe, 1360, 1970, adv. enough. Irene, 1186, Iryne, 2104, Yryne, 1182, s. iron. Iresche, 3934, Irische, 4123,4161, adj. Irish. Irous, 1329, Irows, 1592, Irus, 1957, adj . wrathful Irouslye, adv. wrathfully, 2530. Ischewe, 8. issue, 1943. Isschewis, v. 3 8. issues, 4060; pi. ischewis, 3116. I-wis, 3339, I-wys, 2020, 2332, 2828, I-wysse, 322, 546, 2685, adv. certainly. Jaggede, v. pret. jagged, chopped, 1123, 2087 ; p.p. 905, 2909. Jambe, 2894, Jamby, 373, adj. active, nimble; lit. leggy, from Fr. jambe , leg. Japez, 8. pi. tricks, 1398. Jentille, Jentylle, adj. gentle, 115, 904, 3411. Jerodyne, 8. (?) 905. Jerownde, adj. gyronny (Her.), 2891. Jeryne, 8. (?) 903. J esseraunt, J esserawnte. See Gesserawnte. Jocunde, adj. 2896. Jogges, v. 3 s. jogs, thrusts, 2891, 2893. Jolily, Jolyly, adv. gaily, handsomely, 245, 373, 2088, 4109. Joly, adj. gay, trim, handsome, jolly, 3414; comp, joly ere, 4110; superl. jolyeste, 1658. Jonede, p.p. joined, 2890. Jopowne, 4238, Jupone, 905, s. jupon. Jom4, 3411, Joumd, 2875, Joumee, 340, 372, 825, Jurnee, 2894, 8. a day’s travel, a day’s fight, a day’s work. Digitized by ^.ooQle 170 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Jowelle, s. jewel, 862. Joye, 8. 1161. Joyes, v. 3 8. rejoices, 2896. Joynenyge, s. joining, encounter, 2133. Joynez, v. pi. join, 2112. Joynter, 8. joint, 2893. Juggede, jp.p. judged, 2877. Juggez, 8. pi. judges, 246. Jumette, 8. 1122. Read Inmette, s. intestines. See Inmeats in Jamieson. Juny, 8. June, 345. Jupone. See Jopowne. Jumee. See Jom6. Just, adv. 1123. Justere, 8. jouster, 3412. Justyfye, v. execute justice upon, punish, 663. Justynge, s. jousting, 1657, 2875. Kabane. See Cabane. Kaghte. See Cacbene. Kaire. See Cayre. Kalander, 8. calendar, roll, 2640. Kalendez, 8. pi. calends, 2371. Kambe, 8. comb, 3351. Kampe, 8. figbt, 3670, 3701. Kane, v. can, 2750. Karede, v. pret. 2882. See Cayre. Kare. See Care. Karfuke, s. place where four roads meet, 2003. A well-known crossroad at Oxford is called Carfax. See Carfoukes in the Romans of Rartenay , ed. Skeat, also a note in Notes and Queries , Series III, vol. x. p. 184. O. Er. carrefourg. Kariede, 1887, Karyed, 4010, v. pret. carried. Karpe. See Carpe. Karyage, 8. baggage, luggage, 2282. Kaughte. See Cacbene. Kaunt, adj . stout, bold, 2195. Kay, 3111, Keye, 1867, 8. key; pi. kayes, 3064. Kayere, Kayre. See Cayre. Kaysere, 8. emperor, 1651, 1959; pi. kayseres, 1894, kaysers, 2391. Kele, v. cool, 1839; pret. keled, 2712. Kelle, 8. caul, net (which ladies wore over their hair), 3258. Kembede, v. pret. combed, 3351. Kempe, 8. warrior; pi. kempis, 1003. A.S. cempa. Kempe, v. fight, 2633. Kene, v. tell, 2619, 3521, show, 876; pret. kende, 481, 2194, kend, handed over, 1590. Kene, adj. keen, sharp, 47,1106, bold, 641,1152,1725,1785, fierce, 3669 ; comp, kenere, 4194; super! keneste, 2721, 3490. Kenely, 935, 1243,1271, Kenly, 943, adv. sharply, boldly. Kenetez, 8. pi. kennets, small hounds, 122. Kepare, 8. keeper, 3512. Kepe, 8. care, heed, attention, 156, 1682, 1746. Kepe, v. keep, 1138, 1780, wait, watch, 2003, heed, regard, care, 2398, 3522, 4021; imp. 2 pi. kepys, await, 628; pret. kepede, 919, kepyde, 838, 2263; pp. kepede, 1586, kepide, 998, kepyd, 2171. Keppe, v. catch, seize, 3484. Kepynge, 8. keeping, 4205. Kerfe, 8. cutting, 4194. Kerfes, 4231, Kerues, 2567, v. 3 s. cuts; p.p. coruene, 211, 3335, 3673. Keste. See Caste. Ketille-hatte, 8. helmet, 3516, 3995; pi. ketelle-hattes, 2993. Digitized by <^.OOQLe OLOSSARIAL INDEX. 171 Keye. See Kay. Kidd, 3673, Kydd, 1272, 1390, Kydde, 96, 232, Kyde, 65, 1651, adj. celebrated, famous. Kirke, 4016, Kyrke, 1219, 8. church. Kithe, 3866, Kythe, 28, 51, 542, Kyghte, 3996, s. nation, country. Kleuys. See Clewes. Klokes, 8. pi. claws, paws, 792. Knafe, 2621, Knaffe, 2637, 8. servant; pi. knafes, 2632, knaues, 3484; knaue = male, 850, 1025. Knawe, v. know, 1003, 1581, 1672, acknowledge, 2637; 3 s. knawes, 1317; pret. knewe, 2177; p.p. knawene, 475, 1654, knowene, 3259. Knee, s.; pi. kneesse, 956, kneys, 4274. Knele, v . kneel; 3 s . knelis, 3951; pi. knelis, 3046; pret. knelyd, 1199, 2312 ; up. kneland, 1137, 4337. Knyghte, 8. 1138 ; pi. knyglittez, 1161. Knyghthede, 1320, 1581, 2619, Knyghthode, 1682,3883, s. knighthood. Knyghtly, 2395, Knyghtlyche, 506,1218, 4083, Knyghttly, 1649, adj. knightly. Knyghtly, 1707,1724,Knyghttly, 1692, 1790, adv. knightly, like a knight. Knylles, v. pi. ring, 2353. Kombide, p.p. combed, 1003. Konynge, s. cunning, skill, knowledge, 3883. Konyngeste, adj. most knowing, 3177. Kosyne. See Cosyne. Koueride, p.p. covered, 2381. Kowardely, adv. cowardly, 1923. Krafty. See Crafty. Kraftes, 8. pi. crafts, 2543. Krakede, v. pret. cracked, 3269. Krayers. See Crayers. Kreuelleste, Krewelle. See Crewelle. Krisome, 2636. See Crysume. Krispane, i. p. crisping, 3352. Kroke, s. crook, curl, 3352. Dan Michel uses the verb croki, to curl: “ Of >ise ydelenesse / ne byej> na$t quitte )>e men }>et doJ> zuo grat payne ham to kembe and to pouri me sseaweres and ine hare here wel to croki an to bleue be strengfce.” —Ayenbite of Inwyt, ed. Morris, p. 176. See Havelok the Dane , ea. Skeat, Preface, p. vii, footnote. Krouelle. See Crewelle. Krysome. See Crysume. Ebysomede. See Crysmede. Kwne, v. can, know, 1565 ; kwne thanke = return thanks. Kydd, Kydde, Kyde. See Kidd. Kygbte. See Kithe. Kynde, 8. nature, kind,. 125, 2385, 3049, race, 3867. Kyndly, adj. natural, proper, good, 3883, 4188. Kyndlycbe, 714, Kyndly, 2712, Kyndely, 3521, adv. naturally, kindly. Kyne, 8. kin, 2618. Kyngryke, 8. kingdom, realm, 24, 1272; pi. kyngrykes, 649, kyngrykez, 820. Kynredene, 8. kindred, 2604. Kynsemane, 3898, Kynyse-mane, 1778, s. kinsman. Kyrke. See Kirke. Kymelles, s. pi. battlements, 3046. Kyrtillo, 998, Kyrtylle, 1024, 1191, s . kirtle. Kyste, s. chest; pi. kystys, 2302, 2336, kystis, 2342, 2355. Kythe. See Kithe. Kythe, v. show, 1652, 4193. Digitized by AnOOQle 172 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Lacchene, 750, Lachene, 2541, v. pi. catch, take; pret. laghte, 2693, 2702, laughte, 2226, 2292, lached, 1615 ; p.p . laghte, 874, laughte, 1817, 1828, 1902. Ladde, 8. lad, 4302. Lade-sterne, 8. loadstar, the polar star, 761. Ladily, adj. ladylike, 3254. Ladysse, 8. pi. ladies, 3081. Laggene, v.pl. (1) get ready, 2542. Laghte. See Lacchene. Laghtirs, s. pi. laughters, 2673. Lake, 8. lack, 163. Lakes, 8. pi. lakes, pools, 960, 2149. Lamede, v. pret. lamed, disabled, 4302) p.p . 3281. Langage, 8. language, speech, 3477. Lange, adj. long, 1103, 1269 ; one lange = along, 1045, 2703. Lange, adv. long, 868, 1200; comp, langere, 550, 587, lengere, 736, 889. Lange, v. belong; 3 8. langes, 402, lengez, 2082; pi. langez, 1244, langys, 244, lengez, 1410, 1479; pret. lengede, 1492, 2221. Lannges, v. 3 8. longs, 383. Langoure, s. languor, 4268. Languessande, i. p. languishing, 4338. Lappe, 8. lappet, 3254, rag, 3286. Lappe, v. wrap, fold, enclose, 3292; pret. lappede, 2300. Lapynge, 8. lapping, 3235. Large, adv. wide, away, 1040, deep, 1120, greatly, freely, 1376. Largesce, 8. liberality, bounty, 163. Lasschene, v.pl. lash, smite, 2801. Lat, 3639, Late, 420,1189, Latt, 4001, Latte, 398, 1139, 1321, v., let; 3 8. lattes, lets go, dismisses, disperses, 1819; pret. lete, 3886. Lates, 118, 248, 536, 2054, Latez, 1076, s. pi. features. Lathe, 8. (!) displeasure, 458. Latheliche, 3279, Laythely, 4302, adj. loathly, ugly, hateful. Latte, Lattes. See Lat. Laughene, v. pi. laugh, 3698; pret. lughe, 248. Laughte. See Lacchene. Launce, 8. lance, spear, 1379; pi. launcez, 1459, 1754, lawnces, 2462. Launches, v. 3 8. leaps, springs, 2560; pret . launschide, 194. Launchez, v. pi. launch, throw out (?), 750. Launde, 1517, Lawnde, 2084, 8. plain, lawn. Laundone, 8. (?) field, 1768. “ Landon : .. . petite lande, paturage; terres remplies de broussailles.” Roquefort. Lawe, adj. low, 154, 3720 ; superl. laweste, 2431; on lawe = down, 2281. Lawe, adv. low, 1270. Lawnches, v. 3 s. cuts, 3831. Lawnde. See Launde. Laye, 8. (?) 3721. Laye, 8. law, religion, 2593. Layere, s. lair, camp, 2293. Layke, s. game, 1599, 3386, 4093. Layne, v. conceal, 419, 2398, 2593. Laysere, s. leisure, 2430, 3095. Laythely. See Latheliche. Layttede, v. pret. (?) 254. /w *T, Leberalle, adj. liberal, 2318. Leburde, s. lee-board, 3624. Leche, s. jelly, 194. Lechene, v. heal, 2388. Digitized by <^.OOQLe GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 173 Lechyde, p.p. cut into slices, 188. Lede, 8. nation, man, person, 138, 430, 997; pi. ledes, 195, 1902, ledys, 2801. Lede, 8 . lead, 750, 2300, 3954. Lede, 1268, Leede, 154, v. lead, treat; pi. ledes, 303 ; pret . ledde, 1515, lede, 3380; p.p. lede, 1827, 1903. Ledynge, 8. rule, 3536, conduct, 3880. Lee, 8. shelter, 1446. Leefe, 2479, 3093, Lefe, 1035, 1335, Leue, 350, adj. dear, lief; comp . leuer, 872,1344, 1573. Leefe, 3432, Lefe, 72, 429, Leue, 2082, 8. leave, permission. Lefe, v . leave, 1340; pi. leues, remain; pret. lefte, 1516; p.p. lefede, 1397, leuede, 848, 978, leuyde, 394,1900, 2208. Lefulle, adj. allowable, lawful,130. Lege, 1901, Liege, 1200, Lige, 1768, 3080, Ligge, 2221, 2389, Lygge, 1518, adj. liege. Legyaunce, 8. allegiance, 2594. Lele, adj . leal, honest, faithful, true, 14, 420, 647. Lelely, 672, 2328, Lelly, 1102, Lely, 3084, adv. faithfully, honestly, truly. Lemande, i. p. shining, gleaming, 2462, 2463, 2672. Lemete, p.p. limited, 457. Lenand. See Lene. Lende, v. abide, 1970. Lendez, s. pi. loins, 1047. Lene, v. lean; pret. lenede, 2703; i. p , lenand, 1045, 2672. Lenge, v. abide, remain, dwell, 72, 128, 152; 3-s. lengez, 129; inf. lengene, 1588. Lengede, Lengez. See Lange, v. Lengere, 736,889,1055, Lengare, 2154, adv. longer. Lenghe, 8 . length, 1102, 1126. Lenghene, v. lengthen, 2845. Leppe, v. leap, 2084; pi. leppyne, 3697, lepys, 3696; pret. lepe, 3427; i. p. leppande, 1460. Lere, v . teach, 1035. Leskes, 8. pi. loins, 1097, 3279. Lesse, conj. lest, 2300, 2439. Lesse, adj. false; withowttyne lesse = truly, certainly, 139. Lesynge, 3079, Lesynng, 3721, 8. losing. Let. See Lette. Letande, i.p. (?) appearing, 3831. Lete. See Lat. Letherly, adv. wickedly, 1268. Lett, v. cease, desist, 2325. Lette, v. hinder, prevent, 473, 1269,1721; pret. let, 3720. Lette, 8. hindrance, 92, 458. Lettyng, 8. hindrance, 371. Leue. See Leefe. Leue, v. believe, 702, 1097; 2 *. leues, 2593. Leuenynge, 8. lightning, 2463. Leuere. See Leefe. Leuer4, 8. delivery; hence, granted or assigned place, 241, livery or uniform; and hence, the different parts of an army, 3078. See Livery m Halliwell. Leues, 8. pi. leaves, 1708. Leuetenaunte, 8. lieutenant, viceroy, 646. Leuez, v. 3 8. lives, 1731. Life, 3723, Liffe, 1036, v. live; pret. lifede, 3961; p.p. liffyde, 252. Lifeliche, adj. (?) real, actual, 3427. Liffe, 5. life, 430, 1820. Lifte, v.pret. lifted, 3349. Lige, Ligge. See Lege. Liggez. See Lygge. Digitized by <^.OOQLe 174 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Lighames. See Lyghame. Lightly, adv . 3287. Likez. See Lyke. Likynge, 8 . pleasure, 130, 3381. Lire, 3281, 3954, Lyre, 4272, 5. face, visage. A.S. hleor. Liste, s. desire, pleasure, 12. Liste, v. pret. desired, 4270. Lofte ; on loffce = aloft, 163, 916, 942; appone lofte = aloft, 2800, 3623. Loge, 421, Lugge, 152, 454, v. lodge; pi. lugegez, 2280; pret. luggede, 486; i. p. lugande, 1045. Loke, 1643, Luk, 3209, Luke, 135, v. look; 3 s. lukez, 113 ; pi. lukkes, 751; pret. Inked, 119, lukede, 1313; imp. 2 pi. lokez, 1640; i. p. lukande, 3108. Lokerde, p.p. curled, 779. Sc. lokker , to curl (Jamieson). Lokkes, 8. pi. locks, 778, 3280. Lond, 8. land; pi. londes, 878, londez, 427, 1691, 1933. Londis, v. 3 8. lands, 3922. Longez, v.pl. belong, 2828; pret. lonngede, 3080. Loo, int. lo, 974, 1349. Loos, 254, Loosse, 474, 8. praise, renown, good name. Lordcheppez, 1727, Lordchipez, 253, 646, Lordechippez, 1970, s. pi. lordships. Lordliche, 3638, Lordlyche, 570, 2032, 2281, 2541, adj. lordly. Lordly, 2230, 2479, Lordely, 1818,2227, adv. in a lordly manner. Lome, p.p. lost, 1153. Losels, s. pi. rascals, wretches, 252. Losse, 1599, Lossene, 2845, v. lose. Lotes, 8. pi. features, 1462. See Lates. Lothely, adj. loathly, horrid, ugly, 778, 3234. Lothely, adv. horridly, 2074, 3849. Lothene, 778,Lothyne, 1097, adj. hateful, detestable. Loue, v. praise, 369; p.p. louede, 4305. Louely, 3478, Louelyly, 2292, adv. in a loving manner, kindly. Louerde, 8. lord, 3918. Lowde; on 1. = aloud, 1781, 2032. Lowe, 8. flame, 194. Lowkkide, p.p. closed, 3953. LowTande, i. p. lowering, looking sad, 1446, 4338. Lowttes, v. pi. how, 505; pret. lowttede, bowed before, 2634,3285, 3408. Loyotour, s. embroidery (Perry), 3253. Lufe, 8. some part of a ship, 744, 750. “ Loof. The windward side of a ship. ... It is not easy to make out exactly what part of the ship the loof originally was. Du. loef is a rullock or oar-pin, scalmus, but the loof was a timber of considerable size, by which the course of the ship was directed; it would seem to be the large oar used by way of a rudder, or perhaps the tiller.” Wedgwood's Vic - tionary of English Etymology. Lufe, 703,705, Luffe, 1256,3381, s. love, sake. Luffe, v. love, 1597; pi. luffes, 12 . Lufliche, 3623, Lnfly, 1459, adj. lovely. Lufly, 505, Luffly, 248, Lufflyche, 2674, adv . in a lovely manner. Lugande, Lugegez, Lugge, Luggede. See Loge. Lughe. See Laughene. Digitized by <^.OOQLe GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 175 Luk, Lukande, Luke, Lukkes. See Loke. Lukynge, 8. looking, 139. Lumpe, 1819, Lumppe, 1814, 2230, 8. crowd, throng. Lunggez, 8. pi. lungs, 2168. Lussche, 8. (?) thrust, 3848. Lutterde, adj. bowed, bent, 779. Sc. luttaird. (Jamieson.) Luyschene, v. pi. (?) lash, 1459 ; pret . luyschede, 2226. Lyarde, adj . gray, 2542, 3280. “ Liart , liarde , gns, gris-pommelA” Burguy. See Liart in Jamieson. Lyefe, 2845, Lyffe, 1269, 8. life; pi. lyfez, 1217. Lyf, v. live, 1903; 3 8. lyffes, 405, 537; pp. lyffede, 868. Lyfte, 8. sky, 4272. Lygeaunce, 8. allegiance, 244. Lygge, v. lie ; 2 s. lygges, 1060; 3 8. lyggez, 805, lys, 3938; pi. l^ges, 459, lyggez, 1184, liggez, Lyghame, 8. body, 3281, 3286; pi. lighames, 4269. A.S. lichama. Lyghte, v. light, alight, 1270 ; 3 s. lyghttez, 933; pret. lyghte, 3594; p.pi lyghttede, 1782. Lyghte, v. lighten, 2846; 3 8. lyghttys, 368; pi. lyghttys, 251. Lyghtenande, i. p. lightening, flashing, 2463. Lygmane, 8. liegeman, 420; pi. lyggemene, 1518. Lyke, v. be pleased, rejoice, 195; usually an impers . v . likez, 383, lykes, 55, lykez, 1190, lykys, 32, 186, pleases; pret . lykede, 599; i. p. lykande, being pleased, 248, pleasing, 497, 2406. Lykynge, 8. pleasure, 701, 2673. Lyme, 459, 1097, Lymme, 1046, s. limb. Lympe, v. happen, befall, 1643; pi. lymppene, incur, 3119 j lymp- pede, gained, 3415, lympyde, 292 p.p. lymppyde, incurrea, suffered, 875. Lynd, 8. tree, 454, 486. Lynkwhyttez, 8. pi. linnets, 2674. Sc. linttohite; A.S. linet, flax; linetung f flax-finch, linnet. Lyone, 8. lion, 139; pi. lyouns, 3234. Lyppe, s. lip, 119; pi. lyppys, 1011, lippis, 3954. Lyre. See Lire. Lys. See Lygge. Lythe, 1653. Bead Kythe. Lythe, adj. gentle, 1517, 1600. Lythe, v. listen, 12; pi. lythes, 1810. Lytherly, adv. badly, 1448. Lythes, 8. pi. (?) leases, tenements, 994. See Lith in Glossary to Havelok the Dane , ed. Skeat, ana Lud in Glossary to William of Paleme , ed. Skeat. Lythyre, adj. wicked, bad, 23. Lytille, 1021, Litylle, 1719, Lyttille, 754, adj. or adv. little. Lytte, (?) little, 550. Lyue, 5. life, 1775, 3067, 3520. Lywynge, 8. living, 5. Ma, adj. more, 1829. Mace, 8. 4210. Mache, 8. match, 4070. Machede, p.p. matched, 1533, 2904. Maches, 8. (?) 2950. Mad, v. pret. made, 50,112; p.p. mad, 77. Made, s. madness, 4271. Magestee, 1236, Maiestee, 1303, s. majesty. Maister, 990, 2870,Mayster, 938, 3652, 8. master. Maisterede, v.pret. mastered, 2683. Digitized by <^.OOQLe 176 GLOSSABIA.L INDEX. Makk, 8. companion, fellow, 1166. Makles, adj. peerless, matchless, 3875. Malle, v. hammer, heat, 3038, 4037; 3 s. mall is, 3841. Maluesye, 8 . a kind of wine, 236. Malyncoly, 8. 2204, 4209. Man, adj . See Mayne. Manace, 8. menace, threatening, 3383. Manacede, v. pret . threatened, 1383. Manere, 8. manor, 4310. Manere, 8 . manner, 1383. Mangere, s. 1588. Qu. Maugree, ill wilL Manhede, 8 . manhood, 399, 434, 4278. Manliche, adj. manly, 2417. Manrede, 8. homage, service, 127. Manykyne, adj . of many kinds, 3174. Manys = man’s, 76. Marasse, 2505, Marras, 1534, Marrasse, 2014, 8. morass, marsh. Marche, 8. frontier, boundary, 318, 1588; pi. marches, 631, marchez, 1232, marchys, 77. Marchez-mene, 8. pi. hordermen, borderers, 1237. Marras, Marrasse. See Marasse. Marre, v. mar, 2015. Marters, 8. pi. martyrs, 1066. Martyre, v. kill, 560. Mase, v. 3 8. makes, 960. Masondewes, 8.pi. hospitals, 3038. Fr. maison-dieu, lit. house of God, a name suggested by Matthew xxv. Maugree, 1238, Mawgree, 426, in spite of. Maundement, 8. commandment, order, 1587. Mawene, p.p . mown, 2507. Mawgree. See Maugree. Mawncelet. Read Mawntelet, 8. mantling, or lambrequin, 3632. “ Mantling , or Lambrequin: —a small Mantle, generally of crimson velvet or silk and lined with ermine, with tassels, attached to the Basinet or Helm, and hanging down over the shoulders of the wearer.”— BouteWs Heraldry (3rd edit. 1864), p. 115. In the present instance the mantelet was of silver mail. Mayles, 2250, Maylez, 904,1487, 1764, s. pi. chain or ringed armour. Mayne, 8 . might, power, 4326. Mayne, 427,434, Man, 4071, adj. main. Maynoyrede, p.p. worked, 2507. Mayntene, v. maintain, 399; p.p. mayntenyde, 4278. Mayster. See Maister. Maysterfulle, adj . victorious, 3413. Mede, 8. meed, reward, 666,1068. Mede, 8. mead, 1290, 2506. Medille, 8. middle, waist, 2205, 4168. Medille-erthe, 2951, Medillerthe, 3239, s. world. Medillewarde, 2904, Medilwarde, 8766, Medylwarde, 1988, 8. centre of an army. Mekille, Mekylle, adj. great, 1236; adv. much, greatly, 711,1314,1382. Mele, v. speak, talk, 990; 3 meles, 382, 679, 1781 ; pi. mellys, 3652; imp. 2 pi. melys, 2871. Melione, s . million, 3144. Melle, v. mix, join, meddle, deal with, 938 j pi. mellis, 2904. Melles, v. 3 8, hammers, smites, 2950. See Malle. Mellyd, adj. (1) made like a mall or hammer, hammer-headed, 4210. Mellys, Melys. See Mele. Digitized by <^.OOQLe GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 177 Mendement, s. amendment, 989, 1236. Mendynantez, s. pi. (?) mendicants, beggars, 667. Mene, v. speak, tell, 3556, speak of, mention, 2869; 3 s. menys, talks, 3478, 3653. Menede, v. pret. meant, 891. Mengene, v. pi. mingle, join, 4173; p.p. mengede, 3632. Menske, 8. honour, 126, 399, 433. Menskes, v. 3 s. honours, 1303, 2871. Menskfully, adv. honourably, 631, 940, 1233, 1988. Mereswyne, 8. dolphin, 1091. “ Hie delfis. pis mere-swin.” jEIfric's Grammar , Cotton MS. Julius A ii, leaf 31. Merke, v. proceed, 351, 427,4320, assign, 1068 ; 3 s. merkes, cuts, 2206; pi. merkene, 4168 ; p.p. merked, formed, made, 1304, merkyde, 952. Merkes, 8. pi. bounds, 461,1147. Merrede, 1238, 3555, Merride, 3322, p.p. marred. Meruaile, Meruayle, s. marvel, wonder, 2682, 2906. Meruailles, v. 3 s. marvels, 1314. Meruailous, 260,Meruaylous,428, Mernayllous, 2287, Meruelyous, 236, adj. marvellous, wonderful ,* mperl. meruelyousteste, 129. Mery, adj. merry, cheerful, 260 ; comp, meriere, 3175 ; superl. meryeste, 3239. Messes, s. pi. masses, 4018, 4333. Mett, v. pret. dreamed, 3223. Mette, 2491, s. meat, food; pi. metes, 75, metez, 1298. Mette, v. meet, 434; pret. mett, 1175, 3841. Mette-fulle, adj. measure-full, in good measure, 2343. MOBTE ARTHURE. Mette while, s. measured time, or scanty time, 3903. A.S. mdle, moderate, little. Meue, v. move, 2001. Misdoo, v. ill-use, wrong, 126. Mo, 844, 885, Moo, 856, 2500, adj. more. Mobles, s. pi. movable goods, 666. Mode, 5. mind, 3222, 3382, 3454. Modyr, Modyre, s. mother, 2, 983, 1211. Mofes, v. 3 s. moves, 3323. Molde, s. mould, earth, 129, 952, 975. Mone, v. must, shall, 813, 1155, 2186, 2436, 2820. Monee, s. money, 2343. Monethe, s. month, 318. Montayngnes, 3238, Mowntaygnes, 4259, s.pl. mountains. Monte, s. mountain, 938, 1069 ; pi. montez, 874, 1175, mowntes, 3535, 3556. Mony, adj. many, 3623, 3671. Moo. See Mo. More, adj. greater, 1018. Morne, s. morning, morrow, 1223. Morne-while, s. morning time, 2001, 3223. Morthires, v. 2 s. murderest, 1315; pi. mourtherys, 4259; p.p. morthirede, 976. Morwene, s. morning, 3476. Moste, v. must, 250, 263, 449 ; impers. v. 2491. Moste, adj. greatest, 3322, 4221. Mot, 346, Mote, 4104, Mott, 136, 1306, Motte, 227, v. must, may. Mournande, i. p. mourning, 4333. Mourtherys. See Morthires. Mo we, v. subj. sg. he able, may, 3812. ~ Digitized by <^.OOQLe 178 GLOSS ARIA L INDEX. Moyllez, s. pi. mules, 2287. Muskadelle, s. a kind of wine, 236. Myche, adj. great, 1166, 1214, 2033 j adv. much, greatly, 1068. Myde, adj. mid, 3841. Myddes, 1293, Myddys, 2176, 8. midst. Mylde, adj. mild, 1211. Mynde, s. memory, 1221. Mynsters, s.pi. monasteries, 3038. Myrthez, 8 . pi. mirths, 1532. Myschefe, s. trouble, misfortune, 667, 3437. Myse-bide, v. offer injury, 3083. Mysese, s. trouble, grief; and hence, those who are in trouble, 667. Mysbappene, v. meet with misfortune, 3454. Myskaries, v. 3 s. comes to grief, 2872; p p. myscaryede, 1778, myskaryede, 1237. Mysse, s. wrong, injury, 1315, 3057. Myste, s. mist, 2001. Myx, s. vile wretch; lit. dung, 989. A.S. meox, dung, muck. “ Ne myhte \>e mixes \>o wurse don, Bute a-moug peoues on rode anhon.” Jesus Coll. MS. 29, leaf 265, back. Na, adj. no, 160, 310, 1644. Nakyne, adj. of no kind, 2350. Nane, adj. no, 213, 565; pron. none, 657, 2613. Nauylle, s. navel, 979. Naye, 8. a naye = an aye, an egg, 3283. Compare Nei$ in William of Falerne, ed. Skeat, 1. 83. Ne, adv. not, 230, 1117; conj. nor, 10, 161. Nedes, 263, 1266, Nedez, 1329, Nedys, 470, s. pi. business. Nedylle, 8. needle (of a compass), 753. Neghe, v. draw nigh, approach, 2433. Neghe, arf/;. closely, exactly, 2658. Neke-bone, s. neckbone, 2771. Nere, adv. nearly, almost, 805, 1127, 1135. Nese, s. nose, 2248. Neuewe, s. nephew, 689. New 3 ere, s. new-year, 78. Newjers daye, s. new-year’s day, 90. Nextte, adj. nearest, 2422. Neynesome, nine in all, 523. See Sum in Richthofen’s Altfriesischez Worterbuch. Nobille, Nobylle, adj. noble, 16, 18, 68 j superl. nobileste, 3439, 3935. Nobilly, adv. nobly, 1815. Noblay, 8. splendour, 76, 2433. Noghte,£>r0w. naught, 1191; adv . not, 135, 419, 1174. Nokyne, adj. of no kind, 430. Nombirde, 2887, Nowmerde, 2658, p.p. numbered. Nombyre, 2831, 3068, Nowmbre, 2884, Nowmbyre, 2942, 3438, Nowmer, 884, s. number; pi. nommers, 591, nowmbirs, 3935. Nomene, 1437, Nommene, 1868, 1872, 2477, p.p . taken. Nommers. See Nombyre. None, 8. the ninth hour of the day (at the equinox, none = 3 p.m.), 78. Nonis, 3297, Nonys, 1927, 8. nonce; for the nonce, for the occasion. Nonkyns, adj . of no kind, 2363. Nonne, adj. no, 3365. Nonnes, s. pi. nuns, 3539. Noo, adj. no, 4149. Digitized by AnOOQle GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 179 Not, v. 1 8. know not, 977. Notez, v. pi. make use of, 1815. A.S. notian. Nother, 2367, Nothyre, 10, Nowthire, 161, 429, conj. neither. Notte, s. use; hence, business, 1816. A.S. notu. Nowene, 1806; thi nowene = thine own. Nowmbirs, Nowmbre, Nowmbyre, Nowmer. See Nombyre. Nowmerde. See Nombirde. Nowthire. See Nother. Noyes, v. 3 s. harms, grieves, 1816, 2248. Nurree, s. nursling, 689. Nyghtgale, s. nightingale, 929. Nynne = nine, 3439 0, 656, 1217, 3480, Oo, 3907, prep, on, in. 0, prep, of, from, 3906. Occedente,s. Occident, west, 2360. Occyane, 8. ocean, 31. Oches, v . 3 s. hacks, breaks, 2565; pi. ochene, 3675 ; pret . ochede, 4245. “ Oscher, ocher , ebr^cher, entailler, briser.” Bur guy. Ocupyes, v. 3 8. holds, occupies, 1663, 2360. Of = from, 2540. Oglite, pron. aught, 1014, 1269, 2802. Okene, adj. oaken, 2722. Olawe, adv . below, down, 1517. Olyfaunte, 8. elephant, 2339 ; pi. olyfantez, 1286, olyfauntez, 2288. Olyfe, adv. of life, from life, 802, il39; bringe olyfe = kill. One = on, prep . 74, 116, 753. One, adv. alone, only, 826, 937, 2519,2592. A.S. dne. Myne one, by myself, 3230; by myne one, by myself, 704; be oure one, by ourselves, 1345; thyne one, thyself, 466 ; with hyme one, with himself, 597; of hyme one, of himself, 1793; be thame one, by themselves, 3195. Ones, 135, 179, Onez, 1109,1756, adv. once. One-seeande, i. p. looking on, 525. Onone, adv. anon, quickly, soon, 571, 1178, 1231. Ony, adj. any, 2519, 3489, 4215. Oo. See O. Opyne, adj. open, 2147. Or, prep, ere, before, 1269, 1788; conj. ere, before, 374, 529, 1680. Ordaynede, v. pret. arranged, 1991; p.p. ordande, ordained, 1621. Orfraeez, 902, Orfrayes, 2142, s. gold embroidered work, or fringe of gold. “ Orfrais , . . . 6toffe brocn^e d’or, broderie en or, frange d’or.” Burguy. Orrible, adj. horrible, 1240. Oryent, 2289, Oryentte, 1904, 8 . orient. Osay, s. a kind of drink, 202. Oslante, adv. aslant, 2254, 3923. Ostage,s.£>Z. hostages, 3187,3208. Ostayande, i. p. warring, or leading an army, 3502. “ Ostoier , osteier, osteer , faire la guerre, guerroyer, mener ost, attaquer son ennemi. ,, Burguy . Oste, s. host, 1624; pi. ostes, 1240, ostez, 2387. Other-while, adv. at another time, 1145. Othire, adj. other, 3973; pron.pl . others, 3932. Ouer-charggede, p.p. overburdened, overpowered, 1749. Ouer-fallene, p.p. fallen uj>on, 1154. Digitized by AnOOQle 180 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Ouergylte, p.p. gilded over, 207 Ouer-hande, s. upper hand, mastery, 4300. Ouerkeste, v. pret. overthrew, 3932. Ouerlynge, s. superior, lord, 289 520, 710. Ouer-rane, v. pret. overran; p.p ouer-ronne, 1206. Ouer-reche, v. reach over, afford, 1508; pi. ouerrechez, reach over, 921. Ouer-rydez, v. pi. ride over; p.p. ouer-redyne, 1415, 1524. Ouersette, p.p. overthrown, 111, 2815, 4136. Ouer-swyngene, v. pi. overthrow, overturn, 1466. Ouer-whelme, v. overturn, 3261. Oundyde, 765, Ownde, 193, adj. wavy. Her. ondee. “Hire ownded here, that sonnyssh was of hewe, She rente . . ” Chaucer, Troylus 8f Cryseyde bk. iv. stanza cii. Ovyre-fallys, v. pi. fall over, 3677. Ower, prep, over, 747. Ownde. See Oundyde. Owte-iles, 30, Owtt illes, 2359, s. pi. foreign islands. Owte landes, 2607, Owte-londes, 2723, Owt-londys, 3697, s. pi. foreign countries. Owte-mowntes, s. pi. far off mountains, 3909. Owte ouer, 903, Owtt ouere, 2339, adv. outside, above. Owther, 110, 2413, Owtbiro, 964, conj. either. Owttraye, v. finish, overcome com pletely, ruin, do violence against, 642, 1010, 1328; 3 s. owtrayes, 1664; p.p. owterayede, 1952, owt rayede, 2617, owttrayede, 2840 Pacokes, s. pi. peacocks, 182. Pales, 503, Palesse, 3913, Palez, 636, 718, 5. palace; pi. palaisez, 1287. Palfray, s. 3143. Palle, s. a kind of rich silk or cloth, 1288, 2478, 3142. Palyd, 1287, Palyde, 1375, p.p. paled (Her.). Pape, s. pope, 229, 2327. Pare, v. (?) 4047. Parlement, s. parliament, 146. Party, 5 . part, 212 ; pi. partyes, parts, countries, 2596. Pas, s. pace, 3496. Passande, i. p. passing, more than, 2741, passant, 4184. Pastorelles, s. pi. herdmen, 3120. Patriarkes, s. pi. 3807. Paume, s. palm, 776. Paunsone, s. (?) piece of armour covering the paunch, 3458. “ Pandre , panchire , la partie de 1 arm u re qui couvre la panse ou le ventre. Burgvy. Pauys, 3460, properly means a large shield, but it is by no means clear what is meant in this passage. Pauysers, s. pi. men who hore the panis , a large shield used to cover archers, 2831, 3004. Pavelyouns, 2624, Pauyllyons, 2478, s. pi. tents. Pawnee, s. piece of armour for the belly, 2075. Pawnche, s. paunch, 2076. Paye, v. satisfy, please, 4049 ; 3 s. payes, 2646; p.p. payede, 230. Payganys, s. pi. pagans, 4046. Payne, s. penalty, 2329 ; pi. paynez, 1546,1632. Paynyme, s. pagan, 1377; pi. paynymes, 2835, payuymmez, 1544. Digitized by Google GLOSS ART AL INDEX. 181 Payses, v. pi. weight, load, 3037 ; pret. paysede, overloaded, weighed down, 3042. Payvese, s. pi. pavises, 3625. Pecez, s. pi. pieces, 1825. Pechelyne, s. (?) 1341. Pekille, s. a kind of sauce made of dripping, wine, mustard, and onions, 1027- See the recipe For Pukulle in the Liber Cure Cocorum , ed. Morris, p. 31. Pelid, v. pi'et. thrust, drove (1), 3042. Pelours. See Pylours. Pendes, v. 3 s. belongs, 1612 ; pi. 2624. Penowne, 8. pennon, flag, 2917 ; pi. penouns, 2460. Penselle, s. small pennon, streamer, 2076, 2411; pi. penselles, 2460, pensels, 1289. Percede, v. pret. pierced, 2075. Peres, 146, Perez, 637, Peris, 1637, s. pi. peers. Perfoumede, p.p. performed, 672. Perrie, 4184, Perrye, 2460, 3461, s. precious stones, jewelry. Persayfes, v. 3 s. perceives, 4224; pret. persayfede, 1631, persayuede, 2811. Persewes, v. 3 s. pursues, 2155; pret. persewede, 1476, persuede, 1377. Pertly, adv. openly, 2917. Pes, 2411, Pesse, 1542, s. peace. Pesane, s. (1) 3458. Pete, s. pity, 2812, 3043. Peyne. See Payne. Pighte, Pyghte, p.p . pitched, 1287, 1290, set (with stones, &c.), 212, 3354,3460; adorned(?),3364. Pilgram, s. pilgrim, 3475. Pilgreinage, s. 3496. Pillione hatt, s. 3460. A kind of hat, at one time worn only by doctors in theology, but afterwards more generally. See Pecock’s Repressor , ed. Babington, pp. 88, 89, and Glossary. Pilouur, s. robber, 2533. Plas, s. place, 4013. Plasche, s. marshy place, 2798. Platers, s. pi. dishes, 182. Platez, s. pi. plates, 2075. Plattes, s. pi. purple cloths, 2478. “Platta, purpura, vel pannus purpurei colons.” Ducange. Or more probably plattes is a pi. v. meaning, strike, beat. A.S. plcettian . Playne, adj. level, smooth, 1290. Playsterede, adj. plastered, 3042. Plenerly, adv . fully, 2608, 3498. Plenteuous, adj. abundant, 1028. Plesande, i. p. pleasing, pleasant, 11, 4049. Plesaunce, s. delight, enjoyment, 3140. Pleyne, v. complain, 1217. Plumpe, s . crowd, 2199. Plyande, adj. flexible, 777. Plytte, s. condition, 683. Pomarie, s. fruit-garden, orchard, 3364. Pome, s. globe, 3354. Pomelle, s. small globe (probably used as an ornament on a flagstaff), 1289. Pontyficalles, s. pi. (?) bishops, 4335. Pople, 100, 1204, Popule, 11, 52, s. people. Porke despyne, s. porcupine, 183. Porkes, s. pi. swine, 3121. Porte, s. port, 2609 ; (?) 3625 ; pi. portes, gates, 503, 568, portez, portholes, 749. Postles, s. pi. apostles, 2413. Potestate, s. power, potentate, 2327. Digitized by AnOOQle 182 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Poueralle, s. poor folk, 3120. Pouere, adj. poor, 3540. Pouerte, s. poverty, 1545. Pourpour, s. purple, 1375. Powere, s. forces, 1635, 1925, 2155. Poyne, v. work upon, toil at, 2624. Poyntez, s. pi. points, 767. Praye, s. prey, booty, 3003, 3010. Prekande, Prekes, Prekys, Prekkande, &c. See Prike. Preker, Prekkers. See Prikkere. Presant, adj. present, 1257. Presante, s. present, 1021. Prese, v. press, 1583; 3 s. presez, 1374; pret. presede, 2199. Presone, 1546, Presonne, 1632, s. prison. Presonere, s. prisoner, 2536; pi. presoners, 1583, 1636. Presse, s. crowd, 1477, pressure, difficulty, 1522. Preu4, adj. privy, secret, 2005. Preuely, 213,896,2648, Preualye, 1609, adv. privily, secretly. Price, 94, 355, Pris, 500, 569, Pryce, 230, 746, Prys, 2, 718, Pryse, 1636, Prysse, 1545, adj. precious, worthy, good. Prike, v. prick, ride, 2844 2 s. prykkes, 2533; 3 s. prekez, 2156, prekys, 718 ; pi. prekes, 503; imp. 2 pi. prekez, 1609 ; i. p. prekande, 1545, prekkande, 2836; p.p. prykkyd, pricked, 2648, prykkyde, stitched, 3608. Prikkere, 2649, Preker, 1374, s. rider, horseman; pi. prekers, 355, 1479; prekkers, 2835. Pris. See Price. Priste, adj. ready, 1021, 4106. Pristly, adv. readily, quickly, 2762. Profire, v. offer battle, 2534; 2 s. j profers, 2533; 3 s. profers, 1376, 3141. Profire, 2857, Profyre, 1257, 8. Profitabille, adj. 11. Proudely, 1374, Proudlicbe, 1287, Prowdliche, 3607, adv. proudly, splendidly. Proue, v. prove, try, test, 1341; 3 s. proues, 1478; pi. prouene, 746, proues, 2464; p.p. prouede, 2596. Proueste, 1611, 1889, Prouoste, 1632, s. provost. Prowde, adj. proud, 2536, gay, splendid, 2076. Prowesche, s. advantage, 1958. Pryce, adj. See Price. Pryce, 1924, 2788, Prys, 2751, Pryse, 2649, s. praise, prize. Prykkes, Prykkyde. See Prike. Pryme, s. the first hour of the day, 95, 4105. Prys, Pryse, s. See Pryce. Prys, Pryse, Prysse. See Price. Prysonere, 1478, Pryssonere, 1610, s. Purchese, v. gain, acquire, obtain, 3497. Purpos, 687, Purposse, 2848, 8. Purpre, 4184, Purpur, 3142, Purpure, 1288, Pourpour, 1375, s . purple. Purtrayede, p.p. pourtrayed, 3607. Puruayede, v. pret. provided, furnished, 2832; p.p. puruayede, 1925, 2477. Purueaunce, s. provision, providing, 688. Put, v. 2535 ; put of = ward off. Pygges, s. pi. pigs, 183. Pyghte. See Pighte. Pyke, s. pike, staff, 3475 ; pi . pykes, points, claws, 777. Pyke, v. pick ; 2 s. pykes, 2534; pyke vp, 1636. Digitized by <^.OOQLe GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 183 Pylotes, s. pi. pellets, stones used as missiles, 3037. Pylours, 3004, Pelours, 2831, 8. pi. (?) archers, or men who worked the engines. Pyment, s. a kind of drink, 1028. Pyne, 8. suffering, 3043. Pynne, v. pin, 4047. Pypez, s. pi. pipes, fifes, 2030. Quarte, 552, Qwerte, 3810, 8. health, prosperity. Quarterde, p.p. quartered, 1736. Quod, v. pret. quoth, said, 140, 259, 1559. Quytte, v. requite, 1788. Qwarelles, 8. pi. holts (for the cross-bow), 2103. Qwarters, s. pi. 3389. Qwaste, p.p. quashed, crushed, 3389. Qwat, 3868, Qwate, 4008, pron. what.. Qwayntly, 2103, Qwayntely, 3261, adv. cunningly. Qwen, 1222, Qwene, 26, 736, Qwenne, 48, Qwheae, 407, adv. when. Qwene, 2189, 2871, Qwenne, 3998, 8. queen. Qwerte. See Quarte. Qwhene. See Qwen. Qwhilles, 4160, Qwhyle, 553, Qwhylles, 3480, 3651, 3810; Qwylls, 3505 ; adv. whilst, while; qwylls, 4047, qwylles, 4007, until. Qwyke, 1736, Qwykke, 3810, adj. alive. Qwylls, Qwylles. See Qwhilles. Qwyne, adv. whence, 3503. Qwythene, 4157, properly means whence; in this passage it seems to be miswritten for Qwyne — O that! Compare “ Whyne myghte I ” = “ O that I might,” 1. 703. See the preface to Ham pole’s Pricke of Conscience , ed. Morris, pp. xxv and xxvi. Baas, v. tear, pluck away, 362; pret. rasede, tore, 2984. Bacches, s. pi. hounds, 3999. Bade, adj. frightened, 1995,2881. Bade, s. fear, dread, 3896. Bade. See Byde. Badly, adv. quickly, 1529, 3815. A.S. hrcedlice. Badnesse, s. fear, dread, terror, 120, 310. Baghte. See Beche. Baike, 1525, Bayke, 2985, 8. course, path. Baissede, p.p. raised, 2057. Bane. See Byne. Banez, 8. pi. thickets, brushwood, 923. See Ronex in Sir Oawayne and the Green Knight , ed. Morris, 1. 1466. Banke, 2271, Bannke, 1474,1764, 2138, adj. rank, strong. Bankour, s. 1666. Baply, adv. swiftly, 1763. Bappyd, v. pret. rapped, smote, 785. Barede, v. pret. roared, 784,1124. Basches, v. pi. dash, 2107. Basede. See Baas. Baskaille, 8. rabble, 2881. Bathe, adj. swift, quick, 2550. Bathe, adv. quickly, speedily, 1275,1332, 1668, 2022. Bathly, 237, Baythely, 2880, adv. quickly. Baughte. See Beche. Baunsake, v. search, 4304 ; 3 8. ransakes, 3939 \ pi. ransakes, 1884; imp. 2 pi. rawnsakes. Baunsone, s. ransom, 1528. Digitized by <^.OOQLe 184 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Raunsone, 466,1276,1508,Rawnsone, 3275, v. ransom, levy ransom upon; prei. raunsounde, 293, 329; p.p. raunsound, 100, rawnsonede, 2667. Rauyschett, v. pret. ravished, 294. Rawe, s. row; on rawe = in a row, in order, one after the other, 238, 633, 1292. Rawghte. See Reche. Rawmpyde, v. pret. ramped, 794. Rawndoune, s. swiftness, violence, impetuosity, 2985. See Randon in Roquefort. Rawnsakes. See Raunsake. Rawnsone. See Raunsone. Rayke, v. proceed, go ; 3 s. raykes, 1762, raykez, 889,1057; pret. raykede, 237; i. p. raykande, 3469. Rayke, s. See Raike. Raylide, pp. clothed, covered, 3263. Raymede, p.p. (?) 100. Halliwell has, “ Rame. To rob, or plunder.” Raythely. See Rathly. Reale, 524, Realle, 179, 221, 411, Rialle, 1993, Ryalle, 53, 74, 2138, Ryealle, 17, adj. royal, kingly, noble; superl. realeste, 175,1410. Realtee, s. royalty, 155, 228, 423 ; pi. ryalltes, 3214, ryalltez 1665, royaltez, 4005. Rebanes, s. pi. ribbons, 3255. Rebawde, s. ribald, rascal, vagabond, 1333 ; ph rebaw.dez, 1416, 1705. Rebawdous, adj. ribald, 456. Rebelle, adj. rebellious, 2040. Rebuke, v. 1333; p.p. rebukkede, 4283, rebuyked, 1445, rebuykkyde, 2234, rebuykyde, 867, 1705, 2153. Reche, v. reach, stretch forth the hand in giving or receiving; hence, hand over, give, take, draw, &c., 3 s. reches, 1111, 2252, recliez, 792; pret. raghte, 2766, raugbte, 1527, 1884,3352, rawghte, 3456, rechede, 1090, 3350, 4218 ; pjp . raghte, 2666, rechide, 1043. Reched, 8. (?) richness, 3263. Reches, 8. riches, wealth, 2667, 3571. Recheste, adj. richest, 155. Reconsaillez, v. 3 8. reconciles, 3130. Recreaunt, adj . recreant, 2334. Red, 2932. See Rede, v. Redd our, s. fear, dread, 109, 485, 1418. Su. Goth, reedde , fear. Redd our, s. rigour, 1456. O. Fr. redour , reddur , rigour, severity. Rede, 550, 2369, Red, 2932, v. advise; interpret, 3228 j p.p. rede, discerned, 2921. Rede, 995, 2144, Reedde, 3457, Reede, 795, 1526, adj. red. Redely, 1472, 2070, Redily, 363, Redvly, 1207, 1526, adv. readily, quicily. Redene. See Ryde. Redy, v. make ready, prepare, 4137; pi- redyes, 1427. Redyne. See Ryde. Reedde. See Rede. Refe, v. rob, take away, deprive of; pret. refede, 959, refte, 295, 1475; p.p. refede, 1820, refte, 1206, 1733, rewede, 3315. Regale, s. regalia, 4207. Regestre, s. register, 113. Reghte, adv. right, 1057, 1668, just, 1301. Reghttes, v . 3 s . rights, puts to rights, 3815; pi. reghttez, 1454, ryghttene, 3618. Regne, " 398, Regnne, 4005, Ryngne, 3214, v. reign; 3 s. regnes, 310, regnez, 287, ryngnes, 2266; pi. rengnez, 865; pret. regnede, 293,3273, rengnede, 3272, reynede, 175,ryngnede, 228; i. p. regnande, 2665. Digitized by AnOOQle GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 185 Rehersene, v. relate, tell, say, 3229; 3 s. rehersys, 3206; pret. rehersede, 1666. Rehetes, 411, Rehetez, 3198, v. 3 s. cheers; pret. rehetede, 221. O.Fr. rehaiter. Reke, 8. smoke, 1041. Rekeneste, adj. (?) quickest, readiest, 4081. A.S. recene , soon, quickly. Rekenyng, 1678, Rekkynynge, 102, s. reckoning, account. Rekke, v . reck, care, 995, 2040; pret. roughte, cared for, 3275. Rekkene, v. reckon, 1275, 2334. Reklesse, adj. reckless, careless, 922,1670. Relayes, v. pi. relax, slacken, 1529. Releuis, v. pi. rally, 2278 ; pret. releuyde, 2234; pp. releuede, 1207. Relikkes, 8. pi. relics, 4207. Relyes, 4291, Relyez, 1882, v. pi. rally; pret. relyede, 1391. Relys, v. 3 8. reels, 2794. Remenaunt, s . remnant, remainder, 1553. Remmes. See Rewme. Remmes, 2197, Remys, 4155, 3 s. shouts, cries out; pret. remyd, 3894. Remowes, v. 3 s. removes, 1761. Renayede, adj. renegade, having renounced their faith, 2913, 3572, 3892. Rengnede, Rengnez. See Regne. Renke, s. man, 1057; pi. renkes, 1410, renkkes, 391,1994, renkys, 17,147, rennkkez, 2135. Rennene, v. pi. run, 200. Rente, 8. rent, tribute, 465 ; pi. rentez, 103, 995, renttez, 1509, 1667. Rependez, v. pi. hang back, 2107. Repent, v. pret . repented, 3894; repent, impers. v. 1392. Requit, p.p. paid, 1680. Rere, v. move, 2810. Cf. Dan. fore sig, to bestir oneself. Rereage, 8. arrears, 1680. Rerebrace, 8. 2566. “ From the French arriere-bras. That part of plate armour which covered the arm from the shoulder to the elbow. In the reign of Edward II. only one plate at first protected the arm outside, being put on the sleeve of mail; but afterwards the rerebrace became a cylinder, consisting of two halves joined with hinges and clasps.” Meyrick, Glossary of Military Terms. Rererys, v. 3 8. rears, 4249; p.p. rereryde, 4280. Rereward e, s. rearguard, 1430, 1527, 1762. Resaywe, v. receive, 3587. Rescewe, 1752, Reschewe, 2243, Rescowe, 4131, v. rescue; p.p. reschowede, 363. Reschewe, 3859, Reschewes, 433, Rescowe, 1953, Rescows, 4137, s. rescue, deliverance. Resonabillye, adv. reasonably, 1508. Resone, 2041,Resoune, 174,1668, 8. reason, account. Restreynede^.p. restrained, 2041. Retenewys, 3572, Retenuz, 1334, 1655, 2664, s. pi. retainers, followers. Retoumes, v. pi. turn back, 1395. Reuare, 62, 1455, Reyuere, 424, Ryuere, 1292, s. river. Reuaye, 3275, Ryvaye, 3999, v. hunt by a river. “ Rivoier , riveier, chasser en riviere.” Burguy under Rive. Reuelle, 8. 1667. Digitized by AnOOQle 186 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Reuelle, v. 1969. Reuengyde, p.p. avenged, 1204. Reuerssede, v. pret. turned down, 2070; p.p. reuersside, turned up, trimmed, 3255. Reuertede, v. pret. turned over, 2918. Reueste, p.p . dressed, clothed, 4334. Rewdly. See Ruydly. Rewe, v. have pity, 866; cause regret, 1678 ; 3 s. rewes, 3272. Rewede. See Refe. Rewfulle, adj. rueful, pitiful, sad, 1049. Rewfully, adv. ruefully, sadly, 1523. Rewghe. See Rewthe. Rewllez, 1672, Rewlys, 509, v. 3 8. rules, governs ; pi. rewles, 1455, rewlys, 726; p.p. rewlyde, 52. Rewme, s. realm, 1207 ; pi. rewmes, 52, 66, 425, remmes, 49. Rewthe, 888,1430,2197, Rewghe, 3859, 8. pity, compassion, sorrow; rewthe werkes, sorrowful deeds, 3453, 3894. Reynede. See Regne. Reyuere. See Reuare. Rialle. See Reale. Riatours, s. pi. ravagers, 2034. Richely, adv. 173. Richeste, adj . 147. Rigge, 8. hack, 800. A.S. hrycg. Rightene, v. pi. put right, 1525. Rightewissly, adv. righteously, 1554. Rightwis, adj. righteous, 3989. Riotes. See Ryot. Riotous. See Ryotous. Riste, 1969, Ryste, 108, 423, v. rest; 3 $.rystez, 2170; pret. risted, 485, rysteae, 53; p.p. riste, 2235, ryste, 1428. Rittez, 2138, Rittis, 3753, v. pi. break, tear. Roche, 8. rock, 1146, 3601. Rochelle, 8. a kind of wine, 203. Rode. See Ryde. Rode, s. rood, cross, 3217, 3559. A.S. rod. Rog, 8. (?) crowd, 3272. See roge in Ihre. Roggede, v. pret. shook, 784. Rollede, p.p. enrolled, 2641. Romawns, 8. pi. romances, 3200. Romede, v. pret. roared, 784. Romyez, v. 3 8. roars, 888; pret. romyede, 1124. Rongene. See Rynge. Ronnene. See Ryne. Roo, s. rest, peace, quiet, 1751, 3362, 4304. A.S. roto. Roo, s. wheel, 3374. Fr. roue , Lat. rota. Roo, s. roe, 922, 4000. A.S. rd. Roode. See Ryde. Roseide, 2880, Rosselde, 2793, adj. (?) brandished, shaken. Cf. Sw. ruskla, to shake; E. rustle. Rosers, s. pi. rosetrees, 923. Rosse, s. rose, 3457. Rosselde. See Roselde. Rossete, adj. russet, 237. Rostez, 8. pi. roasts, 1049. Roughte. See Rekke. Roungene. See Rynge. Rowelle, s. wheel, 3262. “ Boele, rouele, roelle , roue, petite roue, rond, cercle ; de rotula. ,i Burguy. Rowm, 1454, Rowme, 391, 432, Rowmme, 3470, adj. roomy, spacious. Rowte, v. sleep; lit. snore, 108. X Rowte, 719, 1763, Rowtt, 1656, Rowtte, 390, 456, s. company, troop. Digitized by <^.OOQLe GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 187 Rowtte, 8. road, way, 379. Roy, 411, 1670, Roye, 3200, 3273, s. king. Fr. roi, Lat. rex. Royaltez. See Realtee. Rungene. See Rynge. Rusche, v. rush, fall; cast, hurl, 1339, thrust, 2880 ; 3 s. rusches, falls, 2241, 2794, ruschez, rushes, 392, ruysches, 2983; pi. rusches, 2550, ruyssches, hurl, dash, 2913; pret. ruschede, 2792, 2879, ruschte, 120 . Rusclede, adj. (V) ruckled, wrinkled, 1096. Cf. ruck in Wedgwood. Ruyd, 1096, Ruyde, 1049, 1057, 1332, adj. rude. Ruydly, 785, 794, Ruydlyche, 18 77 1 Rewdly, 2810, adv. rudely. Ruysches, Ruyssches. See Rusche. Ryalle. See Reale. Ryalltez. See Realtee. Ryally, adv. royally, 1472, 3613. Rybbez, 1134, Rybbys, 1151,5. pi. ribs. Ryche, adj. 108, 833. Rydde, adj. fierce, 4117. See Rid in Jamieson. Ryde, v. ride, 1876; 3 8. ryddis, 3540; pi. ryddez, 2849, rydene, 2809; pret. rade, 294, 853, rode, 1953, roode, 920 ; pret. pi. redene, 485; p.p. redene, 2598, redyne, 52, ioo. y Ryealle. See Reale. Ryfe, 362, Rywe, 2439, v. rive, rend, split, pierce; 3 s. ryfez, 794, 1474, ryvys, 3824; pi. ryffes, 2913. Ryghte, adv. straight, 889. Ryghttene. See Reghttes. Ryghttez, 894, 1439, Ryghtys, 610, s. pi. Ryghtwise, adj. righteous, 866. Ryndes, 3363,Ryndez, 921,1884, 8. pi. trees. Ryne, v. run, 109, 3990; 3 8. rynnez, 1121, rynnys, 31, 62, 540; pret. rane, 1526, 2881, rynnyde, 2965, rynnyd, 920; pret. pi. ronnene, 922; i. p. rynnande, 392, 795. Rynge, v. ring, 4332; p.p. rungene, 462, roungene, 1587, rongene, 976. Ryngne, Ryngnede, Ryngnes. Se• Regue. Rynisch, adj. either Rhenish, or strange, foreign, 203. See Runisch in Glossary to Alliterative Poems. Rynnande, Rynnez, Rynnyde, &c. See Ryne. Rynsede, p.p. rinsed, 3375. Ryot, 456, 785, Ryott, 341, Ryotte, 923,1883, v. ravage; (with the reflexive pronoun) run riot; 3 8. ryottez, 619, riotes, 3172. Ryotous, 379, 432, Riotous, 363, adj. Ryotte, 8. uncontrolled license, riot, 294, 412; pi. riotes, 388, ryotes, 3893. Rype, v. search, 1877; 3 5. rypes, 3940. Rysses, v. 3 5. rises, 3660. Ryste, Rystede, &c. See Riste. Ryues, 5. pi. (1) 1764. Ryvaye. See Reuaye. Ryve (= aryve), v. land, 3896. Ryvys, Rywe. See Ryfe. Sa, adv. so, 3796, 3870. v' Sabylle, 771, Sable, 2027, 5. sable, black. Sadde, adj. satisfied, 847. Ger. satt. Sade, adj. sad, 3948; comp, saddare, 3289. Saddles, 1801, Sadylles, 1855, 5. pi. saddles. Sadly, 331, 1685, 2466, Saddly, 1458, adv. X Ho a Digitized by <^.OOQLe 188 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Safe, v. save, 3051. Sagge, adj. sage, wise, 814. Saghetylle, v. become reconciled, 330. Saise, v. 3 s. says, 1162; imp . 2 pi. saise, 1267. Sakles, 3986, 3992, Sakeles, 3399, adj. innocent. Sale, 5 . hall, 82, 91, 134, 409. Salle, 1364. Read Sable. Salle, v. shall, 16, 105, shalt, 111, 152. Salue, v. salute; 3 s. saluz, 87; j wet. saluted, 82, salu^ede, 953. Salue, 8. salve; pi . saluez, 2691. Salue, v . heal, 932 ; p.p. saluede, 2907. Sandes, 513. Perhaps a mistake for sandesman. Sandes-mane, s. messenger, 1419 ; pi. sandismene, 266. Sare, adv. sore, sorely, 134, 2248. Satanase, s. Satan, 3812. Satilles, v. pi. settle, descend, 2465. Saughte, s. peace, reconciliation, 1007, 1548, 3052. Saule, 666, 1062, Saulle, 2192, Sawle, 1169, s. soul. Saunke, s. blood, 179. Sawghte, adj . at peace, reconciled, peaceable, 3194, 4012. Sawle. See Saule. Sawtere, 3316, Sawtire, 3421, s. psalter. Sawturoure, s. saltire, one of the ordinaries in heraldry, 4182. Sayne, v. bless, cross (oneself), 969; pret. sayned, 1042, saynned, 966. Scathylle. See Skathelle. Schadande, i. p, shedding, flowing, 3845. Scliafte, s ..shaft (of a spear), 2169. Schaft-monde, 8. 2546, 3843, 4232. “ A measure, from the top of the extended thumb to the utmost part of the palm, which in a tall man is about six inches, or half a foot.”—Bosworth's A.S. Diet, under Scaft-mund . Schake, v. shake, proceed, 1213, 1992. Schakke, 8 . sudden movement, 1759. Schalke = chalk, 1226, 1363. Schalke, 5 . man, 1098, 2170, pi . schalkes, 1857, schalkez, 2211. Schalle, v. shall, 7,148, shalt, 102. Schalyde, p.p. scaled, 766. Schamely, adv. shamefully, 2616. Schamesdede, s. deed of shame, 3. Schanke, 8. shank, leg, 3845 ; pi. schankez, 1099. Schape, v. shape, form, prepare, 342, 1324, 2588, 3400; pret . schoupe, 3599. Schappely, adv. fitly, 2333. Schappes, v. 3 s. shapes, destines, 1716 . Schare. See Schere. Scharlette, s. scarlet, 3459. Scharpe, s. 3841. Scharpely, adv. sharply, smartly, 1212, 2429, 2456. Schathe. See Skathe. Schawe, 2406. Read Schewe. Schawe, s. wood, 1765 ; pi. schawes, 1723, 1760. Schaylande, adj. (T) scaly, 1098. Schede, 2922, Schedde, 3398, v. pret. shed, poured. Scheene, 1760, 2457, Schene, 2429, 3747, Schenne, 2676, adj. fair, beautiful. Scheftene, Scheftys. See Skyfte. Schelde, 914,1110,Schilde,3714, Schylde, 2984, 5. shield ; pi. scheldez, 595, scheldys, 2545. Digitized by <^.OOQLe GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 189 Schelde, v. shield, 3. Scheldyde, adj . having shields, 1856. Scheltrone, 2106, 2922, Schiltrone, 1856, Slieltrone, 1992, s. troop, band; pi. schiltrounis, 1765, schiltrouns, 1813,2210. The older form is schiltrum. A.S. set/Id, shield, truma , troop. Schenchipe, s. disgrace, 4299. Schende, v. ruin, disgrace, confound, 2435. Schene. See Scheene. Schepe, 8. sheep, 2922. Schere, v. shear, cut, 2546; 3 8. scherys, 3600; pret. schare, 3843, scherde, 1856, 2545. Scherenkene. See Schrenkys. Schethede, p.p. sheathed, 3852. Scheuerede, v. pret shivered, split, 1813; p.p. scheueride, 3748. Schewe, v. show, 191, 1183, appear, 1717; inf. schewene, 2457. Schewynge, s. showing, manifestation, 3401. Schifte, Schiftys. See Skyfte. Schilde. See Schelde. Schiltrone, Schiltrounis. See Scheltrone. Schippemene, s. pi. shipmen, sailors, 1212. Schire, 1760, 2169, Schyre, 1213, 3600, adj. bright. Schirreues, 8. pi. sheriffs, 725. Schq, pron. she, 853, 860. Schoderede, 3844, Schoderide, 2106, Schodirde, 4234, Schodyrde, 2169, v. pret. shuddered, shook, quivered. Schokke, v. shock, jog, move or throw with violence, 4114; 3 s. schokkes, 3816, 3852, 4235 ; pi. schokkes, 1759. Scholde, 1031, 1719, Schoulde, 3611, v. should. Schone, $. pi. shoes, 3471. Schone, 1717, 1719, Schoune, 314, v. shun, avoid, get or keep out of the way; 3 s. schownnes, 3599. Schonte, Schontez. See Schountes. Schore, s. score, 2344, 3577. Schorte, at the, shortly, soon, 1325. Schotande. See Schotte. Schotene, v . pi. shut, 749. Schotte, v. shoot, 1992 ; pi. schottes, 2426; pret. schotte, 1765; i. p. schotande, 1766. Schotte, s. shot, shooting, 2105, 2428 ; pi. schotys, 3627. Schotte-mene, s. pi. shooters, 2467. Schouelle-fotede, adj. shovelfooted, 1098. Schouene, 2333, Schoue, 2335, v . pret. pi. shaved. Schoulders, s. pi. shoulders, 2546. Schoune. See Schone. - Schountes, 3816, Schownttes, 3715, 3842, Schuntes, 1055, v. 3 8. turns aside, shrinks away, hesitates, delays; pi. schontez, 1759; pret. schonte, 2106,2428, schounte, 736; imp. 2 8. schunte, 1324. Schoupe. See Schape. Schove, v. shove, thrust, 3847. Schowande, i. p. (V) shuffling, 1099. Schownnes. See Schone. Schownttes. See Schountes. Schragges, s. pi. j agged ends, 3473. Schrede, v. pret. cut, 2211, 4167; p.p. schrede, 2688. Schrede, 3991, Schreede, 767, p.p. clothed. Schredez, 905, Schredys, 3473, s. pi. shreds. Schrenkys, v. 3 8. shrinks, 4234; pi. scherenkene, 2105 ; p.p. Digitized by AnOOQle 190 GLOSSABIAL INDEX. schrenkede, wrinkled, 2211; i. p. schrenkande, wrinkling, 1857. Schrewe, 8. wicked person, 2779. Schrifte,s. shrift, confession, 2588. Schrinkande, i. p. shrinking, wrinkling, 767. Schrowde, s . dress, 3628. A.S. scritd , garment. Schryfe, v. confess, 3400. Schrympe, s. deformed creature, monster (applied to a dragon), 767. Schrynede, p.p. shrined, 3991. Schulde, v. should, 3183, 3791. Schuldrez, 1157, Schuldyrs, 3294, Schoulders, 2546, s. pi. shoulders. Schunte, Schuntes. See Sch ountes. Schwede = schewede, showed, 4233. Schyfte. See Skyfte. Schylde. See Schelde. Schynbawde, s. 3846, seems to mean the greave or shin-plate; but the form of the word leads one to think that it originally meant shinbelt, probably a piece of chain-armour or other defence bound round the leg. See Glossary to Syr Gawayne , ed. Madden. Compare Eng. baldrick and Lat. baliens. “He, and his gambesouns, glomede als gledys, With graynes of rubyes, that graythede were gaye And his schene. schynbawdes, scharpe for to schrede.” The Awntyrs of Arthure, ed. Madden, stanza xxxi. Schyre. See Schire. Scoulders, 766. Bead Schoulders. Scrippe, s. 3474. Seche, Sechis. See Seke. See, 8. seat, 3291, 3350. See, 8. sea, 490, 1402. Seegge, 8. seat, proper place, 2478. Seegge. See Segge. Seese, v. pi. see, 1405. Segge, 134, 1043, Seegge, 1574, s. man; pi. seggez, 1420, 1422. A.S. secg. Segge, 355, 8. siege. Seggede, v.pret. besieged, 3011. Segnourry, s. lordship, 528. Sekadrisses, 8. pi. 2283. There is surely some mistake here ; perhaps we ought to read cokadrilles = crocodiles (compare Span, coco - drillo') or cokatrisses , which may have the same meaning, since Roquefort gives, “ Cocatrice , cocatrix: Crocodile.” Either suits the alliteration, gives some sense, and might by a slight mistake of the scribe be turned into sekadrisses , which gives no sense at all. Crocodiles in a Roman camp are not more out of place than camels and elephants are when crossing the Alps with coffins on their backs! See p. 69. Seke, adj. sick, 1574. Seke, 105, 937, . 1296, Seche, 3233, v. seek, make for, go (towards) ; 2 s. sechis, 3507; pret. soghte, 1041, soughte, 720, 2170; inf. sekene, 898 ; p.p. soghte, 1171. Sekere, 1173, 1458, Sekire, 4313, Sekyre, 478, 551, adj. sure, safe, trusty; comp, sekerare, 3289; superl. sekereste, 1492. Sekerly, 441, 969, Sekirly, 3499, Sekyrly, 439, 1420, ado. surely, certainly, safely. Sekire, v. ensure, 2585, 3804. Sektour, 8. executor, 665. Selcouthe, 75, 1298, 3531, Selkouthe, 1948, adj. strange, rare. Seldene, adv. seldom, 1163. Sele, 8. seal, 85. Selfene, 331, 338, Seluene, 1, 8, Seluyne, 10, 34, self. Selkouthe. See Selcouthe. Digitized by <^.OOQLe GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 191 Selkouthely, ado. strangely, 3252. Selkylde, 3356. Perhaps miswritten for ‘ Serkylde,’ encircled. Seluene, Seluyne. See Selfene. Semblant, s. show, splendour, 7 5, 410. Semble, v. assemble, gather, meet, 63, 967 ; pi. sembles, 3748 ; pret. semblede, 409, 1457; pp. semblyde, 70. Semes, 1672, Semez, 133, 1162, Semys, 1418, impers . v. seems; f ret, semede, 123, semyde, 193. It is often used with the objective case of the personal pronouns: the semes=thou seemest, 1672; them semyde = they seemed, 193. Semliche, 3947, Semlyche, 655, Semly, 410, 1949, adj. seemly, comely, goodly. Semliche, 3316, Semlyly, 3787, adv. in a comely manner, well. Sen, 127, 142, Sene, 526, 952, ado. or conj. since. Sendelle, 8. fine linen, 2299. Sengely, 2434, Sengilly, 471, 2592, Sengly, 3729, adv. singly, alone. Sent, s. scent, 1040. Sent, 8. assent, consent, 1628, 2615, 3065. Sepulture, s. burial, 4340. Sere, adj. various, diverse, separate, 192, 607, 1576, 3195. Serfe, v. serve, 1220 ; pret. serfede, 892. Serfede, 1068. See Serues. •Sergeaunt, s. servant, 632 ; pi. sergeantes, 1173. Serte, s. desert, 2926; pi. sertes, 513. Compare serve for deserve. Seruez, v. pi. serve, 1168. Serues, v. pi. deserve, 1315 ; p.p. seruede, 2590, serfede, 1068. Ses, v. 3 8. sees, 3941. Sesez, v. 3 s. seizes, 1500. Seside, v. pret. put in possession, 3065; p.p. sessede, 2608. Sessede, v. pret. ceased, 2132. Sesyne, s. seizin, 3588. Sete, 3315, Sette, 1305, s. seat. Seterdaye, s. Saturday, 1550, 3176. Sethene. See Sythene. Setille, s. settle, seat, 3270. Seuende, adj. seventh, 488. Seuenschore, seven score, 3788. Seuenyghte, s. week, 153, 380, 3182. Sewes, 8. pi. stews, pottages, 192. Sewe, v. follow, 2927 ; pret. sewede, 3288 ; i. p. sewande, 81. Sex, adj. six, 354, 380; sex sum = six in all, 471. Sexte, adj. sixth, 3316, 3416. Sextene, adj. sixteen, 81, 105. Sexti, Sexty, adj. sixty, 179, 210, 601. Sexti-faulde, adj. sixtyfold, 2299. Seyne, s. sign, 2055, 2870. Seyne, p.p. seen, 3985. Seyne, adv. afterwards, 188, 192, 282, 1591. Seyngnour, 3313, Seyn$owre, 2419, s. lord ; pi. seynowres, 1577. Seynt, 8. saint, 1169 ; pi. seyntez, 1163, 1168. Sheltrone. See Scheltrone. Sibb, 3984, Sybb, 645, 3891, Sybbe, 681, adj. related, akin. Siche. See Swylke. Siluere, 8. 1165. Silueryne, adj. made of silver, 185. Singulere, adj. single, by himself, 172. Sir, 3288, Syr, 3312, Syre, 3134, s. lord. Digitized by <^.OOQLe 192 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Sittande, i. p. becoming, suitable, 953, 1501. Sittandly, adv. becomingly, 159. Sittene, p.p. sat, 3291. Skalopis, s. pi. scallop-shells, 3474. Skape, v. escape, 1562. Skathe, 1643, 1841, 3119, Schatlie, 292, s. hurt, damage. Skathelle, 1642, Scathylle, 32, adj . hurtful. Skathlye, adj. hurtful, 1562. Skayles, v. 3 s. scales, 3034. Skayres, v. pi. scare, frighten, 2468. Skewe, v. eschew, escape, 1562. Skiftez. See Skyfte. Skilfulle, adj. reasonable, right, 1561. Skomfite, s. discomfit, 2335. Skomfite, p.p. discomfited, 1644. Skomfitoure, 8. discomfiter, one who discomfits, 1644. Skomfyture, s. discomfiture, 1561. Skome, v. scorn, 1642; pret. skornede, 1840. Skomefulle, adj. 1840. Skotiferis, 3034, Skottefers, 2468, a. pi. shield-bearers. Compare Lat. scuiiferi , squires. Skouerours, 8. pi. explorers, scouts, 3118. Skoulkery, s. lurking, ambush, 1644. Skowtte-waches, s. pi. sentinels, 2468. Skrogges, 1641, Skroggez, 1642, s. pi. stunted bushes, shrubs. Sc. scrog. Skulker, 8. 3119. Skyfte, 1643, Schifte, 1213, 1325, v. shift, dispose, manage; 3 8. skiftez, 1561, skyftys, 32 ; pi. skyftes, 3117, schiftys, 725, schef- tene, 3627, scheftys, 2456, schyfte, 3847; imp. 2 s. schyft, 1717- Sky lie, 8. reason, skill, 32. Skyrmys, v. pi. fight, skirmish, 2467. Slade, s. green valley, 2978. Slakes, v. 3 s. slackens, loosens > 3220. Slakkes, 8. pi. (1) pools of water in slack or hollow places, 3719. Slale, adj. (1) 3117. Slaughte, 8. slaughter, 2675. Slawe, adj. slow, dull, 4044. Slawyne, s. slavein, pilgrim’s mantle, 3474. Slayne,^.p. slain, 1824, 2977. Sleghe, adj. sly, cunning, clever, 2978. Sleghte, 3220, Sleyghte, 3418, 4045, s. sleight, skill, craft. Sleghte, p.p. slipped, 2675. Slely, 3855, Sleyghly, 2975, Sleyghely, 4321, adv. sfily, prudently, cleverly. Slepe, v. sleep, 4044. Sleppes, v. 3 8. slips, 2976; pret. sleppid, 3854. Slewe, v. pret. 3418. Slewthe, s. sloth, 3221. Sleyghly, Sleyghely. See Slely. Sleyghte. See Sleghte. Slode, v. pret. slid, 3854. Slomowre, s. slumber, 3221. Slomyre, v. slumber, 4044. Slongene, p.p. slung, 2978, 4321. Sloppes, 8. pi. pools, 3923. Slote, 2254, Slotte, 2975, s. pit of the stomach. Slottede, p.p. stabbed in the pit of the stomach, 3853. Sloughe, 23, Slowghe, 4045, Slewe, 3418, v.pret. slew. Slowde, 8. slush, sludge, 3719. Digitized by <^.OOQLe GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 193 Slowghe. See Sloughei Slydande, i. p. sliding, 2976. Slyke, adj. such, 3719. See Swylke. Slynges, v. 3 s. slings, throws, 3220, 3855. Slytte, 8. slit, 3853. Slyttes, v. 3 8. slits, 2254, 2975. Smyttes, 2564, Smyttez, 1148, v . 3 s. smites. Snelle, adj. swift, 57. Socoure, v. succour, 2276. ; Socoure, 2317, Socure, 1438, 8. succour. Sodanly, 80, 599, 1422, Sodaynliche, 3270, Sodaynly, 632, 1980, adv. suddenly. Softe, adj. softening, melting, 3983. Softene, v. soften, ease, 2691. Soghte. See Seke. Soiome, 4027, Soioume, 4042, v. sojourn. Solauce, 8. solace, recreation, 239, 659. Solemply, 3196, 3805, Solempnely, 1948, Solempnylye, 525, adv. solemnly. Solempnitee, 8 . solemnity, 514. Som, adj. some, 3683. Somercastelle, 8. wooden tower, 3033. Somme, s. sum, 448, 2347. Somond, 1212, Somounde, 525, v. pret . summoned ; p.p. somonde, 140, sommonde, 267. Somouns, 8. summons, 91, 104. Sonde, 8 . something sent, 2511. Sonde, 8. sand, 3728, 3745. Sondire, 2182, Sondre, 1123, Sondvre, 1388, 1482; in s. = asunder. Sondirwise, adv. separately, 3529. MORTE ARTHURE. Sone, 8. son, 1945. Sone, 170, 1022, Sonne, 2222, adv. soon. Songene, v . pret. pi. sang, 745, 2674. Sonne, 1978, 2511, Sone, 4035, 8 . sun. Sonondaye, 8. Sunday, 501, 2482. Soo, adv. so, 1841. Sope, 8. sup, hasty meal, 1890. Soppe, 8. crowd, company, troop, band, 1493, 2818, 3729. Sore, 8. disease, 932. Sore, adv. sorely, 1173; comp. sorere, 1163. Sorowe, s . 1138, 2224. Sorte, s. troop, company, band, 63, 410, 1575; pi. sortes, 606. Sothe, adj. true, 1686; for sothe, truly, 1087. Sothe, s. truth, 3229. | Sothely, adv . truly, 172, 239, 319. Sott, 1044, Sotte, 847, 1060, sot. Soueraygne, adj. 1167. Soueraygne, 1298, 1330, Soueraygne, 141, s. sovereign; pi. souerayngez, 1960. Soughte. See Seke. Souppe. See Sowpe. Sowdane, 8. soldan, sultan, 590, 1295 j pi. sowdanes, 593. Sowdeours, s. pi. hired warriors, mercenaries, 551, 593, 2925, 2938. So we, 8. some warlike engine, 3033. See Sow in Jamieson. Sowmes, 8. pi. sums, 1627. Sownde, adj. 1577. Sowpe, 1298, Souppe, 3805, v. sup; 3 8 . sowppes, 1025; pret. sowpped, 409; i. p. sowpande, 1044. Sowper, 8. supper, 1022. Digitized by Google 194 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Sowre, 1041. Read Sowrs, source. Sowte. See Soyte. Soyte, 81, 3931, Sowte, 3941, 8. suit, company. Spakely, adv. swiftly, quickly, 2063. Spalddyd, p.p. split, 3699. Spanne, 8 . span, 2060. Spayre, s . the spare or thin part of the body, the waist, 2060. Specyalle, adj. 999. Spede, v. fare, succeed, 2414, speed, hasten, 2416; pret . spede, 1794; p.p. spede, 3016. Speke, v. speak, 2415; 3 8. spekes, 2063. Spekes, s. pi. spokes (of a wheel), 3264, 3311. Speltis, s. pi thin streaks or j splinters, 3264. Spencis, 8. pi. expenditure, 3163. Spendyde, v. pret. spent, 235. Spere, s. spear, 1794; pi. sperys, 1898. Spere-lenghe, adj. spearlength, of the length of a spear, 3311. Speryt, s . spirit, 4327. Spille, v. perish, 2415 ; pi. spillis, destroy, 3159. Spleene, s. 2061. Splent, 8. splint, 2061. “ Splents. In ancient armour, several little plates that run over each other, and protected the inside of the arm.” Halliwell. They were also worn on the leg (see Jamieson under Splentis ), and probably on other parts of the body. Splentide, p.p. splinted, adorned with splinters, 3264. Sponene, p.p. spun, 999. Spoures, 483, Spurres, 2416, a. pi. spurs. Spraddene. See Sprede. Sprangene. See Sprynges. Sprede, v. spread, 3158; pret. sprede, 2062; pret. pi. spraddene, 3310. Sprente, 2062, 3310, Sprentyde, 3700, v. pret. sprang, leapt. Springande, Sprongene. See Sprynges. Sproulez, v. 3 8. sprawls, 2063. Sprynges, v. 3 s. springs, 3162 ; pi. spryngene, 3158 ; pret. pi sprangene, 483; i. p. springande, 3265; p.p. sprongene, 1943, burst, 1794, spronngene, 3699. Spycerye, s . 162. Spytte, s. spite, 270. Sqwyere, 8. squire, 1179. Stade, p.p. set, placed, 1926. Stake, v. put on a stake, 1178. Stale, s. company, troop, 377, 1355,1435, 1932; pi. stales, 1980. StaJkis, v. 3 a. 3466. Stam, s. foreship, 3664. Stamyne, 8. some part of a ship, 3658. Standerde, a. 2080. Statte, 8. state, rank, 157. Stedde, p.p. beset, 2824, 4133. Stede, 8. stead, place, 1748, 2824. Stede, 8. steed, horse, 1355; pi. stedes, 1280, stedys, 1488, 1647. Stekes, v. pi. stick, stab, 3126 ; 3 s. stekys, 3822; pret. stekede, 1488. Stele, 8. steel, 1371, 1487. Stelene, 1488, 2129, Stelyne, 1354, adj. steelen, made of steeL Stepes, v. 3 a. steps, 1229. Sterape, 2692, Sterepe, 916, a. stirrup ; pi. sterapes, 3823. Stere-bourde, 745, Stere-burde, 3665, s. starboard. Sterenefulle, 3824, Sterynfulle, 2692, adj. stern, fierce. Digitized by <^.OOQLe GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 105 Sfceride, Steris. See Stire. Stertez, 1104, Sterttes, 1355, Stirttez, 1932, Styrtez, 1152, v. 3 s . starts ; pi. stirttes, 2692 ; pret. sterte, 916. Steryne, 157, 377, 735, Sterynne, 3622, adj. stern; superl . sterynneste, 3872. Sterynly, adv. sternly, 745, 2130. Sterys. See Stire. Steuen, s. voice, 2531, 4269. Stewede, v. pret. enclosed, 1489. “ Estuier: Serrer, mettre dans un 4tui, cacher, enfermer, renfermer, envelopper, emprisonner.”— Roquefort. Stire, 2823, Styre, 4038, v. stir, move; 3 s. sterys, 917; pi. steris, 2923, 3658; pret. steride, 1793; imp. 2 pi. stirrez, 1748. Stirttes, Stirttez. See Stertez. St^ttelys, v. pi. arrange, 3622. Stodde, Stode. See Stondez. Stokes, s. pi. (?) estocs, or stabbing swords, 1436. Stokes, v. pi. stab, 2554. “ Esto - quer t estoquier: Frapper, pousser, casser, rompre, briser.” Roquefort. Stokkes, s. pi. 3665. Stonays, v. pi. stuns, bits stunning blows, 2118; p.p. stonayede, 1933, 3873. Stondez, 2090, Stonndys, 3623, v. pi. stand; pret. stode, 1489, 2923, stodde, 4133. Stotais, 1435, Stotays, 3467, 4271, v . 3 s. becomes foolish, mad, ^ dizzy, or stupid. “Estoutir, estoutoyer: £tre fou, imprudent, avoir de la t6m6rit6, etre msens6; stultescere” Roquefort . Burguy gives the forms “ estoteier, estouteier 9 estuteier , estoutoier, estotoier,” but with the meaning “ maltraiter.” Stour, 377, 1747, Stoure, 1488, Stowre, 2086, s . battle. Stownde, s. time, 3974; pi. stowndys, 3888. Stownntynge, s. stopping, delay, 491. Stowre. See Stour. Strake. See Stryke. Strandez, 598, 883, 947, 1227, 1337, Strandys, 3626, Strondes, 4067, s. pi. waters. Strates, 561, Straytez, 3009, s. pi. straits, narrow places. Strayte, 1933, Straytt, 1230, adj. strait, narrow. Streke, adv. straight, 1792, 3101. Strekes, Strekyne. See Stryke. Strekez, v. 3 8. stretches, 1229, 2085. Streme, s. stream, 755 ; pi. stremes, 1224. Strenghe, 258, 376, Strenghte, 796, s. strength; strong place, 1230, 1435 ; pi. strenghes, forces, 1475, 2242, strenghez, 1827, strenghethis, 3322. Strenghely, adv. strongly, 4096. Strette, s. street, road, 3467. Streynez, v. 3 s. exerts, 917. Strondes. See Strandez. Stroye, 1927, Struye, 561, v. destroy; pi. stroyene, 3127; p.p. stroyede, 1933, struyede, 1205. Stryke, v. strike, smite; 3 s. strykez, 1124, strykkes, 1480; pi. strykkys, 1411, strekes, 3101; pret. strake, 2080, 2129; pret. pi. strekyne, 755, 3659. Studyande, i. p. studying, 3467. StufFe, v. furnish, 1932 ; pi. stuffene, 2369; pret. stuffede, 3616. Sturdely, adv. sturdily, 1104. Stye, s. path, 3466. Styghtylle, v. order, arrange, 157. Stynte, v. cease, 3127. Styre. See Stire. Digitized by <^.OOQLe 196 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Styrtez. See Stertez. Subarbe, 8. suburbs, 4043 ; pi. subarbis, 3122, subbarbes, 2466. Subgettez. See Sugett. Suerddes. See Swerde. Sugett, 87, Sugette, 3138, 8. subject ; pi. subgettez, 2314. Suggoume, v. sojourn, 153, 354, 1335; 3 s. suggeourns, 54, suggournez, 624. Sulayne, adj. alone, 2592. Sulde, v. subj. pret. should, 72, 213, 214. Sundyre, v. part, separate, 7. Suppowelle, v . support, 2818. Supprisede, 2616, Supprissede, 1845, Supprysede, 3797, Suppryssede, 1951, Supprysside, 1420, p.p. taken unawares, overtaken, surprised. Surcott, 3252, Surcotte, 2434, s. surcoat. Surepel, s. cover, 3317. Surgyne, 8. surgeon, 4311. Surrawns, 8. assurance, security, 3181. Surs, s. rising, rise, 1978, 2511, 3468. Suteleste, adj. subtlest, 808. Suyche. See Swylke. Suyte, 179, 210, 528, Suytte, 3139, s. suit. Swafres, v. 3 s. staggers, 3970. Sc. swaver, to walk feebly. Jamieson. Swaiters, v. 3 s. (1) 3924. Swange, 8. loins, 1129. Swangene, v. pret. pi. swung, 2146. Swanke, v. pret. toiled, 2961, 3361. Swape, s. blow, stroke, 314. Swappes, 4244, Swappez, 1126, 1129, v. 3 s. smites, strikes ; pi. swappene, 1464, swappez, 1465; pret. swappede, 1795. Swarthe, 8. sward, grassy ground, 1126, 1466, 2145, 2960. Swathes, s. pi. 2508. Swayne, s. 3360. Swefene, 8. dream, 812; pi. swefennys, 3228. Swefnynge, s. dreaming, 759. Swelte, v. die, 716, 813 ; 3 s. sweltes, 2961, faints, 3969; pi. swelltez, 1466 ; pret. swelte, 2982; i. p. sweltand, 2146, swelltande, 1465. Sweperly, adv. quickly, nimbly, 1128, 1465. Sc. swipper , quick, swift, nimble. Jamieson. Sweppene, p.p. swept, 2508. Swerde, s. sword, 47, 715 ; pi. swerddez, 1253, suerddes, 314. Swete, 3703, 4223, Swett, 2145, Swette, 3360, s. life. Swetly, 3970, Swettly, 1297, adv. sweetly. Sweyftly, adv. swiftly, 3703. Sweys, v. 3 s. sways, 57; pi. 1467, 3676, 4273. Swiche. See Swylke. Swoghe, s. swaying motion, 759. Swoghe, s. swoon, 1467. Swoughe, s. whirr, 1127. Swoune, s. swoon, 3969. Swounes, v. 3 8. swoons, 1127 ; i. p. swounande, 1467, 2960. Swowynge, s. sound, 931. Swyer, s. squire, 2959, 3703. Swykede, 1795, Swykkede, 3361, v. pret. deceived. Swylke, 403, Swiche, 3000, Suyche, 529, Slyke, 3719, Siche, 967,1031, Syche, 76,226, adj. such. Swym, s . swood, 4246. Swynge, s. swing, 3360, 3676, 4223. Digitized by <^.OOQLe GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 197 Swyre-bane, s. neckbone, 2959. S wytlie, adv. quickly, swiftly, 185, 409, 715, very, 1949; as swythe = immediately, 813. Sybb, Sybbe. See Sibb. Sybredyne, 8. kindred, 691, 4145. Syche. See Swylke. Sydlyngs, adv. sidelong, sideways, 1039, 1043. Sydys, 8. pi. sides, 2148. Syene. See Syne. Syghande,3794, Sygbeande, 3891, i.p. sighing. Syland, 1297, Sylande, 3794, 4340, i. p. flowing. Syluerene, adj. silvern, made of silver, 1949. Sylure, 8. canopy, 3194. Symple, adj. mean, 684, few, 967. Syne, 8. sin, 3315, 3986. Syne, 85, 1182, 3216, Syene, 4083, Synne, 3435, adv. afterwards. Synechalle, 1871, Syneschalle, 1910, s. seneschal. Synglere, 8. boar, 3123. Syngne, 8. sign, 3075. Syngulere, adj. single, 826. Synkande, i. p. sinking, 3705. Synne. See Syne. Syr, Syre. See Sir. Syte, 1060, Sytte, 1305, s. grief, sorrow. Sythene, 184, 1336, Sythine, 159, Sythyne, 56, 169, Sethene, 1977, adv. afterwards. Sythis, 8. pi. times, 2216. Syttyne, p.p. sat, 511. Tabylle, s. table, 53. Tachementez, s. pi. attachments, 1568. Tachesesede (?), 821. Tacle, 3679, Takle, 2444, Takelle, 3618, s. tackle. Taghte, 178, Tawghte, 3202, adj. taught, trained. Tak, v. take, 144; take, 307, proceed, go; 3 5. tase, 1890, takes; pi. tas, 3203; pret. tuke, 328, 1359, 2242 ; p.p. takyne, 73, gone. Tale, s. number, 317, 335, 2933, account, 4094. Talmes, v. 3 s. falters, 2581. Du. Talmen , to loiter, linger, haggle, waver, act tediously, be irresolute or in suspense. Sewell's Diction - ary. Talounez, s. pi. talons, claws, 800. Targe, s. round shield; pi. targez, 732. The targe was often emblazoned, hence at line 89, targe = arms on a seal. Tarsse, s. kind of cloth, 3189. Tarye, v. tarry, 1703. Tas, Tase. See Tak. Tauernez, 8. pi. taverns, 1568. Taulde, told, 2618. Tawghte. See Taghte. Temez, v. 3 s. empties, 1801. Temperalle, 8. 2409. Tempeste, v. 2408. Temporaltee, s. 1570. Tende, adj. heedful, attentive, intent, 1916. Sc. tent. Tende, adj. tenth, 73. Tene = ten, 1421. Tene, s. injury, wrong, grief, vexation, 1396, 1956. A.S. teona. Tenefulle, adj. harmful, grievous, 4280. Tenefully, adv. grievously, 272, 2345. Tenes, v. pi. harm, vex, annoy, 264. A.S. teonan. Tente, 8. heed, attention, 3586, 4094. Digitized by <^.OOQLe 198 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Tentyly, adv. heedfully, attentively, 3618. Teraunt, s. tyrant, wicked or cruel man, 842; pi. terauntez, 583, tirauntez, 1801, tyrauntez, 2408. Terez, v. 3 s. tears, 800; pi. terez, 1143. Teris, 3886, Terys, 3794, s. pi. tears. Tha, 77, 157, 377, Thaa, 1993, pi. of the. Thai, 1141, 1144, Thay, 1160, They, 22, pron. n. pi. ; gen. thaire, 1143, 1396, theire, 13, 20, thiere, 160, 3191, thire, 19; obj. thaime, 396, thame, 329, 923, thaym, 2276, 2280, theme, 169, theym, 1886, theyme, 1889. Than, 1212, 2153, Thane, 64, 196, adv. then. Thar, 881, Thare, 60, 102, adv. there; thare = where, 59, 1185. Thare, impers. v. 403 ; hym thare = he needs. Thare-aftyre, adv. thereafter, after that, 1495, 2028. Thareby,190, Thar-by, 1186, adv. thereby, beside. Thare-fore, adv. therefore, 2042. Thare-in, 1242, Thare-ine, 1254, adv. therein. Thas, 58, 432, Thase, 236, 434, adj. those. Thedyre, adv. thither, 2488. Thee, s. thigh, 1046 ; pi. theese, 1100. Theeffe, 8. thief, 1150. Thees, Theis, Theise. See This. Then, 315, Thene, 1344, conj. than. Ther, adv. there, 884; where, 1131, 1219; there = where, 476. Ther-aftyre, adv. thereafter, 1115, according to it, 339. Ther-to, adv. thereto, also, 181. Ther-vndyre, qdv. under it, 1156. Thes. See This. Thethene, adv. thence, 4345. Thewes, s. pi. virtues, good qualities, 21. Theyne = thine, 3403. Theys. See This. Thie = thee, 104. Thiere, Thire. See Thai. Thies, Thiese. See This. Thikke, s. thick, dense part of a crowd, 3755; pi. tbykkys, 2216. Thir, Thire. See This. Thirllede, Thirllez. See Thyrle. This, pron. or adj. 410; pi. thees, 154, 167, theis, 1604, theise, 2044, thes, 48,1356, theys, 2810, thies, 104, 264, thiese, 2723, thise, 152, 263, thys, 52, thir, 1161, 1164, thire, 993. Thof. See Thoghe. Thoghe, 477, 1329, Thof, 2443, Thofe, 109, 460, Thoffe, 2688, conj. though. Thoghte. See Thynkes. Thole, v. suffer, endure, permit, 676, 4022, 4150. Thoos, 156, 158, Thos, 42, 2200, pron. those. Thorowe, Thorughe. See Thurghe. Thorowely, adv. thoroughly, 3294. Thorowowte, prep, throughout, right through, 2170, 2986. Thosande,1400, Thosannde, 1537, Thowsande, 1421, s. thousand. Thourghe. See Thurghe. Thourghe-gyrde, p.p. smitten through, pierced, 3683. Thra, 3295, Thraa, 249, a dj. K vehement, eager; superf. tnraeste, 3756. Thrange, 8 throng, 2217. Thrawe, 8. throe, pang, 1150. Threpide, 930, Threppede, 2216, v.pret. strove. Digitized by AnOOQle GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 199 Thrette, v. threaten, 3295 ; 3 8. thretys, 249. Thretty, adj. thirty, 3295. Thristis, v. pi. thrust, 3755. Throly, adv. vehemently, 1150, 2217, 4332. Thronge, v . press, 3755. Throo, adj . vehement, 3294. Throstilles, 8. pi. throstles, 930. Throwene, p.p. thrown, 3694. Throwghe, Thrughe, Thrughte. See Thurghe. Thryftye, adj . 317. Thryngez, v. 3 8. presses, squeezes, 1150, 2217. Thrystez, v. 3 8. thrusts, 1151. Thryttene, adj. thirteen, 2216. Thurghe, 1, 215, 499, Thourghe, 1792, 2253, Thorughe, 495, Thorowe, 5, 24, Throwghe, 1772, Thrughe, 1413, Thrughte, 390, prep, through. A.S. \>urh. Thurghe-girde, p.p. smitten through, 1461. Thursse, 8. giant, 1100. A.S. \>yrs. Thykkys. See Thikke. Thynkes, 366, 1335, Thynkys, 350, Thynkkys, 2440, impers. v. * seems; seems good, 996; pret. thoghte, 495,2479, thoughte, 3230. Thyrle, v. pierce, 1413 ; 3 s. thirllez, 2167; pret. thirllede, 1858, 3890; p.p. thyrllede, 2238, 2688. Tliy^andez. See Tydandis. Tide, s. time, 3902 ; pi. tydez, 753. Til, 6, 36, Tille, 10, 130, Tylle, 3608, prep. to. Tiltine, v. pi. tilt, topple, 1144. Tite, 3886, 3887, Tyte, 737, 841, Tytt, 744, Tytte, 1891, 2583, adv. quickly; alls tite = as quickly, at once, immediately. Tittez, v. 3 s. makes totter, 1801. To, adv. too, 957, 1200. To, conj. till, 3182. To-briste, v. burst asunder, 3982. To-geders, 1050, To-gedirs, 1000, To-gedyre, 2718, adv. together. Togers, 8. pi. clothes, 178. Toges, s. pi. togas, 3189. Toile, 8. tussle, broil, 1802. Sc. tuilyie. Toile, s. customs, 1568. Tolowris, 8. pi. Cl) tool-makers, 3618. To-mome, adv. to-morrow, 1587. Tonges, 8. pi. tongues (of a dragon’s tail), 821. Toppe, s. top, 1144, head, 801. Toppe-castelles, 8. pi. 3616. To-rattys, v. pi. rend asunder, 2235. Torfere, 1956, 3451, 3567, Tourfere, 2582, s. harm, mischief. Tomys, 3015, Toumes, 1891, v. 3 s. turns; pret. tomede, 3203, toumede, 1052. To-ruscheez, v. pi. dash asunder, 1428. To-stonayede, p.p. utterly stunned, 1436. Tother, adj. other, 234, 3283. The first t is really part of the article, for the tother = that other, just as the tone = that one. Toure, s. tower, 245, 1890 ; pi. toures, 39, towrez, 1569, towrres, 3153. Tourfere. See Torfere. Towche, v. touch, 2067, concern, tell; 3 s. towchez, 800,1570,1591; pret. towchede, 770, towchide, 841; i.p. towchande, 263. Towne, adj. trained, 178. To-wrythes, v. 3 s. writhes, 3920. Towyne, v. pi. draw, haul, 3655. Digitized by <^.OOQLe 200 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Toylez, 732, Toyelys, 3616, s. pi. (P) gear, tools. Traise, v. 3 s. draws, 1629. Traistely, 3568, Traystely, 1976, adv. safely, securely. Traistez. See Trayste. Trappede, p.p. covered with trappings, 1757, 2150. Trauaillede, p.p. who have toiled, 1947. Trauaylande, 1684, Trauelande, 1630, i. p. travelling. Trauayle, s. labour, 3566. Traylede, p.p. 250. Trayne, s. stratagem, 1630, 3901, 4192. Trayne, v. entice, deceive, 1683. Trays, s. trace, track, 4055. Trayste, v. trust, 669; 3 s. traistez, 1987, 2870 j pret. traystede, 1955, 3569. Traystely. See Traistely. Traytoure, s. traitor, 2173, 4055. Trayuellede, p.p. toiled, laboured, 2357. Trebute, 114, 2611, Trebutte, 2344, Tribute, 271, Tributte, 2357, s. Tremlande, i. p. trembling, 3899. Trenchande, adj. trenchant, sharp, 3856. Tresone, 8. treason, treachery, 1629, 2017. Tresoure, s. treasure, 668, 886, 991. Trete, 8. (?) row, 3655. Trett, 250, Trette, 263, 878, 2932, v. treat; pp. tretyd, 407, tretide, 3191. Treunt, v. steal a march, 1976 ; pret. treuntede, 3900; p.p. treunt, 2017. Trew, 263, 992, Trewe, 879, 2932, s. truce. Trewage, s. tribute, 2358. Trewe, adj. true, 16. Trewghe. See Trewthe. Trewly, adv. truly, 2610. Trewthe, 3437, Trewghe, 3929, s. truth. Treyntis (?), 4056. Trine. See Tryne. Trippe, v. trip, move lightly, 3713. Trisene, v. pi. trice (nautical term), 832. Tristily, 407, Trystily, 2357, adv . trustily, faithfully. Tristly, 731, 1262, Trystly, 832, adv. confidently, boldly Trofle, 2932, Trofulle, 1702, v. trifle; i. p. trofelande, 1683. Trome, v. troop, 3592. A.S. truma> a troop. Trompede, adj. having trumpets, 3713. Trompes, 1757, Tromppez, 1484, 1947, Troumppes, 4107, Troumppez, 1702, Trumppez, 832, 8. pi. trumpets. Trouflynge, s. trifling, 114. Trouthe, 164, 1314, Trowthe, 1063,1807, Trowhe, 3804, s. troth, fidelity; pi. trowhes, 2325. Trow, 89, Trowe, 250, 887, 1693, v. believe. Trowhe. See Trouthe. Trowmpynge, 8. trumpeting, 3191. Trufles, 8. pi. trifles, 89. Trumppede, v. pret. trumpeted, 407. Trumppez. See Trompes. Trusse, v. truss, pack up, 3592, stow; inf. trussene, 1976; pi. trussez, 731, trvssene, 3655; p.p. trussede, 1702. Trvsselle, s. packs, bundles, 3655. Tryede, v. pret. picked out, selected, 1947. Ir. trier. Digitized by AnOOQle GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 201 Trymblyde, v. pret. trembled, 270. Tryne, v. go, proceed; trine, 1757; 3 s. trynes, 3592, trynys, 4055, trynnys, 3901; (?) pret. pi. tryne, 3l92; i.p. trynande, 4189. Trystily. See Tristily. Trystly. See Tristly. Tuke. See Tak. Tumbellez, v. pi. tumble, 1143. Tunge, 8. tongue, 1250, 1891. Turmenttez, v. 2 8. tormentest, 1954; 3 8. turmentez, 3153. Tuskes, 1075, 3234, Tuskez, 791, 8. pi. teeth. Twa, adj. two, 171, 335. Twys, adv . twice, 716. Tydandis, 3450,3899, Tythdands, 264, Thy^andez, 1567, 8. pi. tidings. Tyde, v. betide, happen, 879; 3 s. tyddes, 1703; p.p. tydd, 3654, tydde, 3451. Tydez. See Tide. Tykes, 8. pi. dogs, 3642, 4258. Tylle. See Til. Tymbyrde, p.p . built, devised, 3742. Tymede, v. pret. happened, 3150. Tyne, v . lose, 2933 ; 2 8. tynnez, 1954; p.p. tynt, 272, 770, tynte, 1917, 2345, = perished, 4281. Tyrauntly, adv. like a tyrant, 271. Tyseday, 8. Tuesday, 3900. Tyte, Tytt. See Tite. Tythdands. See Tydandis. Valyaunt, adj. valiant, 2093. Yassallage, s. service, 2048. Yawewarde, 8. vanguard, 1981. Velany, 8. villany, 298, 326. Yencows. See Yenquyse. Yenemus, 299, Yenymmos, 4124, adj. venomous. Yenge, v. avenge, 867; p.p. vengede, 298, 2264. Yenquyse, 1984, Yencows, 4297, r. vanquish; pret. venqwiste, 2093; p.p. venqueste, 3765, venquiste, 325, venqwyste, 2065. Yentelde, v. pret. spread sail to the wind, 737. Yenymmos. See Yenemus. Yernacle, 8. a handkerchief said to have the print of Christ’s face upon it, 297, 307. Yemage, 8. a kind of drink, 204, 3166. Yerrayely, 3765, Yerreilly, 308, adv. truly. Yerrede, p.p. spotted, 2573. Yertely, adv. readily, 3168. Yertous, Yertouous. See Yertuouse. Yertue, 8. virtue, 215, 4297. Yertuouse, 204, Yertuus, 297, Yertouous, 3055, Yertous, 5, adj. virtuous. Yescounte, Yescownte. See Yicounte. Yesage, 8. visage, 137, 3055. Yesare, 910, Yesere, 3054, s . visor. Yesettez, v. 3 8. visits, 1726. Yesselle, 8. 3071. Yestoure, 8. clothing, 3071. Yetaile, 8. victuals, 3071. Yetaile, v. victual, 353; 3 8. vetailles, 3165. Yiage, 8. journey, expedition, 2037, 2493. Yice, 8. fault, defect, 911. Yicounte, 3167, Yiscownte, 2047, Yescounte, 2024, Yescownte, 1984, Yyscownte, 2050, 8. Yisez, v. 3 8. purposes, 3167. Ymbeclappes, v. 3 8. embraces, 1779. Digitized by <^.OOQLe 202 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Ymbegrippys, v. 3 8. grasps, 3758; pret. ymbegrippede, 3944. Ymbelappes, v. 3 s. surrounds, 1819 ; pret. vmbylappyde, 3785. Ymbrere, 8 . part of a helmet, the movable part which shelters the face, 943, 2247, 3952. Yn-abaiste, adj. unabashed, not cast down, 1378. Ynblysside, adj . unblest, not marked with the sign of the cross, 962. Ynblythely, adv. sadly, 1434. Ynbrydilles, v. pi. unbiidle, 2509. Ynclede, p.p. unclothed, 4202. Yncouere, v. uncover, 2710; pret. vncouerde, 739. Yncouthe, 1902,3449, Yncowthe, 3514, adj. unknown, strange. Yncowpylle, v. uncouple, 3999. Yndir-takande, i. p. enterprising, 2723. Yndone, p.p. 1722, 3752, 3966. Yndrone, 2840, 3077, Yndroune, 462, s. Yndyrtakynge, s . 3187. Yne-made, adj . unmade, 2507. Ynfaire, 303, 779, 1045, Vnfayre, 2171, adv. badly, ill, unpleasantly. Ynfaye, adj. unharmed, sound, 2796. Ynfers, adj. unfierce, tame, 4122. Ynfondyde, adj. untried, 2485. Ynfraistede, 2861, Ynfraystede, 2736, adj. untried. Ynfrely, adv. (1) ignobly, 780. Ynlordly, adj . 1313 ; adv . 1267. Ynmete, adj. unmeet, 4070. Ynquellyde, adj. unkilled, 3810. Ynrekene, adj. (1) unpleasant, 3754. Vnresonable, adj. 3452. Ynryghttwyslye, adv. unrighteously, 329. Ynsaughte, 1910, Ynsawghte, 1306, 1457, 4140, adj. Ynsaughtely, 1501, Ynsaughtyly, 1847, adv. Ynsekyrly, adv. unsafely, 966. Ynsemly, adv. unseemlily, 1044. Ynsene, adj. unseen, 3114. Ynslely, ado. unskilfully, clumsily, 979. Ynsownde,ac?/. 3290, 3931, 3942. Ynsparely, 3160, Ynsparyly, 235, adv. unsparingly. Yntenderly, 1144, Yntendirly, 2575, ado. Yntrewe, adj. untrue, faithless, 4227. Yntrewely, adv. dishonestly, 886. Ynuenquiste, adj. unvanquished, 2049. Ynwemmyde, adj. unspotted, spotless, 3801. Ynwittyly, adv. unwisely, 3802. Ynwynly, adv. unjoyfully, unpleasantly, 955,1302, 1481, 3562. Ynwyse, adj. 3817. Yoide, 309, Yoyde, 215, 2049, 2094, v. pass out, pass away; 3 s. voydes, retreats, 3764, voydez, withdraws, 1974; pi. voydez, quit, 3168. Youte, 137, Yowt, 3054, 8. mien. Lat. vultus. Yoyde, adj. empty, vain, 10, (?) open, 911. Yoyde, Yoydes, Yoydez. See Yoide. Ypbrayde, v. 1930. Ypcynes, 8. pi. (1) 3675. Ype = up, 1119, 1877. Yrayllede, p.p. 2568. Perhaps for “ Vervelled, or Varvelled having small rings attached.” BoutelVi Heraldry , p. 88. Digitized by <^.OOQLe GLOSSAKIAL INDEX. 203 Yse, v. practise, 1843. Vtas, 8. 625. “ The eighth day, or the space of eight days, after any festival.” Ealliwell. Yttere, adv. further out, 2438. Vtters, v. 3 8. dismisses, 418. Vttirly, adv. 3966. Yys, 3617, Yyse, 2424, 8. screw. Crossbows were drawn back by means of a screw. Wache, v. watch, 547; inf. wacchene, 613; p.p. wachede, 1613. Wache, s. watch, 2499; pi. wacches, 1356. Wafulle, adj. woeful, sorrowful, 950, 955. Wagande, i. p. wagging, waving, 3660. Wage, s. pay, 302. Wage, 547, Wagge, 333, 1615, v. hire, engage; wage, stake, 2967. Wagene, v. wager, 2445. Wakkens, 2370, Wakkenyse, 257, Waknez, 806, v. 3 s. awakes; wakkenysse, wakens, 3562 ; pret. wakkenyde, awoke, 3392. Walde, v. pret. would, 339, 342, wouldest, 876, 1035. Wale, 8. gunwale, 740. Wale, v. choose, 181. Wale, adj. choice, 2148. Wale, adj. eddying, surging, 741, 763. Walkande, i. p. walking, 762, 3479. Walkyne, s. welkin, sky, 787. Walle, s. wave, 493. Ger. welle. Walopande, i. p. galloping, 2147, 2827. Walowes, v. pi. wallow, roll, 1142; pret. walewede, 3838. Walsche, adj. Welsh, 320, 2044. Wandrethe, 323, 2370, Wanedrethe, 384, 8. woe, sorrow. Wandsomdly, adv. (?) sorrowfully, 4012. Wandyrs, v. 3 s. wanders, 798; i.p. wanderande, 763. Wane, adj. wan, dusky, dark, 492. A.S. wan. Wane. See Wyne. Wapene, 1106, Wapyne, 1119, **. weapon; pi. wapynez, 2137, wapyns, 312. War. See Ware. Warantizez, s.pl. guarantees, 1614. Wardane, 3523, Wardayne, 650, 2494, s. warden. Warde, 8. ward, 2480, custody, 1613. Wardede, p.p. guarded, 1614. Wardrop, 4203, Wardrope, 901, 2622, 8. wardrobe. Ware = where, 1054. Ware, v. pret. pi. were, 18, 177; subj. pret. 1 s. warre, 2647; 2 s. ware, 964; 3 s. ware, 73, war, 976; pi. ware. Ware, 19, Warre, 1973, 2045, adj. wary, cautious, aware. A.S. wobr. Warely, adv. cautiously, 4026. Waresche, v. he healed, recover, 2186. Warlawe, 948, 958, Warlow, 1140, Werlaughe, 3771, s. warlock, wizard; also, a wicked man; pi. warlaws, 613. Wames, v. 3 s. refuses, denies, 700. Warpe, 150, Werpe, 9, v. throw, cast; pi. warpes, 2746; warpes awaye = make off; pret. warpe, 901. Was, v. pret. pi. were, 1415. Wasternne, s. desert place, wilderness, 3233. See Wasturne in Alliterative Poems , B. 1674. A.S. western. Wate. See Wiet. Digitized by <^.OOQLe 204 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. Wathe, 8. way, path, 3233. See 7Fo\>e$ in Alliterative Poem , A. 151. A.S. wa$u. Wathe, s. harm, hurt, 2668. See Wo\>e in Alliterative Poems, B. 855. Wathely, adv. badly, 2090, 2186. Watte. See Wiet. Watyre, s. water, 1299, 1358. Watyre-mene, s. pi. mariners, 7 41. Wauerynge, s. 2224. Wawarde, s. vanguard, 1767. See Avanttwarde. Wawhte, (?) 3480. Waxe, v . grow, 4322. Wayfare, s. course, 1797. Wayfe, v. wander, stray, 960. Waykly, ado. weakly, 697. Wayte, v. watch, look out for, 164, 1807; 3 s. wayttes, 2979; inf. wayttene, 1973. Weches, s. pi. witches, 613. Wedde, p.p. wedded, 700. Wedes, 1365, Wedez, 168, 500, Wedys, 2429, s. pi. weeds, garments. Wedirwyns. See Wyderwyne. Wedowe, s. widow, 950, 4285 ; pi. wedewes, 3154. Weende. See Wende. Weife. See Wif. Weilde. See Welde. Weile. See Wele. Weisely. See Wyesly. Wekyrly, adv. watchfully; hence, in a lively manner, briskly, 2104. A.S. wacorlice , watchfully. Welde, 3090, Weilde, 650, v . rule; possess, 2967. Wele, s. riches, wealth, 401, 653, weal, 4100. Wele, 170, 230, 321, Weile, 1788, adv. well. Welle, 8. spring, well, 540, 882. Welle, v. spring up, bubble up, boil; 3 s. wellys, flows, 3819; pret. wellyde, 3377; pp . wellyde, boiled, 1736. Welte, v. pret. overturned, 3152. Welters, 1140, Welterys, 890, v. 3 s. rolls; pi. welters, 1142 ; i. p. welterande, 2147. Welthes, s. pi. 3157. Wende. See Wene. Wende, 302, 1299, Weende, 2445, 2493, v. go; 2 s. weyndez, 450; 3 s. wendes, 614, wendez, 701, weyndes, 2185; pret. went, 1301. Wene, v. think, suppose; 2 s. wenes, 1806, wenez, 963; pret. w'ende, 2121. Wenges, 768, Wengez, 819, 926, s. pi. wings. Wepede, v. pret. wept, 1920; i. p. wepand, 2679, 3561. Werdes, 3889, Weredes, 385, s. pi. fates, destinies Werdez. See Werlde. Were, adv. where, 3692. Were, 22, 33, 257, Werre, 516, 621, s. war. Weredes. See Werdes. Weres = veers (?), 3054. Weries. See Wery, v. Werke, s. work; pi. werkes, 3, 19. Werkkes, v. 3 s. aches, 2689 ; i. p. werkand, 1797, 2148. Werlaughe. See Warlawe. Werlde, s. world, 5, 708 ; gen. sg. werdez, 674. Werpe. See Warpe. Werraye, 546, Werreye, 657, v. make war, war upon ; pi. werraves, 3447; pret. werrayede, 2045,2215; i. p. werrayande, 2089, wcrreyand, 2599. Werre. See Were. Digitized by AnOOQle GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 205 Werryde, v. pret. wore, 3872; p.p. werede, worn, 2930. Wery, 699, 3155, Werye, 4286, v. curse; 3 s. weries, 3888; p.p. weryd, 959. Wery, adj. weary, 492, 3392. Weryede, p.p. wearied, 796. Wesche, v. pret. washed, 231; p.p. weschene, 1301. Wetene, Wette. See Wiet. Wette, v. pret. wetted, 2332. Weyffe. See Wif. Weyndes, Weyndez. See Wende. Weyne = wine, s . 161. Weysse. See Wiese. Whame, 1202, Whayme, 770, pron. whom. Whanne. See Wyne. Whare, adv. where, 107, 302. Whare = were, 174, 529. Whas = was, 76, 634. Whayme. See Whame. Whedire, 3231, Whedyr, 2533, Whedyre, 962, adv. whither. Whedyre, conj . whether, 1717. Whene, 2044, Whenne, 63, adv. when. Whethire, pron . which (of two), 350. Whilde = wild, adj. 3232, 3446. Whilke, pron. which, 4194. Whilles, 1335, 1570, Whills, 1705, Whils, 1737, Whylez, 1597, conj. whilst; whilles, 1197, whills, 3908, whylles, 2132, 2511, until. WTiilome, adv. sometimes, 1145. Whitte = white, adj. 3260. Whoo = who, 1322. Whydyrewyns. See Wyderwyne. Whyeseste. See Wiese. Whyne, why—not, 703. Whyne myghte I dye = O that I might die! Wieffe. See Wif. Wielde, 5. (?) 2689. Wiese, 3035, Weysse, 2514, Wyes, 149, Wyese, 1972, Wyesse, 2745, adj. wise; superl. wyseste, 290, whyeseste, 532. Wiet, 420, Wette,' 948, Wyt, 958, v. know, know of; Is. wate, 4203, watte, 533, 2224; 2 s. wate, 3393, watte, 692, 3549 ; pi. wotte ( properly a sg. form), 4100 ; pret. wiste, 3231, wist, 4204, wyste, 339, 891; p.p. wetene, 2966, wytene, 869. Wif, 993, Weife, 652, Weyffe, 674, Wieffe, 3550, Wyefe, 3575, Wyf, 986, Wyfe, 955, Wyffe, 3082, s. woman, wife; pi. wyfes, 294. Wightenez. See Wyghtnesse. Wile, v. get away hy stealth, 3908. Wilfully, adv. 151, 3835. Wille, s. wildness, madness, 3836. Willed, p.p. strayed, astray, 3230. Wilne, v . desire; 2 s . willnez, 2224, wilnez, 3479, wylnez, 961; 3 s. wylnez, 384. A.S. wilnian. Wirche. See Wirke. Wirchipe, 2187, Wyrchip, 10, Wyrchipe, 150, s. honour; pi. wyrchippis, 22. Wirchipe, Wyrchipe, 397, v. honour; 3 s. wyrscheppez, 1059; p.p. wirchipid, 320, wyrchlpide, 257, 685. Wirchipfulle, 1356, 2231, Wyrchipfulle, 333, 650, adj . worshipful, honourable. Wirke, 339, 2187, Wyrke, 149, Wirche, 3008, Wyrche, 130, 1030, 1384, v. work, perform, do; 2 s. wirkkes, 2432; 3 s. wyrkez, 1267, wyrkkes, 1468 ; pi. wyrkes, 663 j pret. wroghte, 1796; pret. pi. wroghtene, 2137 ; pp . wroghte, 2622, 3495. Wist, Wiste. See Wiet. Wit, v. depart, 708. A.S. witan. Digitized by <^.OOQLe 206 GLOSSARIAL INDEX. With-owtene, 997, With-owttyne, 114, 139, Wythowttyne, 225, 491, prep, without; except, 849. Withstondene, v. pi. withstand, 1747; p.p. 1926. With-thy, conj. provided, on condition, 2587, 2591. Witter, v. certify, assure, 1239. Witterly, 3549, Wytterly, 324, adv. plainly, clearly, certainly. Wlonke, adj. proud, splendid, gay, 3154, 3338. A.S. wlanc , tolonc. Wode, 1266,1281, Wodde, 1359, 2219, s. wood; pi. woddez, 1974. A.S. wudu. Wode, adj. mad, raging, 3837. A.S. wod. Wodely, adv. madly, 2827. Wodewyse, adv. madly, 3817. Wokes, 8. pi. weeks, 354. A.S. vmce. Wold, 3835, Wolde, 1282, v. pret. would. See Walde. Wolfes, 3446, Woluez, 3232, s. pi. wolves. Wolf-heuede, 8. wolfs head, 1093. Wombe, s. belly, 768. A.S. toamb. Wonde, 3494, Woonde, 1615, v. hesitate; 3 s. wondis, 3833. A.S. tcandian, to fear, be awe-struck. Wonde, 8. wound; pi. wondes, 1469, 2148. Wotide, v. wound; 3 8. wondes, 2090; pret. wondide, 2231; p.p. wondede, 1853, wonddede, 1558, wondyde, 1415, 1434. Wondirliche, 3377, Wondyrlyche, 1357, adv. wonderfully. Wondsome, 8. misery, 3836. Wondyre, 8. 1166, 1342; adv. 2515. Wone, 8. dwelling, abode, 1300, 2472, 4204. Wonene. See Wyne. Wonne, v. dwell, 3910; 3 8. wonnys, 3551. Wonne, Wonnene, Wonnyne. See Wyne. Wonnynges, 8. pi. dwellings, habitations, 3157. Wonrydez, 8. pi. sorrow, grief, 707. See Wandrethe. Woo, 8. woe, 2684, 3393. Woonde. See Wonde. Worde, v. 3393. Worme, 8. reptile, 796, 798. Worows, v. 3 s. worries, kills, 958. Worthe, v. become, be, 959 992, 1306. Wortheliche, 2669, Worthilyche, 695, Worthily, 2191, adj. worthy. Worthethy = worthy, 1302. W orthily, 2231, Worthylye, 2547, adv. Wotte. See Wiet. Wraite, v. pret. wrote, 3904. Wrakfulle, adj. vengeful, 3818. Wrange, adj. wrong, left, 1480. Wraythe. See Wry the. Wreche, 1273, Wriche, 1064, Wryche, 2778, s. wretch; pi. wreches, 1446. Wrechyde, adj. wretched, 5. Wreke, 8. vengeance, 3839. Wreke, v. avenge, 321, 385; 3 8. wrekes, 2213; inf. wrekene, 151; p.p. wrokene, 2968, wrokyne, 2225. Wrethe, 8. wrath, 151, 321, 385. Wrethe, s. fold, wreath, 1093. Wrethide, v. pret. angered, 2191. Wriche. See Wreche. Wristeles. See Wrystille. Wroghte, Wroghtene. $eeWirke. Wrokene, Wrokyne. See Wreke. Wrothely, adv. fiercely, 1141, 1480, 2214 Digitized by <^.OOQLe GLOSSARIAL INDEX. 207 Wrotherayle, 8. misery, wretchedness, ruin, 3154. Wryche. See Wreche. Wryngene, v. pi. wring, 3155; p.p. wryngande, 950, 2679. Wrystille, v. wrestle, 1141; 3 8. wristeles, 890. Wry the, v. twist, writhe, turn about, 4322 ; wrythes, 1920, wryththis, 2214; pi. wrythyne, 1141; pret. wraythe, 1093. Wy, 164, 695, Wye, 2669, a. man, person; pi. wyes, 56, 336, wyese, 1300, 2656, wysse, 685. A.S. wiga, warrior; wig, war. Wyderwyne, s. adversary, 2045; pi. wedirwyns, 3818, wedirwynes, 3834, whydyrewyns, 2215. A.S. tofeerwinna. Wye, v . weigh (anchor), 740. Wyefe, Wyf, Wyfe, Wyffe. See Wif. Wyes, Wyese. See Wy. Wyes, Wyese, Wyesse. See Wiese. Wyesly, 1974, Weisely, 1613, 2599, adv. wisely. Wyghte, s. wight, man, person, 959. Wyghte, adj. vigorous, strong, 1140; comp, wyghttere, 964; su - perl, wyghteste, 290, 336, 532. Wyghtly, adv. vigorously, 553, 740. Wyghtnesse, 258, 516, 796, Wightenez, 1806, s. vigour, strength. Wykkyde, adj. evil, 3232. Wylde, 8. wild animals, 181, 657. Wylde fyre, s. 797. Wylez, 8. pi. wiles, 1504. Wylily, adv. in a wily manner, craftily, cunningly, 2746. Wylnez. See Wilne. Wynche, v. wink, wince, 2104. Wyndowes, 8. pi. some part of a helmet, probably the windhole or aventail, 911. Wyne, v. win, gain, conquer; Wynne, 516; wyne to hir speche, get to speak to her, 3908; wyne awaye, get away, 468 ; pret. wane, 33, 115, whanne, 22; p.p. wonnene, 1214, wonnyne, 26, 618, wonene, 3001, wonne, 887, 1805. Wynly, adv. pleasantly, 671, 2185, 3338. Wynlyche, adj. pleasant, 181. Wyrche. See Wirke. Wyrchip, Wyrchipfulle, &c. See Wirchipe, &c. Wyrke, Wyrkkes. See Wirke. Wysse, v. direct, guide, teach, 9, 813; 3 s. wysse, governs, 671. Wysse. See Wy. Wyste, Wyt, Wytene. See Wiet. Wythowttyne. See With-owtene. Wythsytte, v. resist, 104. Wytt, 741, Wytte, 149, s. wit. Wytterly. See Witterly. Yare, 1901. Read I^are. Yche, Ylke. See like. Ynewe, Ynowe. See Inowe. Yryne. See Irene. Yschewes, v. 3 8. issues, 610. Ythez, s. pi. waves, 741, 747, 763. 3a, adv. yea, 993, 1033. 3aldsones, 8. pi. (?) 3809. 3alowere, adj. comp, yellower, 3283. 3apely, adv. quickly, 1502. 3ates, 2471, 3atez, 2039, s. pi. gates. 3e, pron. ye, 12, 226. 3ee, 3911. Perhaps a mistake for yxes, sobs. A.S. giscian , to sob. Digitized by <^.OOQLe 208 GLOSS ABIAL INDEX. Jeffe, conj. if, 2859. Jelde, v. to yield, 1502; 3 8 . Veldes, 3809; p.p. 3oldene, 2334, 2482. • Jeldene, p.p. 1870. Probably a mistake for 1 ^oldene/ 3eme, v. keep, guard; 3 s. ^emes, 430, gemez, 938 ; pi. ^emes, 647. Jerde, 8. yard, 3254, 3280. 3ere, s. year, 522, 552. Jermys, (?) laments, 3911. A.S. gyrmian , to roar. Jerne, v. yearn, desire, lust after; 2 s. ^ernez, 1502; 3 8. 3 ernes, 1032 ; p.p. 3ernede, 2343. Jeme, adv. earnestly, eagerly, 1794, 3325, 4189. Jif, 340, 3ife, 1502, Jiff, 104, Jiffe, 4153, conj. if. Jif, 1567, Jife, 1668, Jiffe, 2323, v. give. Jis, 2324, Jise, 2585, adv. yes. 3it, 1128, 3itt, 1140, Jitte, 2109, yet. Jofe, 1938,2854. Bead ‘tbofe/ though. Joldene. See 3elde. 3ole, 8. Yule, 2628. Jolke, 8. yolk, 3283. Jomane, 8 . yeoman, 2628. Jon, 2935, 3one, 299, 336, 341, adj. yon. 3ondire, 3809, Jondyr, 2720, adv . yonder. Jour, 95, 153, 222, Jowre, 630, 683, pron. your. Jow, 15,16,3owe, 1266,you. JOHN CHILDS AND BON, PRINTERS. Digitized by <^.OOQLe Digitized by Google / Digitized by <^.OOQLe Digitized by <^.OOQLe