LANCELOT-GRAIL THE OLD FRENCH ARTHURIAN VULGATE AND POST-VULGATE IN TRANSLATION Norris J. Lacy, General Editor VOLUME II Lancelot, Part I translated by Samuel N. Rosenberg Lancelot, Part II translated by Carleton W. Carroll Lancelot, Part II translated by Samuel N. Rosenberg Garland Publishing, Inc. 4 New York and London # 1993 AUG 25 1997 © 1993 Norris J. Lacy All rights reserved Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data (Revised for vol. 2) Lancelot (Prose cycle). English. Lancelot-Grail. (Garland reference library of the humanities ; vols. 941, 1826) Includes bibliographical references (v. 1, p. XXXli-XXX1ii) Contents: v. 1. The History of the Holy Grail / translated by Carol J. Chase. The Story of Merlin / translated by Rupert T. Pickens — v. 2. Lancelot / pt. 1, 3 translated by Samuel N. Rosenberg ; pt. 2 translated by Carleton W. Carroll. 1. Lancelot (Legendary character)—Romances. 2. French prose literature—To 1500—Translations into English. 3. Merlin (Legendary character)—Romances. 4, Arthurian romances. 5. Grail—Romances. I. Lacy, Norris J. II. Title. II. Series. POMS Eero loo5 Gael 92-1674 ISBN 0-8240-7733-4 (v. 1) ISBN 0-8153-0746-2 (v. 2) Printed on acid-free, 250-year-life paper Manufactured in the United States of America Contents Preface by Norris J. Lacy LANCELOT, Part I Ie #69 Oo COI Mm oO iL. ii. Ie 14. i, 16. Iie 18. I), Zz il: King Ban of Benoic and Queen Elaine Take Flight with Their Infant Son Lancelot. . King Ban’s Realm, Despite the Efforts of His Godson Banin, Falls into the Hands of King Claudas. . Lancelot Is Kidnapped by the Lady of the Lake. . Lancelot’s Cousins Lionel and Bors of Gaunes Are Entrusted to the Faithful Pharian. - Queen Evaine of Gaunes Joins Her Sister Queen Elaine at the Royal Minster. . Background of Ninianne, the Lady of the Lake. . Pharian Surrenders Lionel and Bors to King Claudas. . Portrayal of King Claudas. . Portrayal of Lancelot as a Boy. NO, King Arthur Is Rebuked for His Indifference to Queens Elaine and Evaine and Their Children. A Messenger from the Lady of the Lake Rebukes Claudas for Holding Lionel and Bors in Prison. The Messenger of the Lady of the Lake Saves Lionel and Bors from Claudas. Lionel and Bors Are Taken to the Lake to Live with Lancelot. Pharian in Conflict with Both Claudas and the Knights of Gaunes over the Fate of Lionel and Bors. Pharian’s Nephew Lambegue Is Brought to the Lake and Observes How the Lady Cares for the Three Young Cousins. Pharian and Lambegue Are Caught in the Conflict Between the Men of Gaunes and King Claudas. The Conflict Between Claudas and the Knights of Gaunes Is Resolved, Thanks to Pharian and Lambegue. Pharian and Lambegue Rejoin the Boys, and Pharian Dies. Reassured in a Dream That the Three Young Cousins Are Alive and Well, Queen Evaine Dies. King Arthur, Receiving Banin at Court, Regrets Not Having Come to the Aid of King Ban. The Lady of the Lake and Lancelot, Now Eighteen Years Old, Discuss the Meaning of Knighthood and Then Leave for King Arthur’s Court at Camelot. ay U1 22: 48. Lancelot at Camelot: Queen Guenevere, Knighthood, the Adventure of the Wounded Knight, and Departure for Nohaut. . The New Knight Champions the Lady of Nohaut. . Lancelot, as the White Knight, Captures the Dolorous Guard and Learns His Identity. . Gawain and Nine Other Knights Go to the Dolorous Guard. . King Arthur Goes to the Dolorous Guard but Is Denied Entry. . Gawain and His Companions Are Betrayed and Captured. . Lancelot, Entranced by Guenevere, Neglects to Admit Her to the Dolorous Guard and Then Leaves the Castle Himself. . The White Knight Triumphs over the Captor of Gawain and His Companions, Then Admits Arthur and Guenevere to the Dolorous Guard but Once Again Leaves the Castle Himself. . The White Knight Frees Gawain and His Companions but Does Not Reveal His Identity. . The First Tournament Is Arranged, and Gawain Leaves Arthur’s Court in Search of His Unknown Liberator. . Lancelot Is Injured and Requires a Litter. . Gawain Encounters the Knight in the Litter but Does Not Know It Is Lancelot. . Lancelot, as the Red Knight, Takes Part in the First Tournament. . Gawain Resumes His Search for the Unknown Captor of the Dolorous Guard and His Own Liberator. . The Knight in the Litter Goes to Nohaut to Recover from His Wounds. . Gawain, Helped and Hindered by Brun the Merciless, Pursues His Attempt to Locate and Identify Lancelot. . The Knight in the Litter Leaves Nohaut. . Gawain Is Harassed by Brun the Merciless. . Lancelot Returns to the Dolorous Guard and Puts an End to Its Enchantments. . Gawain and the White Knight Both Take Part in the Second Tournament, Where Gawain Learns That the Other Is in Fact Lancelot. . Gawain Reveals to the Royal Court That the Captor of the Dolorous, Now Joyous, Guard Is Lancelot of the Lake, Son of King Ban of Benoic. . Lancelot, Bound by Oath, Kills His Host. . King Arthur Has Strange Dreams Presaging His Fall from Power. . Lancelot Is Entranced by the Sight of Queen Guenevere at Camelot. . King Arthur Receives a Challenge from Galehaut. . Lancelot, in a Lover’s Trance, Is Saved from Drowning by Yvain, Who Does Not Recognize Him but Is Subsequently Impressed by His Prowess in Battle. Lancelot Is Imprisoned by the Lady of Malehaut. LANCELOT, Part II au, 50. Arthur Is Attacked by Galehaut and Gets Advice from a Wise and Worthy Man. Lancelot and the Lady of Malehaut. Contents 61 68 1 80 82 83 84 86 90 90 Oi 93 os 96 97 98 oy) 100 101 103 106 106 107 108 109 110 113 7 Ze Contents oh O2. Do: oe. BD. 56. Od. 58. oo. 60. 61. OZ. 63. 64. 65. 66. 67. 68. 69. 70. as Gawain and Thirty-Nine Other Knights Leave Arthur’s Court in Quest of Lancelot. The End of Galehaut’s War with Arthur; the Meeting of Lancelot and Guenevere. Lancelot and Galehaut in Sorelois. Gawain and Nineteen Other Knights Leave Arthur’s Court in Quest of Lancelot. The Spring of the Pine. The Story of Hector; Segurade and the Lady of Roestoc. Gawain and Helain. The Split Shield; Hector Sets Out in Quest of Gawain. The Lady of Roestoc Learns the Identity of Her Champion. Gawain Helps to Heal His Brother Agravain. Hector’s Adventures During His Quest for Gawain. Galehaut Sends Lionel With a Message for the Queen. Gawain’s Further Adventures During His Quest for Lancelot. Lionel’s Encounter on the Way to Court; Adventures of Gawain and Sagremor. Hector Rescues Elaine the Peerless From Her Imprisonment. Lionel at Logres; Saxons and Irish Attack Scotland; Guenevere Sends Word to Lancelot. Gawain Defeats the Defenders of the Bridge into Sorelois. Hector Achieves His Quest for Sir Gawain. Galehaut Takes Lancelot to the Lost Island. Gawain and Hector Find Lancelot; The Battle of Saxon Rock. Lancelot’s Madness and Cure; Defeat of the Saxons and Irish; Lancelot, Galehaut, and Hector Become Companions of the Round Table. LANCELOT, Part III TX ao: 74. 7D. 76. ie 78. 7%, 80. The Nobility of Galehaut. Galehaut and Lancelot Return to Sorelois, Where Galehaut Hears Alarming News. Guenevere Is Accused of Imposture. Galehaut’s Plans and the Interpretation of His Dreams: Lovesickness and Destiny. Galehaut Makes Plans to Leave Sorelois in the Hands of Bademagu; Portrayal of Bademagu’s Son Meleagant. Lancelot Is Wounded by Meleagant; Guenevere Is Confronted by Her Accusers; Arthur Is Captured and Succumbs to the Wiles of the False Guenevere. Arthur Returns to Court and Proclaims the False Guenevere Queen. Lancelot, as Guenevere’s Champion, Defeats Three Foes; He Breaks with Arthur. The Imposture Is Revealed; the False Guenevere Dies; Arthur Repents and Is Reconciled First with Guenevere, Then with Lancelot. vit 126 127 149 150 153 155 164 165 170 17] 1a 17 198 205 PANE 218 Ele 220 ve | Bee 230 vila 81 82. 83. 84. 85. 86. Sue 88. 89. 90. Olli: g2. 93. eee ORY, 26. 97. Glos wi), 100. Lor, 1o2. 103: 104. 105. 106. . Gawain Is Abducted by Caradoc; Lancelot, Yvain, and the Duke of Clarence Set Out in Quest of Him. The Duke of Clarence Learns About Caradoc from His Cousin. Yvain Rescues a Young Man and His Family from a Band of Thieves. Lancelot Extricates Drian from an Enchanted Coffin and Is Warmly Received at Gay Castle. Gawain, in Caradoc’s Prison, Is Helped by a Resourceful Damsel. Galehaut Stops Lionel from Setting Out After Lancelot. The Duke of Clarence Rescues a Damsel, Defeats Four Fighters at Pintadol, and Fails at Escalon the Dark. Yvain Attempts to Rescue Sagremor and a Damsel. Melian Brings News of Lancelot to the Royal Court; Arthur and Galehaut Set Out to Rescue Gawain. Lancelot Comes to the Rescue of Yvain and Sagremor. Lancelot and Yvain, en Route to Caradoc’s Dolorous Tower, Stop at Escalon the Dark; Yvain Fails, but Lancelot Succeeds. The Duke of Clarence, Despite Warnings, Enters the Valley of No Return. Description of the Valley of No Return. The Duke of Clarence Is Held Prisoner in the Valley of No Return. Lancelot Liberates the Valley’s Prisoners but Is Abducted by Morgan the Fay. The Valley's Newly Liberated Prisoners Are Received by Kay of Estral; News of Lancelot Arrives. Lancelot, Released Provisionally, Resists Seduction by Morgan’s Damsel; He Recovers Two Bodies from a Riverbed, Then Rejoins Yvain and the Duke of Clarence. of Clarence Go Directly to the Dolorous Tower, Where They Are Captured. Recalled to Prison by Morgan the Fay. Morgan the Fay Sends a Messenger to the Royal Court to Denounce the Love of Lancelot and Guenevere; Galehaut, Lionel, and Gawain Set Out in Quest of Lancelot. Galehaut Discovers Lancelot’s Shield and Battles Successfully, Though Not Without Being Wounded, to Gain Possession of It. Morgan the Fay Releases Lancelot, but on Condition That He Not See the Queen Before Christmas. Lionel Is Led to Believe That Lancelot Is Dead, but Then Learns the Truth by Catching Sight of Him Himself; Lionel Rejoins Galehaut and They Both Go to Sorelois. Yvain Comes upon Gawain in Combat and Helps Him; They Discover Lancelot in a Tournament, but He Refuses to Return to Court with Them. Lancelot Goes to Sorelois, Only to Find That Galehaut Has Departed; He Too Leaves, but in Circumstances That Suggest Suicide. Hear the News of Lancelot’s Apparent Suicide, and Dies Heartbroken. Lancelot Confronts Caradoc’s Men at the Wicked Pass While Yvain and the Duke Lancelot Triumphs over Caradoc, Liberates Gawain and the Others, and Is Then Galehaut, at Court, Hears That Lancelot Is Back in Sorelois; He Returns, Only to Contents 281 Moye 283 285 287 290 Z| 296 298 ue) 300 303 305 306 307 312 314 319 320 523 O25 327 320 330 32 ao2 Preface Norris J. Lacy Volumes II and IIL of Lancelot-Grail present the full text of the Lancelot Proper, the longest romance by far of the five that constitute the Vulgate Cycle. This romance, which incorporates a number of reworked episodes and motifs (most notably the famous cart scene) from Chrétien de Troyes’s Le Chevalier de la charrete, narrates the infancy and youth of Lancelot (reared by the Lady of the Lake), his arrival at court and the exploits through which he establishes himself as a gifted knight, and his love for Guenevere. Ironically, as E. Jane Burns notes in her Introduction to the present translation, the Lancelot fictionalized biography both glorifies and ultimately marginalizes its hero; eventually he is displaced by Galahad (see volume I, pp. xxv—xxvi). It is the story of Lancelot’s ascension and ultimate eclipse that we present in this volume and the next; the present volume ends with the death of Lancelot’s dearest friend Galehaut. Summaries of this material, and of the entire cycle, will be included in volume V. The primary source of our translation is the nine-volume Micha edition. (Bibliographical information on editions and translations is given at the end of the Introduction to volume I.) Those familiar with that edition will recall that Micha began roughly one-third into the romance, edited the text to the end, and only then provided the opening sections. Consequently, those wishing to read the romance from beginning to end in his edition must read the volumes in the order: VII, VIII, I, II, IV, V, VI. Volume IX is an index; volume III contains “short versions” of material presented elsewhere. It should be said that, in choosing to translate the “long versions,” we do not wish to imply that they are somehow more authentic or necessarily superior to their shorter counterparts. Our decision is indeed largely arbitrary, and we hope that our translation of the Vulgate Cycle will eventually be completed by an English text of the shorter versions. The translators have made use not only of Micha’s text, but also of Elspeth Kennedy’s text for that portion of the work presented in her 1980 edition of the so-called non-cyclic Lancelot. We have occasionally referred also to Corin Corley’s translation of parts of the Kennedy edition. We have in addition used the Sommer text wherever it offered readings that the translators judged superior to Micha’s. Other sources, acknowledged in the notes, include Micha’s notes and variants and suggestions made by F. Lecoy in a review of the Micha edition. Whenever the translator departs from the Micha text, the change is documented in notes. Notes also provide information on cultural, historical, and linguistic matters, and they identify earlier or later passages to which the text refers. As in our first volume, we divide the text into chapters. We have chosen to adopt all of Micha’s chapter divisions, even though the result is often a dramatic difference in the length of chapters, from a few paragraphs to many dozens of pages. Despite that disparity, we consider that the concordance of chapter divisions will facilitate the work of readers who might wish to consult the Old French original. It should be noted, however, that chapter numbers do not always coincide: Micha numbered his chapters consecutively through volume VI (I-CVIII); then, with volume VII, he reverted to Ia in order to present the beginning of the romance. Consequently, our chapter numbers agree with his only for our Parts I-II (chapters 1~71 = Ia— LXXIa); Micha’s chapter I is then our chapter Up We have divided the Lancelot into six sections. The following table lists the translators, their portions of the text, and the Micha chapters they have translated. Volume II Part 2 ee ee Part 1 ere Samuel N. Rosenberg ere Carleton W. Carroll Preface Micha VII, chapters Ia~XLVIIa Micha VIII, chapters XLIXa—LXXla , elie 3 Chapters 72-106 Part 4 = Il Chapters 107-140 Part 5 Chapters 141-157 Part aa Lie wiittst= 1Otemin ser Cluechapter ((eja, “Corresponds to Micha VII:Ia; Sommer III:1-8; Kennedy 1-7”) situates the text in Micha’s, Sommer’s, and, where appropriate, Kennedy’s editions. The reference is to Micha’s chapter number (hence, in this example, chapter la from volume VII), but to page numbers for Sommer and Kennedy. In addition to following Micha’s chapter divisions, we have inserted his page numbers, enclosed within brackets, into our translation. The number precedes the translation of the page in question. Moreover, wherever our notes offer cross-references to earlier or later material, we have indicated ourchapter number in Arabic numerals—to distinguish our chapters from Micha’s, identified by Roman numerals—and have most often included Micha’s specific page number in brackets; e.g., “See chapter 23, p. [305].” Reference is thus to our chapter 23 (Micha’s XXIIIa) and to Micha’s p. 305. > The reader is referred to the Preface to volume I for information on our approach to translating, on problems of Old French syntax Samuel N. Rosenberg Roberta L. Krueger William W. Kibler Chapters | Carleton W. Carroll Micha V, chapters LXXXVII-XCIX and yaa orl Micha VI, chapters C—CVIII Micha I, chapters I-XXXV Micha II, chapters XXXVI-LXIX Micha IV, chapters LXX-LXXXIV and Micha V, chapters LXXXV-LXXXVI and style, and on the effect we are seeking. It will suffice to note here that we wish to produce a text that is accessible to twentieth-century readers and devoid of the systematic archaisms that would shift the text into an artificial, “fairytale” register. Of course, for modern readers, a degree of archaic or exotic flavor necessarily attaches to the terminology relating to castles and court life, to weapons and warfare. We have not hesitated to include some comparatively technical vocabulary concerning those subjects. Wherever the resulting English word struck us as rare or arcane, we have provided a note to explain the term or concept. In the Preface to volume I, we acknowledged, however inadequately, our major debts to scholars, institutions, and assistants. We are pleased to renew that acknowledgment here and to express our gratitude also to many others who simply greeted the announcement of this project with enthusiasm and offered encouragement during the long process of translating and producing volumes I and, now, II of the LancelotGrail project. LANCELOT, PART I translated by Samuel N. Rosenberg Lancelot, Part I 1. King Ban of Benoic and Queen Elaine Take Flight with Their Infant Son Lancelot.! In the borderland between Gaul and Brittany, there were once two kings who were brothers and whose wives were sisters. One of the two kings was named Ban of Benoic and the other, Bors of Gaunes. King Ban was an old man and his wife, young; she was a beautiful and good lady and loved by all* people. She had had by him only one child, a boy whose baptismal name was Galahad but who was called Lancelot. Why he was called Lancelot the story will explain later on, for this is not the time or place.? The story moves ahead, then, and tells that King Ban had a neighbor whose lands bordered on his in the direction of Berry, which was at that time called Terre Deserte, the Land Laid Waste. His neighbor was named Claudas and was lord of Bourges [2] and the country all around. Claudas was.a king, a very fine knight and clever man, but he was treacherous as well; he was a vassal of the king of Gaul, the land now called France. Claudas’s kingdom was called the Land Laid Waste because it had been laid waste by Uther Pendragon and by Aramont, known as Hoel, who at that time was lord of Brittany. Aramont was overlord of Gaunes and Benoic and all the land down to the borders with Auvergne and Gascony, and he should have been overlord of the kingdom of Bourges. But Claudas did not recognize the claim and refused his service, acknowledging the king of Gaul as his overlord instead. At that time Gaul was subject to Rome, and all its kings, chosen by election, sent it tribute. When Aramont saw that Claudas rejected his lordship, he went to war against him; but Claudas had the help of the king of Gaul and all his forces, and so Aramont lost much in a lengthy struggle. Then Aramont came to Uther Pendragon, who was king of Great Britain, and became his liegeman on condition that he take command of his war. Thus Uther Pendragon crossed the sea with all his forces. The news came to them that all the nobility of Gaul had rallied to Claudas against Aramont, who was arriving with Uther Pendragon. Then Aramont and Uther Pendragon attacked Claudas, defeated him, stripped him of all his land, and drove him out; and the land, in every direction, ! Corresponds to Micha VII:Ia; Sommer III:1-8; Kennedy 1-7. 2411” as in Micha variants, Kennedy 1, and Lecoy 377. Micha and Sommer 3 have “good.” Here and in following notes, “Micha variants” are those reported at the bottom of the relevant page of Micha VI; “Kennedy” denotes vol. I (text) of Kennedy’s edition; and “Lecoy” refers to the review of Micha VII in Romania 103 (1982), 376-384. 3A brief explanation of the choice of “Lancelot” is given in chapter 108. The loss of “Galahad” is not explained until the end of chapter 149. was so utterly devastated that no two stones remained together in any fortress, [3] except in Bourges, which was saved from fire and destruction by an order from Uther Pendragon, ever mindful that he had been born there. After that, Uther Pendragon returned to Brittany and, when he had stayed there awhile, went on to Great Britain; and from then on, Brittany was subject to the kingdom of Logres. When King Aramont died, and Uther Pendragon, too, and the land of Logres came into the hands of King Arthur, wars broke out in Great Britain in many places and King Arthur was being attacked by most of his barons. It was at the beginning of his reign, and he had not long been married to Queen Guenevere; he had much to do on all fronts. It was then that Claudas, who had long been inactive, went to war again, for he had recovered all his land as soon as King Aramont had died. He began to make war on King Ban of Benoic, partly because he was close by and partly because Ban had been a vassal of Aramont, who had deprived him of his land for such a long time, and had done him great harm as long as he could. At that time, there came from Rome a consul of great renown, Pontius Anthony, who aided Claudas along with all the forces of Gaul and its dependencies. They succeeded in taking possession of King Ban’s city of Benoic and all the rest of his land except a castle of his named Trebe, which was at the edge [4] of his territory and was so well fortified that, apart from starvation or treason, it had nothing to fear. But one day his enemies were storming a castle of his that was less than three leagues away from Trebe;* he went off to rescue it and regain control. When he saw that the invaders were already within the walls, he struck at them with his very brave knights; and he himself was well known for his extraordinary bravery. Right there they killed many of the enemy knights and managed to stop the assault; the whole army then set out after King Ban and his men and made them flee. But they had already remained there too long, for Pontius Anthony, with all his men, who had gathered in the forest, now came out to attack them, and their force was so overwhelming that King Ban and his men could not resist, and so all but three of his companions were either slain or captured. But King Ban had the satisfaction of killing the army’s leader, Pontius Anthony, and he and the three, though so few, fought so hard that they put the Romans to flight. They were giving them 4This statement seems to be in contradiction to the preceding sentence, according to which all of Ban’s possessions have been seized except Trebe. We are probably meant to understand the report of the present castle storming as a flashback, with the continuing narrative reappearing a few paragraphs below (“Claudas laid siege to Trebe”). 4 chase, when Claudas came charging up ahead of all the others. When King Ban saw him, he exclaimed as a man with nothing more to lose, “Ah, God! I see my mortal enemy before me. Lord God, who have granted me great honors, allow me to kill him! [5] I would rather die at the same time, dear God, than see him leave the battlefield alive, for only with his death can all my woes be ended.” With that, they fought; and King Ban brought his foe down so roughly that everyone thought he was dead. Then Ban rode away, joyful in the belief that his prayer had been answered; he galloped all the way to Trebe. On the fourth day, Claudas took the castle that he had been besieging. When King Ban, back in Trebe that evening, learned that Claudas was not dead, he was so heartstruck that he never recovered, as was later obvious. Claudas laid siege to Trebe. The siege lasted a long time. King Ban sent to King Arthur for help a number of times, but Arthur had so much to do on so many fronts that he could not readily undertake to aid anyone else. Ban’s brother, King Bors, who had given him much support in the past, was now lying on his deathbed, and every day foragers ran through his land, for it adjoined the land of Benoic near Trebe. When Claudas saw that he would not easily take the castle, he undertook to speak to King Ban, each one assuring the other of safe conduct. King Ban came to the meeting with only two men, his seneschal and a knight. Likewise, Claudas came with only two, and the meeting took place right in front of the castle gate. The castle stood high above the place where the besieging army was camped, [6] and the bluff was steep and very hard to climb. When Claudas saw King Ban, he accused him right away of killing Pontius Anthony. Ban then accused Claudas of unjustly stripping him of his land. ‘I did not take it from you,” answered Claudas, “because of anything you had done to me or out of any hatred for you, but because of King Arthur, your overlord: I was dispossessed by his father, Uther Pendragon. But if you wish, I’ll make you an interesting offer: Give me possession of this castle, and I will return it to you instantly with the understanding that you are henceforth my liegeman and hold all your land in fee from me.” “That I will never do,” said King Ban, “for I would be perjuring myself with respect to King Arthur, whose vassal I am.” “Then I will tell you,” said Claudas, “what to do. Send word to Arthur that he should rescue you within forty days; and if he has not done so within that time, you will surrender the castle to me and, with all your land, become my vassal, and I will increase your holdings with rich fiefs.” The king said that he would ponder the matter and in the morning would send word of his choice, to yield or to resist. Thereupon King Ban withdrew, but his seneschal lingered, and Claudas spoke to him: “Seneschal,” he said, “T know that poor Ban is doomed. He will not receive any help from King Arthur and will lose everything in vain expectation. I am sorry that you are tied to such a man, from whom you can [7] expect nothing, for I have heard much good about you. And so I would suggest that you Lancelot, Part I come over to me. Do you know what I can offer you? I can pledge to grant you this kingdom as soon as I have conquered it, and to give you the backing of all my power. I hope that I’ll not have to capture you, since in that case I will be obliged to cause you great hardship. I have sworn on relics that anyone taken by force in this war will be either killed or imprisoned without any hope of release ever.” After much discussion, the seneschal promised to help Claudas to the utmost, short of betraying or selling the person of his rightful lord. And Claudas hastened to promise that as soon as he held Trebe, he would give the whole land over to him and accept him as his liegeman. Thereupon they separated, and Claudas returned to his army. The seneschal went back into Trebe and reported to his king that Claudas had spoken to him at length and very much wanted to be on good terms with him. “And how do you advise me?” said King Ban. “My lord,” he answered, “the best course I see is that you go yourself to beg King Arthur’s help. You may be sure that everything you own will be well guarded until you return.” Then King Ban came to the queen and told her how Claudas had urged him to surrender the castle, “and he iS willing, he said, to swear to me that as soon as he has it, he will give me title to it, along with all the land. But I know that he is so faithless that once he had the castle, he would never return it to me, nor would he return the slightest parcel of land. I have to report tomorrow what I wish to do. He wants me to appeal to my lord King Arthur, and he will grant me [8] a forty-day truce. If the king comes to my rescue, I thank God; if not, I will give Claudas title to the castle.” The queen, who greatly feared being dispossessed, advised him to act as he said, “for if King Arthur fails you, who will ever aid you?” “My lady,” he answered, “since you agree, I’ll go ahead. But do you know what I have thought of doing? I'll go to King Arthur myself and beg him to prevent my dispossession. He will be more deeply moved than if I were not present, for he will see me standing before him; if I sent a messenger, it would be of no avail, for no one bearing bad news is as readily believed as the man who embodies the proof. Now make your preparations. You will come with me, and no one else except my son and a single squire who will attend to our needs, for I want my lord the king to be deeply moved when he sees my sorry state. We must leave tonight. Be sure to take all the precious things that you are aware of here, jewelry and plate, and put them into the big chests, for I don’t know what may become of the castle before I return, and for nothing in the world would I want you to be at risk—not that I am afraid the castle may be taken by force, but you can never rule out treason.” The queen made ready just as the king had directed, and let him know that she was prepared to leave. Then he chose a young man in whom he trusted particularly and told him to harness his horse as necessary, [9] as he would have to start out before daybreak. The young man was very attached to his lord and was quick to obey his order; he soon had a large, strong, fast packhorse equipped with everything. Lancelot, Part I Then the king came to the seneschal and confided his plan to go to King Arthur’s court, “and I have greater trust in you than in any other man, for I have always cherished you, and so I commend my castle to your care, to be guarded as if it were my very heart. Tomorrow you will tell King Claudas that I have sent to King Arthur for help, and you'll give him whatever assurance he wants that, if I am not rescued within forty days, I will grant him the castle as he wishes. But take care that he not find out that I have gone away, because he would not respect my ownership once I were gone.” “My lord,” answered the traitor, “have no fear; I will take good care of everything.” That night King Ban went to bed rather early, for the nights were short and this, the story says, was the night of the Assumption, in mid-August. He was worried about the journey that he had to make, since much was at stake. He arose in time to ride three leagues before daylight, and once the horses were saddled and everyone was ready, he said goodbye to his seneschal, his castle, [10] and all his people. Then the king left by means of a short wattle bridge that crossed the narrow river below the castle. The castle was besieged on only one side, and the enemy was moreover more than three bowshots away at the closest; for near the height on which the castle stood there were hills and valleys and no easy access, and on the riverside no siege could take place because there was a broad, deep marsh there and the only road was a narrow little path that was more than two good leagues long. That was the route that King Ban took, accompanied by his wife on a fine, large, smoothly ambling saddle horse and by a devoted and utterly faithful squire who was carrying their child in a cradle before him on a stout packhorse. King Ban was riding a solid, well-trained saddle horse and was preceded by one of his truly good horses that was in the hands of a young groom of his. The squire was carrying his shield, and the groom? [11] on the horse was carrying the king’s spear and leading a packhorse. The animal was laden with jewelry and plate and money. King Ban was riding in mail leggings and hauberk, wearing his sword and covered with a raincape; he was the last in the line of riders. When they emerged from the marsh, they entered a forest. After about half a league, they came to a beautiful stretch of open country where King Ban had been many times before. He and his party continued on their way and reached a lake that was at the other end of the heath, at the foot of a high hill from which you could see the country all around, and at that point day had broken. The king said that he would not move on until it had grown a bit lighter, and he dismounted. He wanted to climb to the top of the hill in order to gaze back at his castle, which he loved more than any other castle in the world. He waited until it was somewhat lighter and then mounted his horse and left the queen and the others behind him down by the lake, which was very large. Ever 5There was no mention of any attendant other than a single squire in the paragraphs preparatory to the royal departure; nor will there be any further reference to the groom in the remainder of this episode. 2] since the time of the pagans, the lake had been called the Lake of Diana. Diana was queen of Sicily and reigned in the time of the good author Virgil, and the foolish unbelievers who lived at that time considered her a goddess. She loved the delights of the forest more than any other woman in the world and would spend every day hunting, and so the pagans called her the Goddess of the Woods. The forest where the lake was was the largest small forest in Gaul or [12] Brittany; it was only ten Welsh leagues long and six or seven wide, and it was known as the Woods in the Valley. King Ban climbed up the hill, because he wanted to see the castle that he loved so much. But now the story stops speaking of him for a while and speaks of his seneschal, to whom he had entrusted the castle. 2. King Ban’s Realm, Despite the Efforts of His Godson Banin, Falls into the Hands of King Claudas.! According to the story, when King Ban had left Trebe Castle, the seneschal, who had not forgotten his agreement with Claudas, came to see Claudas outside the town and said to him, “My lord, I bring you good news! No man has ever been so fortunate as you—assuming you wish to keep our agreement—for as of this moment you can take the castle with no resistance.” “What do you mean?” said Claudas. “Where is King Ban?” “He has abandoned it,” said the seneschal. “He has left, with just the queen and a squire and no one else.” “Then surrender the castle to me,” said Claudas, “and I will grant you possession of it and of all the land as well, and next Sunday, after Mass, you will become my liegeman. It will be the middle of August, and all my barons will be present.” The seneschal was delighted and said, “My lord, I’ll go back now and [13] leave the gates unlocked. I will tell my men that we have a firm truce, and they will gladly take some rest, for they have been tense and uneasy. When you and your troops are inside the walls, keep very quiet until you reach the main hall of the castle, and then you can take the whole place without hindrance.” That is what the traitor said to Claudas. When he was back inside the castle, he came upon a knight who was King Ban’s godson. He was always on watch at night. When he saw the seneschal come in, he asked him where he was coming from and why he had gone out at such a late hour. “I have just been to see Claudas,” the traitor answered, “to confirm the truce that he granted our lord King Ban.” At these words, the godson shuddered, for he very much feared betrayal, and he said, “But, seneschal, a man who means to behave loyally does not go out at such an hour to discuss a truce with his lord’s mortal enemy.” “What!” said the seneschal. “Do you think I am disloyal?” 1 Corresponds to Micha VII:Ila; Sommer III:8-12; Kennedy 7— 12. “Heaven forbid,” said the knight, whose name was Banin, “that you should ever be disloyal!” That is what he said, and he would have said more, had he dared. But the seneschal was too powerful and would have had him killed in a moment; and so he said no more. The seneschal told the men on guard duty that, thanks to God, the truce was holding, and he sent them all to bed. They were glad to go, since they were exhausted. [14] Banin, however, had no desire to sleep, but set himself to watch instead. He went up into a turret to see what the besiegers were doing and to see whether anyone inside the castle was ready to open the gates for them. He was unaware that the gates were already unlocked. And from his position in the tower he could see as many as twenty knights, helmeted for action, approach the castle, then twenty more and so on up to two hundred. Then he suspected that the town was being betrayed, and he ran down the steps of the wall and through the castle, shouting “Treason! treason!” but still not realizing that the gates were wide open. The shout went up throughout the castle, and the men who were unarmed ran for their weapons. But Claudas’s knights were already inside the first gate. When Banin saw them, he was so shocked that he almost lost his senses; he attacked immediately, and struck the first one with such vehemence that his spear went right through shield, hauberk, and body, and he thrust the man down dead. The others, on foot or on horseback, rushed toward him, and he saw that if he fled toward the main hall of the castle, they would strike him down two or three times before he could reach it, since they were mounted and he was on foot. So he darted up the stairs to the top of the walls and ran along the walkways until he came to the great tower. He raised the little drawbridge as soon as he had crossed it, and one of the soldiers guarding the tower let him in; the others were [15] all down below asleep, since they did not think there was any danger. Meanwhile, a party of Claudas’s knights were running after Banin along the walls, eager to capture him. When they saw that he had escaped them, they turned back, but others had taken over the building where the castle lord lived? before the men inside could arm themselves. The din was so great that even the thunder of God could not have been heard. In the midst of all the shouting and the noise, the seneschal started up and made a show of defending himself, as if ignorant of what was happening, and he began to bewail his lord. From the tower Banin cried down to him, “Murderer! Bastard!? You’re the man responsible for all this! You have betrayed your rightful lord, who raised you from nothing to great power, and now you have robbed him of all hope of regaining his land. May you come to the same end as Judas, who betrayed the One who came into the world to save him and all other sinners, for you have done the work of Judas!” That is what Banin shouted down from the tower. Meanwhile, the castle lord’s dwelling was taken, along with 2The “building where the castle lord lived”: the petit chastel, literally, “small castle.” 3“Bastard”: here and elsewhere, fiex a putain, literally, “whore’s son.” Lancelot, Part I all the fortifications except the tower. The town was set on fire and all the splendor of its beautiful houses was burned and destroyed, but that angered and upset Claudas, who did not know which of his men was to blame. The sole resistance left came [16] from the tower, where Banin was alone with only three soldiers; but they killed great numbers of King Claudas’s men in their defense. On the fifth day, King Claudas had a catapult set up in front of the tower, where there was room for only one. But even with the catapult they would not have been defeated, had it not been for the lack of food or drink. Still, they defended themselves very well, above all Banin, who killed many of Claudas’s men by throwing sharp pikes and pointed stones at them. So bravely did Banin resist and so willing was he to suffer that everyone was awed by him. Claudas, moreover, hearing him praised and seeing for himself his great valor, said that if he had a knight as worthy and as true, he would hold him dearer than himself. After they had eaten whatever food they had, the men in the tower still held out for three whole days. They were overcome with hunger, but on the third night they had the good luck to catch an owl in an opening in the tower: all the other birds had flown away because of the attacks of the catapult. This good luck gave them new courage, and yet the catapult had been so rough on them and so battered and shaken the walls [17] that they could hardly go on. One day, Claudas saw Banin and said, “Banin, surrender! Otherwise, you can’t last long. I’ll give you horses* and arms and provisions to go wherever you wish. Or if you were willing to remain with me, so help me God and the saints of His church” (and here he pointed toward the chapel), “I would cherish you more than any other knight for the great valor and the great loyalty that you have.” Claudas repeated this entreaty many times. One day, Banin, sick and suffering, answered, “Sir Claudas, you may be sure, Sir Claudas, that when I surrender to you, I will be so obviously at the end of my strength that no one will blame me for it. When I surrender to you or to anyone else, I won’t be surrendering as a traitor.” Together with his companions, Banin held out so long that he grew very weak with hunger. Every day Claudas begged him to give up, because he very much admired the great prowess that he saw in Banin and was eager to have him in his service. When Banin saw that he and his men could no longer hold out and, for lack of food and [18] because they were so battered by the catapult, would have to surrender, he began to grieve bitterly. His companions, who were starved to the limit, said to him that they would surrender, because there was no question of holding out any longer; and he said, “Take heart! I will give up the tower, but with honor and with no possibility of blame. I am no less exhausted and starved than you, but even when a man is at the end of his strength and is forced to yield, even then he must safeguard his honor.” That day, Claudas went back to him and asked whether he intended to surrender or hold out. 4“horses” as in Micha variants, Kennedy 9, and Lecoy 377. Micha and Sommer 10 have “castles.” Lancelot, Part I “My lord,” he answered, “I have taken counsel with my companions. They advise that we hold fast in this tower, for we are not frightened by the catapult or any other machine of war. But I do not wish to carry the burden any longer, when worthier and greater men than I have put it down. And so I have decided to surrender the tower along with my companions and myself, as it seems to me that I could not surrender to a worthier man than you. You will accept our arms, then. But beforehand you must assure us that you will protect us from all enemies and defend our rights within your household against any challenger, in such manner that, if anyone questions them, you will grant us satisfaction; and if we have cause to challenge any man subject to your authority, you must grant us satisfaction.” Claudas accepted these terms; he had the holy relics brought and, at the foot of the tower, swore that he would faithfully abide by the [19] agreement. Then Banin and his men came down from the tower, and Claudas sent his own in to occupy it. He showed Banin much honor and felt deep affection for him, because he had seen that Banin was a man of great courage and great loyalty. Three days later, the seneschal asked Claudas to meet the terms of their agreement, and Claudas said that he would gladly do so; yet he sought a delay, and word of it reached Banin. Banin then came to Claudas and, in front of his barons, said, “My lord, I wish all these barons to know that I surrendered to you on condition that you would protect me from all enemies and would defend my rights against all challengers and would guarantee me justice both against anyone who found cause to question my rights and in the case of anyone whom I found cause to challenge.” Claudas acknowledged that this was true. “My lord,” Banin went on, “now I therefore ask and pray that [20] you grant me justice against the seneschal here present. He is a traitor, who has betrayed both God and his rightful earthly lord. And if he dares to deny that he is a traitor who has betrayed both God and his liege lord, I am prepared to prove it in bodily combat right now or on whatever day you care to name.” “Do you hear, seneschal,” said Claudas, “the charge that this knight brings against you? I would be a dupe to offer you my friendship and grant you everything in my power, only to find myself betrayed.” “My lord,” said the seneschal, “if any knight, however valiant and admired, tried to show that I were a traitor to you, I would not hesitate to deny it in bodily combat.” “My lord,” said Banin, “accept my pledge to prove in combat that I have seen and heard his betrayal of his liege lord!” Claudas was pleased to hear Banin’s challenge, because he himself held the seneschal’s treachery to be hateful; and so he was very glad to have a reasonable opportunity to see him lose the high station that he had promised him. He asked for his response. “My lord,” answered the seneschal, “advise me yourself, because my accuser hates me on account of you; that is why he has charged me with treason.” “This,” said Claudas, “is my advice: if you know that you are innocent, defend yourself with confidence, for you are no less strong or able-bodied than he, and you are no less admired in combat. If you believe yourself to be innocent, v defend yourself promptly, for [21] if he made the same charge against me, I would not let myself be shamed by not defending myself. Be assured that you have no man to fear but him; and he, no one save you. But if you do not defend yourself, then you look very much like a man who feels guilty of treason.” Once Claudas had spoken, the two adversaries handed their gages to him. He then turned to the seneschal: “Seneschal, I have always considered you to be faithful and loyal, and your lord King Ban attested as much. Come forward and hear me: I now invest you with the kingdom of Benoic, with the income and fiefs and all dependencies, save only the fortresses with which I would invest no man. If you can avenge yourself on Banin and defend yourself against his charge, you will swear me the oath of fealty and pay me homage. But if he succeeds in overcoming you, I give and grant the land to him, and he will become my liegeman.” Thus Claudas invested the seneschal with the kingdom of Benoic because he did not want to violate the oath that he had sworn, and he expected not to have to abide by it, since he well knew Banin to be a man of great prowess and fierce loyalty. What else shall I tell you? Four days later, the battle took place in Benoic Meadow, between the Loire and the Arsie, and there Banin cut off the head of the seneschal. At that, Claudas offered him the entire [22] land of Benoic as his hereditary fief, and Banin said to him, “My lord, I surrendered to you with the understanding that I would remain here only so long as I would wish, and my desire is now to go away. So now, in front of all your barons, I ask to leave, for thanks to God I have accomplished what I had stayed for. Be assured, moreover, that I would not accept any land from you, for God has not created any land so rich that I would want any part of it, unless I could use it to your detriment. My heart would have it no other way.” With that he left, and Claudas was very sorry to see him go; he would have made every effort, if he could, to keep him, as no other knight had ever impressed him with such great prowess and loyalty. But at this point the story stops speaking of Banin and Claudas and his knights, and instead turns back to King Ban, about whom it has long been silent. 3. Lancelot Is Kidnapped by the Lady of the Lake.’ At this point the story says that once King Ban had left his castle, he climbed up a high hill to look back at the place that he loved so deeply. The day was quickly growing light, and as he looked on, he saw the high tower and the walls and everything within brighten and gleam. But he had not been watching long when he saw thick smoke and a moment later saw the whole castle flare up. In a short while, he saw the splendid halls crash down, and the churches and chapels fall apart, and the fire {23] dart from one spot to 1Corresponds to Micha VII:II]a; Sommer III:12-16; Kennedy 12-18. & another, and the dreadful, frightful flames shoot upward to the sky. The air was all ablaze with red, and the land all about was aglow. King Ban watched as the fire destroyed the castle that he loved more than any other, for in that castle alone lay his hope of recovering all his land, and it was his only comfort. When he saw that he had lost the object of all his trust, there were no grounds left for hope, and he felt empty and broken. His son was hardly old enough to help him; his wife was a very young lady, raised in great comfort and, as a descendant of the noble line of King David, noble in the eyes of both God and the world. He was distressed to think that his son would have to leave France in poverty and sorrow and his wife fall under some authority other than his own and pass from one protector to another; and distressed that he himself, old and poor, would have to scrape through the rest of his days in dire need, he who had been so feared and powerful and had in his youth so loved fine company and a joy-filled house. King Ban recalled all these things and could see them with his mind’s eye, and there was such great pain in his heart that his tears could not even flow. He felt a spasm in his chest and fainted. So hard did he fall from his horse that [24] his neck almost broke, and from his nose and mouth and from his two ears red blood spurted forth. For a long while King Ban lay senseless. When he came out of his faint, he struggled to speak and, looking upward, said, “Ah, Lord God, have mercy! I thank You, dear Father, that it is your will to let me die in poverty, for You came to suffer death on earth as a pauper and an indigent. My Lord, because I can no longer stay here below without sinning, I cry to You for mercy, for I plainly see that I have reached my end. And, dear Father, You who came to redeem me with Your blood, do not let the soul that You placed in me be lost, but on this final day, when my end is at hand, receive me as I confess to You the burden of my sins, so great and so terrible that I cannot relate them all. “And if my body has done wrong on earth, where no one can be without sin, dear Lord, take Your vengeance in such a way that my soul, however tormented once the body is gone, may one day join the ranks of those who live in the everlasting light of Your dwelling and in Your endless presence. Dear merciful Father, take pity on my wife Elaine, who comes from the noble lineage that You established in the Adventurous Kingdom? to glorify Your name and the greatness [25] of Your faith and to witness Your great mysteries, the lineage to which You have granted victory over foreign peoples. My Lord, guide her who is without guidance, who comes from that noble family and has always loved Your faith and kept Your commandments. And, Lord, remember my unhappy son, orphaned so young, for You have in Your hands the power to sustain orphans.” When King Ban had spoken these words, he looked up toward heaven and beat his breast in penance and bewailed his sins before the eyes of Our Lord. Then he pulled up three blades of grass in the name of the Holy Trinity and 2A dventurous Kingdom”: a name for King Arthur’s realm. Lancelot, Part I ate them as a sign of true belief.? At that moment, his heart tightened with the pain he felt for his wife and son, and he could utter no further word; his eyes grew dim, and he collapsed with such a start that the veins in his heart snapped. His heart burst in his chest, and he lay dead on the ground, with hands stretched out and head turned to the east and facing upward. His horse, frightened by his fall, turned and fled down to the other horses. Seeing this, the queen told the squire who was with her to seize the reins. He put the child down and ran to catch the [26] horse; then he rode up to the top of the hill and found the king lying cold and dead on the ground, as you have heard. The young man dismounted. When he found his lord King Ban dead, he let out a cry so loud that the queen heard it clearly, and she was so alarmed that she left her son on the ground at the feet of the horses and ran all the way up to the top of the hill and found the squire embracing the body of the king and sobbing uncontrollably. At the sight of her lord and husband dead, she fell in a faint onto the body. When she revived, she abandoned herself to her immense grief: she tore at her beautiful blond hair; she ripped her clothes and threw tatters to the ground; she clawed at her delicate face until red blood ran down her cheeks. She mourned out loud the great exploits of her lord and all his kindness, and her cries were so piercing that the hill and the valley and all the land around echoed with them. She grieved that way until she could no more; she was drained, and words came no more because of the great sorrow that gripped her heart. She swooned and mourned in turns. When she had lamented at length her lord’s great deeds and had bewailed her great loss, she [27] wished for nothing less than death itself, and she rebuked it for not coming. She had been in this state for a long while when the thought of her son came back to her, and she could be consoled by nothing else. But suddenly afraid that he might have been trampled by the horses, she let out a great cry, jumped up as if out of her mind, and started running down to where she had left the child. But she was so afraid that he might be dead that, before she could reach the bottom of the hill, she fell to the ground in a faint. When she regained her senses, she fell again into sobs and weeping, then jumped up and, all disheveled and in tatters, rushed down toward the lakeshore where the horses stood. There she saw her son out of his cradle, unwrapped, and naked on the lap of a young lady who was holding him clasped to her breast and kissing him repeatedly on the eyes and mouth. Nor was she wrong to be doing so, for he was the most beautiful child in the world. It was now fully light, and the morning was cold. The queen said to the woman, “My good friend, for God’s sake, let the child go. His days will be filled with grief and sorrow, 3An instance of the symbolic lay communion occurring in various western European medieval works, e.g., the chanson de geste Raoul de Cambrai (laisses 120 and 337): on the eve of battle or on the point of dying, the believer might take communion, in the absence of priest and sacramental wafer, by placing three blades of grass or the like in his mouth. See J.D.M. Ford, “‘To bite the dust’ and Symbolical Lay Communion,” PMLA 20 (1905), 197-230, and G.H. Hamilton, “The Sources of the Symbolical Lay Communion,” Romanic Review 4 (1913), 221-240. Lancelot, Part I because he has just been orphaned and lost all happiness. His father is now dead, and he has lost his inheritance, which would not have been small if God had preserved it for him just as he was intended to have it.” But the young woman had no answer for anything the queen might say. Indeed, as she saw her draw nearer, she rose and, still holding the child in her arms, [28] turned and hurried toward the lake. At the edge, body poised, she jumped in. Seeing her son in the lake, the queen fainted. When she revived, she could see neither the child nor the damsel. Then she fell into the deepest despondency and would have leapt into the lake, had she not been held back by the young man, who had meanwhile come down from the hill; indeed, he had left the king’s body and come down in order to comfort the queen, afraid as he was that she might give up all hope. No one could give you a full account of the queen’s great grief. Now, as she was lamenting, it happened that an abbess was traveling past, along with two nuns; they were accompanied by her chaplain, a monk, and only two squires, all of great faith. The abbess heard the queen’s loud lamentations; overcome with pity, she turned in her direction and said, “God grant you joy!” “Indeed, my lady,” answered the queen, “it would be very helpful, for I am the most despondent woman in the world. In this one day I have lost all honor and all joy, which I used to have in abundance.” “Ah, my lady,” said the abbess, who realized how beautiful she would have been if not for her great sorrow, “who are you?” “So help me God, my lady,” answered the queen, “to me it no longer matters who I am—just that I have lived too long.” [29] Then the chaplain looked at her and said to the abbess, “In God’s name, my lady, never listen to me again if this is not my lady the queen, the wife of King Ban!” The abbess realized this and began to weep. “My lady,” she said, “tell us please whether you really are my lady the queen.” At that, the lady fell into a faint. When she revived, the abbess repeated, “Please, my lady, don’t hide it from me. I am sure that you are my lady the queen!” The queen then replied, “God help me, I am truly the Queen of Great Sorrows.” Because of this name that she gave to herself, the opening part of the present story is called “The Story of the Queen of Great Sorrows.” She added, “My lady, in the name of God, whoever I may be, make me a nun, for that is my greatest desire.” “Certainly, my lady,” answered the abbess, “very gladly, but please tell us your woes. I am very anxious about you.” The queen then recounted her misfortune from beginning to end, and spoke of the land that she had lost and her husband dying on the hill and her son carried off by a devil in the shape of a young woman. Then the abbess asked her how the king had died, but the queen could not tell her. “My lady, ” the abbess went on, “I suppose he died of grief over the burning of Trebe.” “What!” said the queen; “is Trebe burned down?” 9 “Yes, indeed, my lady, and I thought that you knew.” [30] “God help me, my lady,” she answered, “I didn’t know, but now I am sure that that was the sorrow that killed him; and my only thought now is that I don’t want to stay in this world any longer. Please, my lady, take all this treasure of gold and plate and jewels, and use it to build a little chapel here, where hymns and prayers will be offered every day for my lord’s soul from now on.” “My lady,” answered the abbess, “it’s likely you don’t know how burdensome an order can be: it is endless travail and sorrow and constant peril for the soul. But come away with us now and be mistress of our abbey just as you ought to be, since it was founded and established by the forebears of my lord the king.” “My lady, please,” answered the queen, “I ask you, in God’s name and upon your soul, to make me a nun, because I have no more interest in the world and the world has no need for me. And if you deny me, I will wander off into this wild forest, wretched and likely to lose body and soul.” “My lady,” said the abbess, “since you are so decided, come now and worship God and thank Him, for we are very happy that God is granting us the company of so good a lady and so noble a queen.” Right then, with no delay, the queen was shorn of her hair, which was the most beautiful in the world; robes were brought, and she took the veil. [31] When the squire who was with her saw her veiled, he said that he would not stay in the world once his lady had left it, and then and there he became a monk and was fittingly robed. After that, they took the body of the king and carried it to the abbey, which stood not far away, and they had a funeral rite befitting a king. The body was nobly buried in the abbey itself until such time as a chapel could be built on the spot where he had died. After the burial, the queen remained in the abbey, and where the king had died, the abbess had a fine chapel built, and fine outbuildings. It was all ready within a year, and when it was, the king’s body was carried there. The queen came to live there along with two nuns, and there were also two chaplains and three monks. Every morning, as soon as she had heard Mass sung for the king, the queen would come to the shore of the lake, to the very spot where she had lost her son, and she would read the part of the psalter for that hour and recite what prayers she knew,‘ and she would weep bitter tears. It became known throughout the land that Queen Elaine of Benoic was a nun, and the place came to be called the Royal Minster. It grew in size and importance, and a great many noble ladies of the region became nuns there out of love for God and the queen. But now the story falls silent about the queen and her companions and turns back to King Claudas of the Land Laid Waste. [32] 4Micha reads si lisoit son sautier teus fois [Kennedy 17: tex hore] estoit et disoit teus biens qu’ele savoit. The first clause might also give “and she would sometimes read her psalter,” and the meaning of the second clause is not quite certain, either. 10 4, Lancelot’s Cousins Lionel and Bors of Gaunes Are Entrusted to the Faithful Pharian.' At this point, the story recounts that King Claudas succeeded in taking over the whole kingdom of Benoic and all the land of Gaunes, for once the death of King Ban was known, King Bors lived no more than two days; indeed, it is generally believed that he died not of illness but of grief for his brother. He had two fine sons, one named Lionel and the other, Bors. They were wonderfully beautiful children, but Lionel was only twenty-one months old and Bors, only nine. In the land of Gaunes there were many worthy men and many fine knights; they resisted the invader as long as they could. As for Queen Evaine, the wife of King Bors, she was in a castle that formed part of her dower, Montlair, which was remarkably strong. Thus, when all the rest of the land was captured, Montlair, with the queen and her children, still held out. But once Claudas had established his authority everywhere else, he came to lay siege to this castle. When the queen, Bors’s widow, saw her castle under siege, she did not dare remain there, lest Claudas take her by force and dishonor her. And so she fled with her two children, [33] rowing across the river that flowed under the castle. In the woods on the other side, which had long been in her possession, the queen and the servants with her mounted their horses and continued on their way. The queen planned to travel straight to the convent where her sister, the queen of Benoic, lived as a nun. Thus riding along, she and her children came to a beautiful stretch of open country. In that place a terrible thing happened to the queen, and I will tell you about it. The fact is that King Bors had once disinherited a knight for having killed another knight; for King Bors of Gaunes, like his brother, King Ban of Benoic, was of all men one of those most bent on justice. The knight disinherited for murder went off to Claudas, since he knew the ways of the two brothers and what they were capable of. He made a good impression on King Claudas, who offered him trust, friendship, and advancement, Claudas gave him some of his own men to accompany him wherever he liked. In return, the knight held him very dear and took all the pains he could to serve him well and keep his friendship. The day the queen was going from Montlair to the convent where her sister lived, King Claudas happened to be hunting in the forest that she was passing through, and he was on the track of a [34] huge boar; the disinherited knight was one of the party. The knight came upon the queen and her two children in a spot where he was awaiting Claudas, on the way into a large game enclosure. As soon as he saw the lady, he ran and seized the reins of her horse, and she began to weep piteously. Then he had the two children removed from their cradles on the back of a packhorse, in order to take them to the place where he had left Claudas. Corresponds to Micha VII:IVa; Sommer III:16-18; Kennedy 18-20. Lancelot, Part I Don’t ask if the queen was distraught! Her sorrow was greater than you could ever experience or imagine. She kept fainting, so that the people who saw her thought that she would die at any moment. When the knight saw her so overcome, he was filled with pity and said, “My lady, you and the king now dead have done me great wrong, but my heart would not allow me to hand you over to your enemy, because you once did me a service well worth my thanks: you once saved me from death, and you were sorry to see me disinherited. And so I am now going to pay you back by leading you out of these woods to safety. But you must leave my two young lords here with me, and I will keep them and raise them until they have grown up; and if they can ever recover their land, so much the better for me. If you do not agree, you cannot avoid being dishonored should you fall into the hands of Claudas of the Land Laid Waste.” [35] When the queen heard these words, she did not know what to do. If she left her two children, she would no doubt never have them back; on the other hand, if she fell into the hands of her mortal enemy, she had great shame and suffering to fear. She reflected that it was better to choose the lesser of the two evils than to have them both, for she might well be dishonored and see her children put to death as well. She said, then, that she would place the children under the protection of Our Lord and the knight, and said that she preferred that to the possibility that they might be dismembered before her very eyes, which she knew would crush her forever. She said to the knight that she was entrusting her children to God and to him, and she begged him to protect them as duty bound him to do, “and now,” she added, “please take me out of this forest, before I am troubled or captured by anyone else.” The knight took the two children and gave them over to his most trustworthy men and then led the lady out of the woods to a monastery. He left her there, saying, “My lady, you will stay here until my messenger comes to tell you that Claudas has gone away.” The queen stayed and he turned to leave, but she fell at his feet and begged him, for the sake of God, to take pity on the two children and never, out of some desire for a reward, [36] put them into the hands of their mortal enemies. He answered, swearing on his honor that, if they came to harm, it would be because of his inability, not his unwillingness, to protect them. With that, he went off. When he rejoined Claudas, the boar had been killed, and soon came the news that Montlair had fallen. Claudas was delighted and rode up to the castle right away. He found that it was already in the hands of his army, for once the queen had left no one dared resist any longer. But failing to find the queen and her children, he was very angry. Still, he took possession of the castle and in that way came to hold both kingdoms. But now, at this point, the story recounts nothing more of Claudas and turns back instead to Queen Evaine, the widow of Bors of Gaunes. Lancelot, Part I 5. Queen Evaine of Gaunes Joins Her Sister Queen Elaine at the Royal Minster.’ Now, according to the story, when the disinherited knight heard the news that Montlair had fallen and saw Claudas set out for the castle, he sent a squire who was a nephew of his to the queen and had him conduct her to the convent where the queen her sister was living. No need to ask what happened when the two sisters caught sight of each other! They were overcome with joy and grief at one and the same time, and felt more torn between the two than anyone could ever express. Their grief came from seeing each other destitute and exiled, whereas they had been women of high honor and power; their joy, on the other hand, came from simply seeing themselves together again, since they had been extremely fearful for each other. It seemed to them that, together, they would more easily [37] weep out the rest of their lives, grieving over their great losses and their sorrows and serving Our Lord, for from this would come whatever comfort they could have. After they had long lamented their destitution and the loss of their husbands, the queen of Benoic still felt great pain in her heart; she fell into bitter mourning and laments. “Alas!” she said, “I have lost everything and more, lost my land and my lord and my son, who was the flower of all youth. .. And what of your children?” she asked; “where are they?” At those words, her sister swooned; and at that sight, Queen Elaine fainted as well, and all the people around them were overwhelmed with grief. When the queen of Gaunes was revived, she began to tell her sister how she had lost her two children. “Alas!” said the queen of Benoic, “now we are both childless!” Then she began to tell how her husband had died and how she had lost her son to the young woman who plunged into the lake with him. The sorrow of the two sisters over the losses they had suffered was immense, and if they had not been together, [38] their anguish would have been ever greater; but their suffering was lessened somewhat by their being together. As soon as the abbess came, the queen of Gaunes had her hair shorn and took the veil, as the two sisters were very much afraid of Claudas’s treachery; but once they were shorn and veiled, they gave him no further thought. Here the story has no more to say about them and turns back instead to Lancelot, at the moment when he was carried down into the Lake. 6. Background of Ninianne, the Lady of the Lake.’ Now, according to the story, the damsel who carried Lancelot off into the Lake was a fairy. At that time, the word “fairy” was used for all women who practiced magic, and at that time there were many more of them in Great 1 Corresponds to Micha VII:Va; Sommer JJJ:18-19; Kennedy 20-21. 'Corresponds to Micha VII:Vla; Sommer III:19-22; Kennedy 21-24. it Britain than in other lands. According to the story in the Breton Chronicles,* they knew the powers of words and stones and herbs, which allowed them to retain youth and beauty and enjoy whatever wealth they wished. All that dated from the time of Merlin, the English prophet, who possessed all the wisdom that can come from demons, which is why he was so feared by the Bretons? and so revered that everyone called him a holy prophet and the ordinary people all called him their god. The woman that the story tells about had learned everything that she knew of sorcery from Merlin, and she practiced it with great skill.4 Now, Merlin had been sired by nothing less than a devil, and for that reason he was called the Fatherless Child. [39] It had been one of those demons that are very much present in our world but have no power to work their will on either believer or disbeliever, because they are lustful and lascivious. We find it written that when they were still angels, they were so beautiful and attractive that they delighted in looking at each other to the point of burning with lust. And once they had fallen (along with their sorry master), they kept on earth the lasciviousness that had begun in the high reaches of heaven. From such manner of devils, according to the story in the Chronicles, Merlin sprang, and I will tell you how. The fact is that in the borderland between Scotland and Ireland,® there was once a noble young lady of great beauty who was the daughter of a vavasor of only modest means. When the girl reached the age to marry—there was something about her, I tell you!—she made it clear to her father and mother that they should not seek a husband for her, for no man she ever saw would she allow into her bed: her heart would not tolerate it. The father and mother cast about for some means of changing her mind, but to no avail, for she made it clear to them that if they forced her, she would either die right away or take leave of her senses. Then her mother took her aside and asked her, as mother to daughter, whether she wanted to stay away forever from any intimacy with a man. She answered that, no, she could quite well accept a man whom she did not see: she was more than willing to feel, but [40] seeing was out of the question. She was her parents’ only child, and they loved her as parents do an only child; they had no wish to risk losing their daughter, and so they bore the matter with patience but watched for any sign of a change of heart. That went on until the father died. After the father’s death, the mother often urged her daughter to marry, but to no avail. She refused to give 2“Breton Chronicles”: or “British.” The reference might also be to Brut, or Brutus, legendary founder of the British nation. 3“Bretons”: or “Britons.” 4For the story of Merlin and Ninianne, see the Estoire de Merlin (Sommer IJ), translated in our volume I, and the Prose Merlin and its Suite, excerpts of which appear in English translation in The Romance of Arthur I, ed. J.J. Wilhelm (New York: Garland, 1986), 213-266. 5 Geography in our text is sometimes fanciful. In the present instance, however, it may be, as reported in Kennedy II:81, that Irlande is meant to be Argyll and Escoce the Pictish kingdom to the northeast of it, in which case the two regions would be part of the same land mass. IZ herself to any man whom she could see with her eyes, for such was the peculiarity of her eyes that she could in no way tolerate seeing a husband; but feeling him without seeing him she could accept easily and gladly. It was not long afterward that a demon of the kind that I have told you about appeared in the girl’s bed one night. He was very insistent in his desire and promised her that she would never see him. She asked him who he was. “I am,” he answered, “a man from a foreign land, and I have come to you because you have no interest in any man that you might see: in the same way, I cannot look at any woman that I might take to bed.” The girl ran her hands over him and sensed by touch that he had a fine and well-built body. A devil, of course, has no body or any part of one that can really be caressed, because a spirit cannot be felt, and a devil is a spirit; but devils sometimes take on the appearance of a body, so that they seem [41] to people to be formed of flesh and bone. When the girl felt all over the demon’s body, his arms and hands and other parts, she was convinced, from what she could thus know of him, that he had the build of a handsome man. She was enraptured and abandoned herself to his will; but she concealed it from her mother and everyone else. When she had led this life for five months, she became pregnant; and when she reached her term and gave birth, everyone around her was astonished, as nothing was known of any father and she refused to speak of the matter to anyone. The child was a boy, whom the young woman named Merlin, just as the devil had instructed her to do before the birth; but the boy was never baptized. When he reached the age of twelve, he was taken to Uther Pendragon, according to the account given in the chronicle of his deeds. Later, after the death of the duke of Tintagel, brought about by the treachery of Uther Pendragon and Merlin because Uther Pendragon loved Ygraine, the duchess, Merlin went away to live in the deep and primitive forest. He was of the same nature as his father, deceptive and disloyal, and he possessed all the false and perverted knowledge that an individual could have. Near the border of Brittany there lived a maiden of great beauty who was named Ninianne. Merlin was greatly attracted to her and [42] often sought her out, by day or by night, wherever she might be. But she was very sensible and refined, and she held him off. One day, though, the girl encouraged him to tell her who he was, and he told her the truth. She answered that she would do whatever he wished, if only he taught her some of his great craft. And he, loving her as much as any mortal man could love, agreed to teach her anything her lips requested. “I want you to teach me,” she said, “howI can close off a place with magic words and seal whatever I like inside so thoroughly that no one could enter or leave it any more. And teach me, too, howI can put someone to sleep forever so that he will never wake.”® “Why do you want to know that?” asked Merlin. SAs the following paragraph will make clear, what Ninianne really wants—and what Merlin will teach her—is to be able to put someone to sleep for as long as she wishes, even forever, and to be able to wake him, as well. Lancelot, Part I “Because,” she answered, “if my father found out that you or anyone else slept with me, he would kill me at once; but once I had put him to sleep, I could feel safe. Take care, though,” she said, “not to teach me anything involving a lie, because that way you would never ever have my company or my love.” Merlin taught her both things, and she put them down on parchment, since she knew quite well how to read and write. From then on, whenever Merlin came to see her, she would make him fall asleep right away, and she would cast [43] a spell on her groin which, as long as it lasted, prevented anyone from deflowering her and having relations with her. She tricked him in that way for a long time, and Merlin always thought when he left her that he had been in bed with her. She was able to deceive him like that because he was half mortal; if he had been wholly a devil, she could not have deceived him, as a devil cannot sleep. In the end, when the young lady had learned as much as she wanted from Merlin, she played a final trick and sealed him in a pit in the perilous forest of Darnantes, which borders on the kingdom of Sorelois and the sea of Cornwall. And that is where he remained, for never again did anyone see or hear of him or have news to tell of him. The young lady who put Merlin to sleep was the very one who carried Lancelot off into the Lake. Once she had him there, there is no question that he was very dear to her, for she took care of him more tenderly than any other woman could who had not actually given birth to him. She was not alone, but surrounded by knights and ladies and maidens; and she found the child a wetnurse who was very good to him. When he was weaned, he was given a tutor, who taught him proper behavior. No one in the household other than the young lady herself knew the boy’s name, and they addressed him in various ways. Some called him Fair Foundling and others [44] called him Prince; she herself used those names, and sometimes she called him Precious Orphan. Lancelot thus stayed in the care of the young lady for three years, living in great comfort and firmly believing that she was his mother. In those three years, he grew more than another boy would have grown in five, and he was in all respects so beautiful a child that one more beautiful could not be imagined. The young woman who was bringing him up never wandered from her broad, deep forest, and the Lake that she had plunged into with him when carrying him off was an enchanted lake; it was in the flat land below a hill much lower than the one on which King Ban had died. In the area where the Lake seemed to be broadest and deepest, the lady possessed several beautiful and splendid houses. Farther down in the valley flowed a stream teeming with fish. The whole estate was so hidden that no one could ever find it, for the apparent lake so masked it that it could not be seen. Lancelot thus remained in the care of the damsel, and he grew in size and attainments, as you can hear. But the story now leaves off speaking about him and turns back instead to his cousin Lionel and Lionel’s brother Bors, the sons of King Bors of Gaunes. Lancelot, Part I 7. Pharian Surrenders Lionel and Bors to King Claudas.' At this point, the story recounts that once the knight who carried off the children of the queen of Gaunes [45] had gone back to his fief (which King Claudas had restored to him together with a fair amount of other land), he took faultless care of the two boys. They had whatever was thought good for them, because the knight’s single purpose was to treat them with all honor until they came of age and God restored their land to them; indeed, he foresaw a great advantage for himself if they attained some power. He thus kept them in his household for more than three years, but so secretly that no one knew who they were except his wife alone, who was a young? woman, very beautiful and well-spoken. She was, in fact, so beautiful that Claudas fell in love with her. She in the end yielded to his desire, and he, out of love for her, made her husband seneschal of the whole land of Gaunes and granted him many new fiefs and fine sources of income. The knight, named Pharian, was a very bold and worthy man. After a while, he learned of the love affair between his wife and the king, and there is no point in wondering whether it made him suffer, for he loved her more than anything; but he was on his guard. One day, Claudas sent him on a mission, and the knight pretended to go but did not; instead, he watched his wife in secret until, at night, he saw Claudas come to join her. The knight tried to kill him but failed, for Claudas jumped out of the room through a window and escaped. [46] Pharian knew quite well that the man was Claudas; it worried him that he had failed to kill him, and he was very much afraid that Claudas might now kill 42m. He pondered a stratagem by which he could protect himself, as mere force would not work. He came to Claudas, drew him aside, and confided to him, “My lord, I arn your liegeman, and you are obliged to ensure that my rights are respected. I would like you to know that one of your knights has betrayed me with my wife; one time I even found them together.” “Who is it?” said Claudas. “My lord,” said the knight, “I don’t know who he is, because my wife won’t tell me his name, but she has told me this much: that he is one of your men. Now, as my overlord, advise me what I am to do if I find him with her again.” “Of course,” answered Claudas, “I would kill him if I ever found them together again as you have described.” He said that in the belief that Pharian did not know that he was in fact the man. Thereupon Pharian took his leave. He went back to his castle, and took his wife and put her into a tower where her conditions were very harsh. She was deprived of all company except an old woman who brought her food and drink, and Pharian did not even reveal to her why he was punishing her so. When the lady could bear no more Corresponds to Micha VII:VIla; Sommer III:22-26; Kennedy 24-30. 2“young” as in Micha variants, Kennedy 25, and Lecoy 377. Micha and Sommer 22 have “good.” 13 suffering, she found a way of speaking to a cousin of hers, a poor young man whom she had been good to. She spoke to him late one day from a tower window and asked him to go to King Claudas and [47] tell him how her husband had locked her away on his account. He should make it possible for her to speak to him, and she would acquaint him with her shame and her disgrace, which he was not aware of; and if he did not come to her soon, a terrible thing could happen, for he might die and she would, too. The young man went to see Claudas, was let in, and along with the right password gave him the lady’s message. Not long afterwards, Claudas was out hunting in the forest of Gaunes and had the impulse to go see the lady. He sent word to Pharian with one of his squires that he was coming to his house to dine. When Pharian heard this, he put on a cheerful smile for his lord’s messenger, and it seemed that he was very glad of the news. He had the lady brought down from the tower right away and ordered that she be beautifully dressed and adorned, and whatever good food he could find he ordered prepared. When Claudas drew near, Pharian rode out to meet him. His face showed great delight, and he received him with a great flurry of hospitality. After dinner, Claudas and the lady sat down together, and she began to complain to him of her harsh treatment. “My lord,” she said, “it is up to you to find a solution, since it is only because of you that I face such hardship.” “Of course,” he answered, “T’ll provide a solution; but what can I do?” “T'll show you,” she said, “how you can avenge both me and yourself, provided you love me as much as I have deserved.” [48] “You may be absolutely sure,” he said, “that, if I can find the way, I will avenge you. Tell me how, if you know, and I give you my word as king that it will be as you wish.” “My lord,” she said, “he knows that it was really you that he found in bed with me, but out of fear of you he doesn’t dare admit it or let it show. Do you know what grounds you have to do away with him? For more than three years now, he has kept the two sons of King Bors of Gaunes in a room under this tower, kept them until they would be old enough and powerful enough to kill you. Since he has done that, he rightly deserves to die.” “What!” said Claudas, “is that true?” “Yes,” she said, “don’t doubt it. Nor could you find any better grounds than these to undo him, for this is a crime that calls for death or, at least, for disinheritance.” “Let's leave the subject now,” said Claudas, “and show no sign of discussing it. I need to think about it.” With that, Claudas said goodbye to her and left; he reached Gaunes that night and slept there. There was a man in his household there who was a deadly enemy of Pharian. Claudas told him that he could now take his revenge if only he wished to and dared. “How, my lord?” he said. ‘Tl tell you,” said Claudas, “but you must give me your faithful promise to do as I advise you.” The man promised. “The truth is,” said Claudas, “that he is keeping the two sons of King Bors of Gaunes in one of his fortresses. I know it from people who [49] are closer to him than I am. Now Le this is what you must do: you will accuse him of treason in front of me, on the grounds that he is my liegeman and is harboring my mortal enemies. If he dares deny it, you will prove it in bodily combat. Now this is what I'll do for you: I grant you here and now the office of seneschal of Gaunes, to be yours and your heirs’ from this point forward.” The man was happy with the promise, thanked Claudas profusely, and offered to do whatever he would dictate in the future. Some time passed with no further word of all this. Then Pharian decided one day to go to court, but in his prudence he realized that he did not know what could befall him, for Claudas hated him and in any case no one is ever safe from treachery. And so he ordered all those responsible for his affairs to obey a certain nephew of his as they would himself, because he was the man he trusted most in the world; and he had them all swear an oath to do so. Thereupon he set out for court and at length arrived there with his nephew.® The traitor welcomed him warmly. The next day, the knight, who hated him bitterly, came up to the door of the church and, in front of all the people who were gathered there, said to Claudas, “My lord, sir, uphold my rights against Pharian, here present, on the grounds that he is a traitor to you, as I have heard and seen to be a fact. If he tries to deny it, I am prepared to prove forthwith, in front of you, in bodily combat, that he is harboring your mortal enemies, [50] the two children of King Bors of Gaunes.” “Do you hear, Pharian,” said Claudas, “this man’s charge? If you are in fact a traitor, I am sorely grieved, for I have granted you much honor and advancement.” “My lord,” said Pharian, “I need to think about it.” “What!” said the knight who was his nephew, “you need to think about it?! There is no need for thinking! No knight needs to think about it, when he has just been accused of treason! If he is guilty, he should put the rope around his neck himself and go to his punishment with no delay. And if he is in the right, he should defend himself with confidence against the finest knight in the world, because disloyalty turns a good fighter into a bad one, and a knight who is true fights well and confidently even if he has never done so before.” Then he stood before Claudas and said, “My lord, I will defend my uncle against the charge of treason, for he is not a traitor.” But his uncle jumped up and said that he would not allow anyone else to fight* in his behalf. “My lord,” said Pharian, “accept my pledge that I have never committed treason against you.” “Do you acknowledge,” said Claudas, “that the children of King Bors are in your keeping?” “My lord, sir,” said Pharian’s nephew, “even if he is guarding them, what matters here is that he is prepared to 31t is not clear whether we are meant to understand this nephew as the same one mentioned in the preceding paragraph or as a different one. There is in any case no further reference to the first anywhere in the text. 41 iterally, “to hang a shield around his neck.” Lancelot, Part I reject any charge of treason against you. He is accused of treason, and that is what he denies.” “The accusation,” said Claudas, “involves the children of King Bors. If he tries to deny that they are in his keeping, this man stands [51] ready to prove it. is “My lord,” said Pharian’s nephew, “he may have them in his keeping, but that does not mean that he has committed an act of treason against you. If there is any knight here so daring and bold as to try to prove that it is treason, I am prepared to deny it, for my uncle has done no more than honor his oath of fealty to King Bors. Even though he was ill-treated by his overlord, he is bound to protect his children, just as he would his lord himself if he were still alive.” Then he said to his uncle, “Come, my lord; defend yourself against the charge of treason that this knight has made, and I will defend you as well, for there is no wrong in protecting the children.” There was no man inclined to contradict that statement, and even the knight who had leveled the charge of treason lost his earlier vehemence. “What!” said Claudas to the accuser, “have you nothing more to say?” With this encouragement, the knight offered his gage to prove the accusation. And Pharian held out his gage in contradiction. With no delay, the two men went to arm themselves, and Pharian called his nephew aside and said, “My good nephew, go to my castle and, whatever may happen to me, good or ill, take my two young lords and be off with them to the Royal Minster, where my lady is. Hand them over to her, since I can no longer guarantee their safety.” With that, Pharian’s nephew left for the castle. He gathered up the two children and took them away as he had been [52] ordered. Meanwhile, Pharian fought his accuser and killed him in front of Claudas. Then the news reached Claudas that Pharian’s nephew had gone off to remove the children from his grasp. When he heard that, he came to Pharian and gave him a pleasant smile, saying that he should surrender the children to him, and “I will swear to you right now,” he said, “on holy relics, to take care of them and then, when they are old enough to be dubbed knights, to restore their inheritance to them. And if I die beforehand, they will return to your keeping and you will guard the children and the land of Gaunes; and the land of Benoic, too, which is to be theirs, for I have heard, I am sorry to say, that the son of King Ban died a while ago. Iam now of an age to desire no more than the salvation of my soul. In any case, I dispossessed their father only because he refused to become my liegeman even though he had no support from any other lord.” Then Claudas had the relics brought forward and swore before all his vassals that the children would never come to harm on his account, but that he would faithfully keep their land for them until they were old enough to come into possession of it. Pharian accepted his word. He jumped onto his horse and hurried off to where he knew he would find his nephew. When he found him, he took the two children of [53] King Bors and brought them back to Claudas, who welcomed them very warmly. They were the object of every gaze, for they were marvelously Lancelot, Part I handsome boys. Claudas put them into the care of Pharian and his nephew and then very soon thereafter had all four of them put into the tower of Gaunes; the boys were too young, he said, to be made knights, and meanwhile he wanted them kept there. Thus, Lionel and Bors were in prison in the tower of Gaunes, and their two guardians were there with them. King Claudas made a great show of affection for them and ordered that they be given whatever they might desire. But at this point the story leaves off speaking of them and turns to King Claudas himself. 8. Portrayal of King Claudas.' Now, according to the story, King Claudas held the kingdoms of Gaunes and Benoic without any opposition, and he was greatly feared by his neighbors and other people. The only child he had was a very handsome, fair boy almost fifteen years old, named Dorin. He was so arrogant and strong that [54] his father did not yet dare make him a knight, lest he rebel against him as soon as he was able; and the boy spent so freely that no one would fail to rally to him. Claudas was the most anxious of princes and the most miserly in the world. He never gave anything to anyone except when he needed men so much that he was forced to. His size was intimidating, for the story says that he was nine feet tall, as feet were measured at that time. His face was dark and broad, with thick eyebrows and big, widelyspaced, dark eyes. He had a short, twisted nose, a red beard, and hair neither all black nor all red but mixed; and he had a thick neck and large mouth, with bright and even teeth. But his shoulders, his chest, and the rest of his body were so handsome and well-built that better could not be imagined in any man. His traits of character were both good and bad. He was very fond of the poor man who was a fine knight and never wished a rich man to be a fine knight; he hated people who were more powerful than himself and loved those who were his inferiors and had something to gain from his generosity. He liked to go to church but did not offer much to the poor. He liked to rise early and to eat, but he rarely played chess or backgammon or other games. Two or three days [55] in a row he would gladly spend in the woods, but he made no habit of it. He did not readily make commitments but often had recourse to trickery and deception. He had been in love only once in his life, and whenever he was asked why he had put an end to it, he would answer that his desire was to have a long life. “A long life, my lord?” said his men. “Why can’t a man be in love and still live long?” And he would answer that it could not be. “But why, my lord?” they would say. “Because,” he said, “a knight who has true love in his heart can desire only one thing: to surpass everyone else; but no man, however valiant, has a body that can survive all the trials his heart is rash enough to undertake. Still, if 1Corresponds to Micha VII:VIIla; Sommer III:26-33; Kennedy 30-38. 1 bodily strength were great enough to meet all the challenges of the heart, I would have been forever in love and would have surpassed the worthiest men in all the acts of prowess that a good knight may have it in him to perform; for there is no great achievement at arms without true love behind it, and I know my heart so well that I am sure I would have loved, and would love, more truly than all other true lovers.” That is how Claudas spoke to his men in private; and it was the truth, for when in love he had shown remarkable prowess and in many a land had gained great renown for his knightly valor. He had other qualities, too; anyone who told him a secret, for example, could be certain that it would not be revealed. His greatest pleasure was wild-fowl hunting, and he preferred falcons to goshawks. [56] Riding he hardly ever did except on battle horses, unless it were a matter of very long stretches—and then he always kept a large battle horse beside him, whether in peace or in war. Two years after conquering the two kingdoms, Claudas conceived of a great act of prowess, but he pondered it only in his own heart. He said to himself, “I am a man of great means and energy and am feared by many people. King Arthur himself does not dare stand against me: for more than two years I have held two of his vassals’ kingdoms, and he has never dared do anything about it. In fact, I can be sure that I am feared by others if King Arthur himself is afraid of me. But I cannot go on considering myself as bold as I have to be, unless I succeed in making myself his overlord. What I want to do is go to war with him without delay. But since everyone takes him for such a worthy man I want to find out first whether he is as valorous as people say, for it seems to me that no man can receive extreme praise or extreme blame without some of it being true. That is why I want first of all to learn something about him and what he is like; and if he is the sort of man I should go to war against, I will do it very soon; and if I see that I could not defeat him, I'll simply forget such folly and do nothing more about it.” That is how Claudas spoke to himself. Then he went to an uncle of his, an older man, to share his secret thought with him. [57] He made him swear on holy relics that he would not betray him. Then he said, “My dear uncle, I am going off to King Arthur’s court in disguise to find out whether anyone can get the better of him; and if anyone can, I will. But if I see that it would be folly to attack him, I'll give up the idea right away. I will leave my whole land in your care, since I refuse to have my son in charge unless I am known to be dead. If it should happen that I am not back by the end of a year, you could then consider me dead and confidently give him possession of the land. I will have all the vassals in my three realms swear to uphold this arrangement.” He proceeded as planned, saying to his vassals, “My lords, you are my liegemen. I am leaving on a pilgrimage and taking along only a squire. I want you to promise me that you will behave toward my uncle, here present, as you would toward me for as long as a year. If at the end of the year I am not back and you know me to be dead, then you of the Land Laid Waste will give the realm of Berry to my son Dorin, and you of the kingdoms of Benoic and Gaunes will give back to the children of King Bors the land [58] 16 which is properly theirs, that is, the land that I have conquered. For I have heard that the son of King Ban died with his father, and I have no wish to damn my soul by disinheriting anyone after my death. My son will have a great deal if he is worthy; if not, nothing would be safe in his hands, and within this year I do not want him to be in charge of a single furrow of my land. I want you to swear to that. You, dear uncle, will be the first to swear to uphold my terms.” The uncle was the first to take the oath. A very noble man, always loyal to Claudas, he was named Patrice and was lord of a castle just to the west of Gaunes which Claudas had given him, but he was also the hereditary lord of a castle named Charrot and another, nearby, named Dun. Later, in the time of Patrice’s son Issout, who was extremely valiant and powerful, it was called Issoudun, because its original name was too meager for a castle so strong and so rich, and Issou-Dun was as good as DunIssout.? But at the time, the lord of that land was Patrice. Once he had taken the oath, all the other vassals of Claudas did likewise. Four days later, Claudas left on his journey, along with one man-at-arms, who was [59] intelligent and brave and dependable in every way. Claudas rode all the way to Great Britain and found the king in his city of Logres, where he was at war with most of his barons. Arthur had not long been king and had taken Guenevere as queen only seven and a half months before. She was the most beautiful woman that anyone had ever heard of in Arthur’s domain; and you may be sure that never during her lifetime in the kingdom of Logres was there another woman comparable to her in beauty, with only two exceptions. One was the lady of the castle in the border land of North Wales and the Franks; the castle was called Gazevilte and the lady, Elaine the Peerless. ‘The story will speak of her later on. The other was the daughter of the Maimed King, that is, King Pelles, and she was Amite, the mother of Galahad; Galahad was the knight who witnessed the great wonder of the Grail and passed the test of the Perilous Seat at the Round Table and brought an end to the adventures of the danger-filled and adventurous realm that was the kingdom of Logres. The woman who was his mother was of such great beauty that no story tells of any other in her time whose beauty could [60] compare with hers; she was called Amite, though her true name was Helizabel.3 2«Dun-Issout” as in Kennedy 32. Micha and Sommer 28 have the problematic phrase h dus Essout. 3The genealogy presented in the passage that begins, “The other was the daughter” varies from manuscript to manuscript and from one printed edition to another. Essentially, they disagree on the identity of the Grail hero (Galahad or Perceval) and on his relation to Amite (son or brother). This matter, significant for an understanding of the genesis and unity of the Lancelot-Grail cycle, has occasioned considerable comment, e.g., F. Lot, Etude sur le Lancelot en prose (Paris, 1918), 109-114; J.N. Carman, Romance Philology 6 (1952-53), 179-186; E. Kennedy, Meélanges . . . Frappier (Geneva, 1970), 1:527; and A. Micha, Essais sur le cycle du LancelotGraal (Geneva, 1987), 11-29. Lancelot, Part I Guenevere was a queen of great beauty, but her beauty was as nothing beside her character, for she was the most noble and the most worthy of all ladies; and together with that, God gave her such fine virtues that she was loved and esteemed more than anyone else by everyone who knew her. At that time, King Arthur was at war with King Yon of Lesser Ireland, his own cousin King Aguisant of Scotland, the king of the Lands Beyond Galone, and many another of his barons. But he overcame all of them with the help that Our Lord offered time and time again and with the help of the worthy men who from all corners of Christendom were attracted by his valiance. Even from pagan lands men came to serve under him; they turned Christian thanks to his example, and some of them went on to great deeds of prowess in the lands that he ruled. Claudas remained at King Arthur’s court from midAugust to the end of May, disguised as a foreign mercenary. He observed Arthur’s behavior, his generosity and his graciousness, his great {61] intelligence, his goodness, and his prowess. He saw him so stamped with all the virtues of heart and body that he could hold no other man in such high regard. At that point, Claudas and his man took their leave. When they had crossed the sea and come to Wissant, Claudas turned to his man, whom he had found utterly dependable in many a need, and said, “I have done much for you and have found you in turn to be a good man and loyal. Now I urge you, by the allegiance you owe me, to give me faithful counsel about something.” “My lord,” said the man-at-arms, “if I can give you any counsel, I will gladly do so.” “Then listen,” said Claudas; “you don’t know why I went to King Arthur’s court, and no one else does, either. Now, though, I am going to tell you the true story. It occurred to me one day that I was one of the most dynamic men in the world and that, if ] could take over the kingdom of Logres, I would be the most formidable king ever and could conquer so much that I would become king of the whole world. It occurred to me that I should go to war against King Arthur and not stop until I had defeated him. Now, you are so clever and full of insight that you must know whether such an effort would succeed. Tell me, as a friend, what you advise.” “My lord,” he answered, “for anyone with a little insight, the solution is easy. To my mind, [62] the man who yearns to overthrow King Arthur must be a man of unlimited ambition. I think that God made King Arthur what he is, not to be dishonored or humbled, but to hold sway over all people, to win some over through his nobility and that of his knights, and others through his generosity and his graciousness. And we do know that he is extraordinarily rich in land and has at his court the flower of all earthly knighthood. He is the handsomest knight you could imagine. He has such great prowess and such great nobility that he surpasses all other knights, both those of his court and foreign ones. He is so generous and openhanded that you wouldn’t dare imagine what he dares to spend. He is so well-bred and gracious and so outgoing that he shows great hospitality and affection to poor knights no less than to the high-born and gives them costly and Lancelot, Part I attractive presents. In that way he wins the hearts of both rich and poor, for he honors the rich as his companions and the poor for their bravery. He does it in order to increase his fame and his honor in the eyes of God and the world, for whoever accomplishes in the world that which God has given him the power to do earns fame and honor in the eyes of the world and grace and love in the eyes of God. [63] Even if King Arthur were a fool and a bad man and an utter coward, I know of no one whose counselors would advise an effort to defeat him, for anyone who wished to overthrow him would have to be a more powerful man and have great numbers of superior knights under his command. I do not believe that there is anyone like that, anyone more capable than King Arthur; and there could hardly be, for I have never seen in any other high-born man qualities as noble and as fine as I have found in him. For that reason it does not seem to me that he could be overthrown by any man, and I would not dare recommend the attempt to anyone, even a blood-relative. God never made him the way He did just to abandon him, as you assume; and if anyone of God’s creatures, however closely related to me or however good to me he may be, were in a position to overthrow King Arthur and I could prevent it, I would prevent it to the best of my ability; and I would do my penance afterward.” “What are you saying?!” said Claudas. “You would take his side against your liege lord! Have I made you rich and respected for such service as that?” “My lord,” said the other, “if he took up arms against you unjustly, I would fight for you to the death—or even if he did it justly! But if you had the power to [64] overthrow him and tried to do it, I would defend him as well as I could.” “In that case,” said Claudas, “you would be untrue to me and a traitor, as you yourself acknowledge, for you are my legeman and you would be coming to the aid of an outsider against me.” “My lord,” he answered, “I would be neither traitorous nor untrue. I would not be going against you, but rather giving up my allegiance to you in order to protect everyone from sorrow and impoverishment, and to uphold all knighthood, for if that man were to die, I do not know who could ever preserve knighthood and uphold noble conduct. It would be much better for you, who are only one person, to be denied wrongful control of things than for everyone to be plunged into wretchedness and sorrow. Indeed, everyone would be disinherited and ruined if King Arthur were overthrown, because the stability of all of us is his concern. If you or anyone else denounced my words as treasonous and disloyal, I would be ready to defend myself wherever the charge were made. But when an overlord asks counsel of his vassal, the vassal is obliged to express all the reasonableness and loyalty in his heart. If the overlord is willing to trust him and good comes of it, the giver of good counsel is honored for it; and if he is not willing to trust him and the result is bad, the vassal is not only free of shame but discharged of it to his honor.” Claudas thought that the man spoke very persuasively and felt much respect for him, as he well knew that it all came from [65] a greatly noble heart. But to take some extra pleasure in such welcome words, he retorted as if ig angry and said that as soon as they were home again he would force him to acknowledge that his words were treasonous. “In the name of God, my lord,” said the man, scornful of the threat, “I withdraw my allegiance here and now, and I request that you name a day when I may appear at court to defend my loyalty against any man, whether ordinary soldier or knight, who would dare impugn it. And, by the Holy Cross,” said the man, “I am ready, now that you have pushed me to it!” “T will not be deterred,” said Claudas, “from proving right now that you are untrue and traitorous; and no one knows as well as I do the true sense of those words. Let the battle take place right now! And may God grant success to the one who is in the right!” [66] The man put his hand to his sword, and Claudas did likewise, though neither of them was dressed for battle. Claudas had brought some very handsome and protective armor from Britain, but had then left it in Wissant since he wanted to return to his land without being recognized. They were far from any people, and Claudas, who had no desire for a fight, saw the man coming toward him with sword drawn. He knew him to be extremely brave and daring, and was deeply chagrined to realize how far his little joke had gone; but he did not know what to do. If he asked for mercy, word would no doubt get out, and everyone hearing it, not knowing the true circumstances, would consider it an act of cowardice, and Claudas had always hated cowardice. These thoughts bewildered him, and he stood there paralyzed as the other came toward him, sword drawn, demanding satisfaction. He was thoroughly frightened, knowing perfectly well that, once they came to blows, one of them would surely leave the field either dead or wounded. Never had Claudas been so afraid of death or thought himself so close to it. Thus, the two men were headed toward each other. Still, Claudas hesitated. When he saw the other all ready to strike, he cried out that he should let him speak for a moment first. The man paused, and Claudas said, “Come now! I brought you up and I have done much for you. If I kill you, I want to know that you have forgiven me for your death, for [67] other people cannot know, as we do, what provoked this duel.” The man was stunned by these words, stunned that his lord was asking him for a pardon that he, the liegeman, should have sought. He said, “Sir Claudas, my lord, there is more virtue in your heart, if you were only willing to let it be seen, than in all the other hearts that now exist. You have convinced me not to do battle with you today, however much I might like to. Let us go instead into the kingdom of Gaul to fight our duel in front of the king, for it is true that if I killed you here in this place, I would always be blamed for murder and betrayal, and so would you if you killed me.” Claudas was pleased with what he heard and agreed to the proposal. The other wanted to take his leave; he said that he would be ready for battle three days later in front of the king of Gaul. 4Several of Micha’s manuscript sources, like Kennedy’s text, attribute the challenge to the young man rather than Claudas. 18 “What do you mean?” said Claudas. “I agree to the proposal, but not to see you leave now! That would be an unfair blow, as I have taken you abroad with me to serve me and you would be deserting me just when I needed you most. I don’t want anyone to find me so bereft. I ask you, then, to stay with me and to go on serving me as you have done.” The man said that he would never again serve his mortal enemy or remain in his service. “Listen now,” said Claudas; “you know [68] that we have agreed to postpone our duel until we reach the king of Gaul; and you know that once I am armed for combat I will be facing a man better than myself and able, with some effort, to defeat me. I’ll be showing you an extraordinary honor which would be unthinkable even in combat with King Arthur himself; the truth is that I consider myself already defeated. I want you to know that what I said to you was no more than a joke; and now I’ve lived to see a time when I would give anything or even disappear beyond the Sea of Greece if only I could take back my words! I am ready, too, to swear to you on holy relics, at the first church we find, that I am grateful to you for everything you said. And for the great noble spirit that I recognize in you, I grant you the honor of being constable of my court from this day forward, and I will make you a knight on Saint John’s Day,° because I would not lose you for the best of my castles.” As they rode on and Claudas made his plea, they came to a church that they had noticed near the road, to the right; there was a hermitage there. Claudas dismounted; he swore to abide by his promises and then kissed the man to seal the oath. In such manner, peace was made between them, and they rode on until they came to Bourges, where [69] Claudas’s people welcomed him joyously. Three days later, Patrice, his uncle, came to him and told him how his son Dorin had caused great harm in the land, damaging towns, seizing livestock, and killing and wounding men. ‘I am not troubled by all that,” said Claudas. “He has the right, for a king’s son must not be prevented from being as generous as he may like, and royalty cannot allow itself to be impoverished by giving. I have seen so much generosity since leaving here that I would find it hard to believe it could be different anywhere in the world; and I am well aware that true generosity is the noblest quality that a man can have, that is, the generosity that is extended without regard to need. Such is the generosity of King Arthur.” Then he told his men how he had gone to Britain and why; told them all about the queen and the superb knights in the king’s household, from lands near and far. After that, he told them about the dispute that he had had with his man-at-arms and how he had settled it, recounting the story from beginning to end, but omitting the great fear that he had felt. This led to much joking through the court; it embarrassed the man mightily and made him feel like a fool. When Saint John’s Day came, Claudas made him a knight and invested him with the constabulary of his court, and the man was henceforth a knight of great bravery, [70] 5The Feast (nativity) of John the Baptist, June 24. Lancelot, Part I just as he had been a brave soldier. His name was Arcois the Fleming. Claudas was thus back in his own land, but at this point the story takes leave of him and turns back to Lancelot, who was in the Lake. 9. Portrayal of Lancelot as a Boy.’ At this point the story recounts that when Lancelot had been in the care of the Lady of the Lake for the three years you have heard about, he was so beautifully developed that everyone seeing him thought that he was a third again older than his real age. Along with being big for his age, he was better behaved and more intelligent and agile than a child of his age was expected to be. The Lady found a tutor who taught him how to behave like a man of good birth. Still, in the whole household there was no person apart from the young woman and a maidservant of hers who knew who he was, and so they all called him The Child, as the tale has already explained. As soon as the boy could handle it, his tutor made him a bow of appropriate size and light arrows and taught him how to shoot at a target. Then, when he was ready, he had him shoot at little birds in the forest. As he grew bigger and stronger in body and limb, his bow and arrows also increased in size and he began to hunt hare and other small animals and large [71] birds wherever he could find them. As soon as he could mount a horse, he was given a very fine one that was well equipped with reins and saddle and other things. He rode up and down around the Lake, never going very far; nor was he alone, but had the fine company of noble lads, both older and younger, and of men of high birth. He behaved so beautifully in their company that everyone who saw him thought that he was one of the noblest and most refined beings in the world. And, indeed, he was. Chess and backgammon and all the games he saw he learned so easily that when he reached the age of training for knighthood, there was none left for anyone to teach him. He was, says the story, the handsomest lad in the world, with the most beautifully formed torso and limbs. Nor may the details of his face be overlooked; they need to be described for all people who like to hear about great beauty in a youth..He had a perfect complexion, neither too fair nor too dark, but a blend of the two; it might be called light brunet. His face glowed with such harmoniously measured natural ruddiness that it was obvious that God had combined the three tones: fair was not eclipsed or spoiled by dark nor dark by fair, [72] but they were rather tempered by each other, and the ruddy overlay brightened the blend of the other tones with its own brightness, so that the face showed no inequality of colors but only a harmonious mixture of all three. His mouth was small and well proportioned, the lips red and well shaped, and the teeth small, white, and compact. His chin was shapely, with a tiny cleft; the nose was moderately long, slightly hooked in the middle. His Corresponds to Micha VIL:I[Xa; Sommer III:33—40; Kennedy 38-48, Lancelot, Part I eyes were bright and smiling and full of delight as long as he was in a good mood, but when he was angry, they looked just like glowing coals and it seemed that drops of red blood stood out from his cheekbones. He would snort like an angry horse and clench and grind his teeth, and it seemed that the breath coming out of his mouth was all red; then he would shout like a trumpet in battle, and whatever he had his teeth in or was gripping in his hands he would pull to pieces. In short, when he was in a rage, he had no sense or awareness of anything else, and this became apparent on many an occasion. He had a high, becoming forehead, with dark, widely separated eyebrows; his fine hair was so purely blond and gleaming that throughout his early years no hair could ever have been of more beautiful color. But when he reached the age to bear arms—as you will hear—his hair changed from [73] pure blond to auburn, and it was always curly and moderately light and very attractive. There is no point in wondering about his neck. Even as the neck of a beautiful woman, it would have been very becoming and attractive, well proportioned to the shoulders and body, neither too thin nor too thick, neither overly long nor overly short. His shoulders were high and wide as they ought to be, and his chest was such that one so broad and full and well developed could not be found in any other body. No one could have found fault with any part of him, but people who saw him did agree that, if his chest had been a bit less fully developed, he would have been that much more attractive and appealing. Later on, the worthy Queen Guenevere, who had more to say on the subject than others, said that God had not given him a chest in any way too big or deep or expansive, for it suited his great heart, which would have burst had it not been lodged in a large enough enclosure. “And if I were God,” she said, “I would not have made Lancelot any smaller or any bigger.” Such were his shoulders and his chest. His arms were long and straight, with just the right development of flesh and muscle around the bones. His hands were just like a woman’s, except that the fingers were slightly less delicate. As for his back [74] and hips, you could not imagine better made in another knight. His thighs and legs were straight, and his feet properly arched; and no man ever stood more straight than he. He sang marvelously well when he wanted to, but it was not often, as no one ever showed so little cheerfulness without good grounds; but when he had good reason to celebrate, he was more spirited and gay by far than anyone else could be. And he often said,? when he was full of joy, that there was nothing his heart dared undertake that his body could not accomplish, so much did he trust in the joy which let him meet many a great challenge with success. But such self-confident words were taken the wrong way by many people, who believed that he was speaking out of arrogance and boastfulness. That was not the case, however, and he was rather expressing the great assurance that he found in the very source of his joy. 2That is, once he had grown up and come to know the “joy” of love. The “very source of his joy,” a few lines below, is no doubta reference to Guenevere. i2 That was how Lancelot looked, and how his face and torso and limbs were crafted. But qualities of the heart were firmly fixed in him as well, for he was the dearest and the most good-natured of all comparable youths, yet he knew too how to deal with men of ill will. No boy of such great generosity had ever been seen: he gave to his companions as eagerly as he received. He honored men of good birth with an open heart and undivided attention; and no suchmannered youth had ever been seen, for he was never disagreeable to anyone without a reason so good that no one could blame him for it. But when he was angered by some wrong done to him, [75] it was no easy thing to calm him down. He was of such keen mind and sound judgment that, once he had passed his tenth year, he hardly ever strayed from proper behavior. Still, if he had a desire to do something which to his heart seemed good and reasonable, he was not easy to stop and he paid no heed to his tutor. It happened one day that, together with his tutor and other companions, he was out hunting a small roebuck. They had all been riding for a long time and were starting to slow down. Lancelot and his tutor, though, being on better mounts than the others, went on. It was not long before the tutor and his horse stumbled, and the horse broke his neck. The boy did not look back but galloped on after his quarry, which he shot dead on a paved road. Then he dismounted to truss the roebuck behind him; in front of him he had his pointer, which all day had tracked the roebuck ahead of the other dogs. As he was heading back toward his companions, who had become anxious about him, he came upon a man on foot who was leading a weary and sluggish horse by the bridle. The man was a very handsome young fellow with a beard just beginning to grow. He was all scratched. He was dressed simply in a tunic, with a cape attached at his neck, and was wearing spurs covered with the blood of his horse; the animal had run so long that he could hardly take another step. When the stranger saw the boy, he felt greatly embarrassed and, bowing his head, began to weep very softly. [76] The boy paused for him a moment at the side of the road, and asked who he was and where he was going in that state. Fairly sure that the lad was of very high birth, he answered, “Good sir, God grant you honor! It cannot matter to you who I am, since I am very poor, and will be even poorer in three days, unless God helps me more than He has done until now. Yet I was once very comfortable, many times more than now.” “What has happened to you?” said Lancelot. “Iam a man of noble birth on both my father’s side and my mother’s, and I am all the more sick at heart over the misfortunes that have come my way. If I were a peasant, my heart could more easily tolerate whatever trouble I might have.” The boy was deeply moved by this, but still said, “How can you be a man of high birth and yet weep, no matter what the cause, unless it be a friend? you’ve lost or some disgrace you can’t undo? No noble heart should be distressed by a setback that can be reversed.” 3“friend” translates ami, which may also mean “relative.” 20 The young man was surprised by this lad who was so young and could yet speak so nobly, and he wondered who he was. “In fact, good sir,” he said, “I am not weeping over the loss of a friend or any land I’ve had to give up. I have been summoned to appear tomorrow morning at the court of King Claudas [77] to confront a traitor who some time ago killed a member of my family, a very honorable knight, in his bed, on account of his wife. As I was riding along yesterday evening, he had me ambushed in the forest I was passing through. My horse was fatally wounded right under me but managed to carry me out of danger, and then a good man—God bless him!—gave me this one. But I’ve worked him so hard in order to avoid being killed that he is barely good for anyone anymore. “I am indeed grieving for the friends I lost in the ambush, who were wounded and killed; and I am also very sorry that I can’t be at King Claudas’s court at my appointed time. If I could be, I would find relief for my sorrow at the same time as satisfaction for the wrong done; but now I can only remain disgraced because of my delay.” “Tell me,” said the boy, “if you had a fast, strong horse, could you get there in good time?” “Yes, I could, my lord,” he answered, “even if I still walked a third of the way.” ‘In God’s name, then,” said the boy, “you will not be shamed for lack of a horse—neither you nor any other wellborn man—as long as I have one and know it is needed.” He then dismounted and gave him the horse that he had been riding; and then he mounted the other, with his game again behind him and the pointer on a leash. [78] After a short while, he had to stop riding, because the horse was in such great pain that he could not go on. On foot, he urged the animal forward, but he had not gone far when he came upon a vavasor on horseback, holding a switch in his hand and accompanied by two greyhounds and a pointer. The vavasor was advanced in age, and the youth, as soon as he saw him, greeted him. The other wished him God’s blessing in reply and asked where he was from. He answered that he was from the region nearby. “It’s clear,” said the vavasor, “that, whoever you are, you’re a handsome lad and well brought up. But what are you doing here, my boy?” ‘ “My lord,” he said, “I have been hunting, as you can see. I’ve caught this roebuck, and you may have some if you care to take it, for Iam sure it would be put to good use.” “All my thanks, my dear boy,” said the vavasor; “I can’t decline such a sincere and kind offer. Your ancestry must be as noble as your heart. In fact, I needed this game: I have just married off one of my daughters and I was out hunting for something that would please the wedding guests, but I had no success.” The vavasor dismounted, went over to the roebuck, and asked the youth how much he should take. “My lord,” said the boy, “are you a knight?” The answer was yes. “Then you will have all of it, for I could not put it to better use than to let it be eaten at the wedding of a knight’s daughter.” The vavasor was delighted with that answer. He took the roebuck, tied it to his horse, and urged the youth to accept the hospitality [79] of his house and table, including Lancelot, Part I some of the game itself; but the boy declined, saying that his companions were not far away. “Then I bid you goodbye,” said the vavasor. With that, the man rode off, wondering who the lad could be, for he seemed to bear a close resemblance to someone but the vavasor could not think who it was. At last it struck him that he resembled the king of Benoic more than anyone else. Then he spurred his horse to turn around and he rushed back toward the boy. He found him mounted (since the horse no longer had the roebuck to carry along) but moving along very slowly. Out of breath, he said to him, “My good lad, could you perhaps tell me who you are?” The youth answered no, not now, “but,” he said, “why does it matter to you?” “The truth is,” said the man, “you remind me more than anyone else of a certain lord of mine who was a very worthy man, and if you had any need of me, I would risk body and land for you; and so would seventy other knights within four leagues of this spot.” “Who was the good man that I look like?” said the boy. And the vavasor answered, with tears in his eyes, “King Ban of Benoic it was. This whole land was his, but he was robbed of his inheritance and then his son, who was the most beautiful child of his age in the world, was lost. a “And who disinherited him?” said the boy. “A rich and powerful king, my good friend: Claudas of the Land Laid Waste, a neighbor [80] of this kingdom. But if you are King Ban’s son, in the name of God, let me know! All the men and women of this land would greet the news with joy, and I would guard you like my very self and even better, for I would sacrifice my body to protect yours.” ‘But Iam no son of a king, as far as I know,” said the youth, “even if I have often been called one. But I like you for what you are saying; you are speaking like a loyal vassal.” The vavasor saw that he would get no further word from him; yet his heart would not let the the matter rest, and he felt sure that the boy was the son of his overlord. He said, “My good lord, whoever you are, to judge by your body and your face you must be of high nobility. Here you see two of the best greyhounds that I have ever had; please accept one of them. And may God let you grow and prosper, and may He keep our lord, if he is still alive, and take pity on the soul of the good man who sired him!” When the boy heard that the greyhounds were very good, he was delighted and said that he would gladly have one of them and would repay him for it should the occasion arise. “But give me the better one,” he said. The man handed him the dog by the chain and was satisfied it was a wise and proper gift. Thereupon they said goodbye to each other, the boy going off in one direction and the vavasor in the other, [81] thinking of the lad all the while. It was not long before the boy encountered his tutor and three other men who had been looking for him. They were surprised when they saw him on a scrawny old horse, with two dogs on a leash, bow around his neck, and quiver hanging from his belt; and he had used his spurs so freely on the horse that he was covered with blood almost up to the knees. His tutor asked him what he had done with his own horse, and he said that he had lost it. Lancelot, Part I “And where did you get this one?” he asked. “It was given to me,” he answered. But the tutor did not believe him, and urged him in the name of his lady to tell him what had really happened. The boy, who would never lightly speak a lie, acknowledged the truth and told him about the horse and about the roebuck that he had given to the vavasor. “What!” said the tutor, who wanted to show his authority. “You mean you gave away the horse which you were so attached to that you couldn’t imagine any other, and gave away my lady’s roebuck? And without my permission?” With that, the tutor drew threateningly closer, but the boy said, “Sir, don’t be angry. This greyhound that I have in exchange is worth two such horses!” “By all that’s holy,” said the tutor, “you’ll be sorry you said that! Once we’re done, any trouble you get into in the future will be nothing next to this!” [82] Then he raised his hand and gave him a slap that knocked him off his mount. The boy did not cry out or weep, but despite the blow repeated that he preferred the greyhound to two such horses. Hearing him answer back again, the tutor raised a stick that he was holding and struck the dog’s flanks. The stick was thin and cutting, and the animal’s flesh tender; it let out a shrill yelp. That angered the boy so that he dropped the dogs’ leash and seized the bow with both hands from around his neck. The tutor realized what was happening and tried to grasp and hold him, but the lad was quick and agile; he jumped aside and struck him on the head with the edge of his bow so forcefully that he cut right through hair and scalp and knocked him down to the ground, and the bow itself broke apart. When he saw his bow in pieces, he became furious and swore at the tutor for having broken it; he charged again, striking him on the head and arms and all over the body, so much that in the end no piece of the weapon was left large enough for one more blow. Just then the other three men came running up to seize him. With no other means of defense, he pulled his arrows out of his quiver and hurled them at the men in an attempt to kill them. [83] They turned and ran off as best they could, and the tutor rose and darted into the forest underbrush. The boy then mounted the horse of one of the men who had just fled, and rode off accompanied by his dogs, one in front of him and the other behind. After a while, he came to a broad valley. There he sawa great herd of does grazing. He raised his hands to seize the bow that he thought still hung around his neck, when he recalled that he had broken it on his tutor’s head. He was upset almost to the point of rage and swore to himself that, if he could find the man, he would make him pay dearly for the fact that he was now unable to catch one of the does. Indeed, he thought, he could not fail, had he the bow, to capture one of them, for he had the best greyhound in the world and the best pointer. Angry and upset, he continued on his way, until he came back to the Lake. He rode through the gate into the yard, dismounted, and went off to show his fine greyhound to the Lady. But when he came into her presence, he found his tutor there as well; he was covered with blood and had already made his complaint. The boy greeted his lady, and vali in the greeting that she returned there was more love than any heart has ever had for a child not of one’s own flesh. She made a show of being extremely angry, however, and said, “Prince, why did you do such an outrageous thing, beating and wounding the man [84] I had named to be your tutor and instructor?” “The truth is, my lady,” he answered, “that, when he was beating me, he was not my tutor or my instructor, because I had done nothing wrong; but I didn’t care about being beaten myself. He was brutal to my dog, though, one of the best greyhounds in the world, and almost killed him right in front of my eyes, just because I loved him. Then he did me further harm, too: he prevented me from shooting one of the most beautiful does in the world.” Then he told her how he had given away his horse and his roebuck and how he had found the does and would have caught at least one of them if he had still had his bow. “And you may be sure,” he said, “that the first time I find him anywhere outside these walls, he is going to die!” When the lady heard him speak with such resolve, she was very pleased, as she realized that he could not fail to become a worthy knight; she was very pleased that, with God’s help and hers, he would be a man of great valor. Still, she made a show of being angry, and the boy believed her and could not contain his wrath. He turned threateningly toward the tutor, who had so stirred the lady’s anger against him. But she called him back, saying, [85] “What! Do you think you can give away your horses and my property just like that, and give a beating to the tutor that I have put in charge of you to keep you out of trouble and teach you proper conduct?! I don’t want you to do such things!” “My lady,” he said, “I need to guard against such acts as long as I choose to remain under your control and in the charge of a knave. But when I choose to leave, I will go where I wish and seek my fortune where I can. You must understand, before I go, that a man cannot attain great honor if he lives too long under the orders of a tutor or guardian, man or woman, for he is too often forced to cower. As far as I am concerned, I have no further interest in a tutor; of lord or lady I have nothing to say. But too bad for the son of a king, if he dares not be bold and generous with the things he owns!” “What!” said the lady. “Do you think that you’re a prince, just because I call you one?” “My lady,” he said, “I am called a prince and I have been regarded as one.” “Then let me tell you,” she went on, “that whoever took you for the son of a king was mistaken. You’re not a princel” “My lady,” he said, and he sighed, “that’s too bad. My heart would have risen to it.” And with that he started away in deep distress, for he was unable to utter a single word. [86] Then the lady jumped up and took him by the hand and brought him back. Again and again she kissed him on the eyes and and on the mouth, with great tenderness, so that no one watching would have doubted he was her child. Then she said, “My dear son, don’t be upset! So help me God, I want you to make gifts of horses and whatever, and you will have no lack of things. Even if you were forty years tag) old, you would have been right to give away the horse and the game as you did. From now on I want you to be independent and in charge of yourself, since you can judge very well by yourself what is proper behavior for a young man. No matter whose son you are, you have in fact the heart of a king’s son, for you were born to one who would have dared to rival the world’s loftiest king in bodily prowess and greatness of heart.” Thus did the Lady of the Lake comfort Lancelot and reassure him as a result of the resounding statement he had made. That is how the story relates this episode, but at this point it has no more to tell about the boy and turns back instead to his mother and his aunt the queen of Gaunes, tearful and helpless in the Royal Minster. 10. King Arthur Is Rebuked for His Indifference to Queens Elaine and Evaine and Their Children.’ Now the story says that Queen Elaine of Benoic and her sister, the queen of Gaunes, were together in the Royal Minster. The queen of Benoic was leading an admirable and very holy life, and so was her sister. The place had so grown and prospered in the seven years since the queen’s arrival that there were now thirty nuns there, all local gentlewomen; and thanks to her efforts, the head of the abbey came there, too. [87] The queen of Benoic was in the habit of going out every day after high Mass to the hill where her lord and husband had died and to the Lake where she had lost her son. There she would pray earnestly, as God had instructed her, for the soul of her lord, that God might take pity on him, and she would pray for her son, who she believed was surely dead. One Monday morning, it happened that she had had a special Mass sung in memory of her husband and her son, and then heard the high Mass, so that she grew impatient to be off to her private mourning. As soon as she reached the top of the hill, she cried and wept long tears. Then she went down to the Lake where she had lost her son and wept so bitterly that she was aware of nothing else. As she was thus plunged in her grief and weeping, a monk and his squire came riding by. The man was dressed all in black, his closed cape as black as the rest. On seeing the queen so absorbed in her grief, he had to wonder who she was and why she was weeping so. He rode up toward her, but she, immersed in her grief, did not notice him until he was standing in front of her. He gazed at her and saw how beautiful she was and thought she must be a woman of nobility. Then he pushed back his hood and greeted her. “My lady,” he said, “God grant you comfort, for it seems to me that you do not have the comfort [88] that you need.” The queen glanced up at the good man and acknowledged his greeting, sorry though she was that she had not noticed him before he had come so close. ‘Corresponds to Micha VII:Xa; Sommer III:40-47; Kennedy 48-57. Lancelot, Part I When the queen saw the monk, she saw that he was very old and that he looked like a very worthy man. And, indeed, he had certainly been caught up in worldly deeds before dedicating himself to Our Lord, for he had been a valiant knight but quite some time ago had given up earthly knighthood and withdrawn to a hermitage. There he had succeeded in attracting others like him, and they now lived together according to the rule of Saint Augustine. He was tall and solidly built and had greying hair and bright eyes that were large for his face. His look was stern, and he had scars on his face and head and in many other places that you could not see. His hands were thin and gnarled, with prominent veins; his shoulders were broad; and he sat up straight, with his feet firmly fixed in his stirrups. He said to the queen, “My lady, who are you, please? And why are you weeping so? Once a lady has dedicated herself to the service of Our Lord, she should not, it seems to me, grieve over anything except her own sins; she should put all earthly losses behind her.” At these words, the queen thought that he was surely a very worthy man and of wise counsel, and [89] she said, “The truth is, sir, that I am weeping because I cannot do otherwise; nor am I weeping over any loss of land or property. I am an unhappy, wretched woman, who was once mistress of the land of Benoic and the country all around. I lost my lord, who was the worthiest man on earth, at this very place; and I lost my son, the most beautiful child of all, when some young woman carried him off and, with my child in her arms, jumped into that lake. I do not know whether she was human or a devil, but she had all the appearance of a woman. Because my husband died of grief, I am very fearful for his soul, as much as I am bound to be for my own, for once we were joined in true marriage, we were as one flesh; that is what the Holy Church teaches, and I believe it. And so I weep and cry for my lord, hoping that God will be moved to pity by my sinner’s tears. As for my son, lost to me in the way I have said, my heart aches for him. Had he died before my eyes, I would eventually have been able to forget him, because I know that in the end we all must die. But when I remember that my son was drowned, that boy born in true wedlock and offspring of a noble line, whom God chose to witness His great wonders and honor foreign lands with his presence and honor His lofty name and exalt His faith, then I have the feeling that God deprived me of both the boy and his father out of some hatred [90] for me, even though I had never, to my knowledge, wronged Him. And so I weep out of fear of Our Lord and out of fear for the soul of my husband, lest it be sent down to eternal death, and out of anguish over the ugly death of my son.” “My lady,” said the good man, “surely there are solid grounds for your grief, for you have lost much—too much—and not only you but many other people who have been hurt by the same loss. Still, you may be going too far, for in all things we need to keep a sense of reason and moderation. Besides, since you have renounced the world and taken the veil for the love of God, it is not proper for you to show your grief in this place and that; you should bemoan your sins and those of others not in public but in your Cloister, as privately as possible. I do believe, though, Lancelot, Part I that you do not care to do it in private, not out of vanity, but to comfort your heart, which has been wounded and is anguished and sore. May God have pity on the soul of the good man who was your husband! His loss is great, and there is no recovery possible for you; it is very sad. But about your son be reassured! I tell you in all truth that he is safe and well and thriving.” At these words, the queen was so dumbfounded that for a long while she could say nothing. When at last she could speak, she fell to the feet of the monk and said to him through her tears, “Ah, good [91] sir, please, are you telling me the truth? Is my son Lancelot safe and well?” “I give you my word as a monk,” he said, “that he is well and in good health.” She was so filled with joy that she fainted straightway. At that, a nun who was standing nearby ran to her aid, and so did the good man, who was deeply moved by what he saw. When she regained her senses, he comforted her and assured her that he had told her the truth. “Good sir,” she said, “in the name of God, how do you know that? You have given my heart the greatest joy it has ever felt. And if the news were not true, I would be more crushed than ever before.” “T know it,” he said, “from someone who sees him day and night. And you may be certain that, even if he were with you and you were still queen of the land of Benoic, he would not be any better treated than where he is being raised now.” “Ah, my lord,” she said, “please tell me where he is. If it is a place where I cannot see him, at least I can often gaze in his direction and find some comfort in that way.” “My lady,” he said, “all I can tell you is that he is healthy and well. And [92] even that neither you nor I myself would come close to knowing if it were not that the people who have him want your heart to be at rest.” “Ah, sir,” she said, “please tell me, if you can, if he is in the hands of his enemies or of people who care for his welfare.” “My lady,” he said, “be assured that he is in the hands of people who would do their utmost to keep him from all harm; his enemies will never lay their hands on him.” The queen was overjoyed by that, so much so that she could barely believe that the good man was speaking the truth. She asked him, “My lord, do you know any of the sisters who live with me?” He said that he thought he did, and he looked at the nun who was there with the queen and recognized her; she, moreover, recognized him. The queen was then reassured and said, “Sir, please come back to the convent with us, and you will see other sisters whom you know and who will be very glad to see you.” Thus the queen led him back to the nuns’ compound, and they went in. When the sisters heard that there was a worthy monk come to see them, they all clustered about, and indeed many recognized him and welcomed him warmly. The queen took them aside and asked whether she could trust what he might report to her. “Yes, my lady,” they said; “he would never lie; he was a very worthy man in the world and now he is a worthy servant of Our Lord.” Zo Then all the ladies invited him to eat, but he said that, as God knew, he would not eat more than once a day, “for our order forbids us to. But this lady,” he said, “moved me very deeply today; she once did me a great favor, for which I would like to thank her. I’ll tell you what that favor was, and I believe that she will surely remember it. It happened one time that [93] her lord the king—may God keep his soull—was holding court with many people in attendance; it was Epiphany, and he was making many presents of knightly robes and other fine and precious things. When I arrived on the eve of the feast day, it was already so late in the day and there were so many knights gathered that the king had given away all his robes. When my lady here saw that there was no robe for me, she said that I looked like too worthy a man to remain at the feast without a robe, and so she had one made to measure for me from some splendid silk cloth that had been meant for her, and she gave it to me to wear. I was then more richly dressed than any other knight at court. That is the favor that my lady did me, and I don’t consider it a small one, so I will do whatever I can to pay her back for it. And what I can do is help her with the labors of my body and with my speech, which has been heard and heeded by many a powerful man.” Then the monk said, “My lady, it is a great joy to the world and a great honor to God that so noble a lady as you, a woman so high-born and descended from such a noble line, has dedicated herself utterly to the service of Our Lord. Your soul will reap the benefit, please God. But I feel sorrow for the land of Benoic and the land of Gaunes, now fallen into the hands of the traitor Claudas. We and our people are harmed by that, and [94] King Arthur bears the shame of it, because he should long ago have avenged our disgrace. I want you to know that I am on my way to a monastery of ours that is nearby. As soon as I've reached it, I'll leave again for King Arthur’s court, where I will make an appeal in your behalf. Your son will yet be ruler of his land, please God, and, with God’s blessing, a very worthy man.” At these words, the queen of Gaunes came out of her room, where she had been taking a nap, since like her sister she never spent a night without rising at least three times for prayers. When she heard the report that her nephew Lancelot was still alive, she was so happy that her legs gave way and she fell to the floor in a faint. As the queen of Benoic and the other nuns helped her up, the good monk asked who she was and what was the matter. “You don’t know, my lord?” said the queen of Benoic; “this is my sister, the queen of Gaunes. She fainted, I am sure, out of joy for her nephew.” “In the name of God,” said the woman who had just come out of her swoon, “that is not the reason. Joy for my nephew makes me smile, not weep or faint. No, I fainted out of grief for the children I have lost; my heart was suddenly so overcome with longing that it almost broke.” “My lady,” said the good man, “fear no longer for your children. Our Lord is all-powerful and is protecting them just as He has been protecting your nephew, whom you and everyone else believed dead. Your children likewise are well and in good health. And amid all your woes and with all the misfortunes and tribulations you have had, you should take ES comfort in the knowledge that the two of you are together in the care of [95] Our Lord. Now take comfort from each other for your sorrows and enjoy together the benefits that you have. Think of that great wealth that is everlasting, for you have had more than enough of the wealth of this world and you can readily see what nothingness all our earthly greatness becomes. Our Lord will not forget you, for He is more compassionate and gracious than tongue can tell, and He will take pity on you and bring you forth out of your affliction into His great and eternal joy. I who am a mortal man and a sinner have been so touched by pity that, God knows, I will never rest, except in the hearing of His Mass, until I have been to the court of King Arthur and have appealed your disinheritance and detailed his great shame. There is no court in the world that I would not dare address, especially if powerful barons and wise men were present. Nevertheless, I know that King Arthur has had so much to do for so long now that it is no wonder if he has delayed attending to your case. There are scarcely any barons who have not taken up arms against him, to the point where many have believed he would in the end be driven from the court, and it is perhaps for this reason that he has not been hearing any suits. It is hard to blame him for it.” At that point the good man took his leave, commending to God both the two queens and all the other ladies. He rode on tirelessly until he reached Great Britain and found King Arthur in London [96] together with a very large retinue. It was the first week of September, according to the story, when King Arthur had come down from Scotland from an encounter with King Aguisant, his own cousin and three times in revolt against him; they had just come to a good and secure peace accord. In addition, King Arthur had reached a truce, until Easter, with the king of Outre les Marches, the Land Beyond the Borders. He had come, then, to stay awhile where he felt most comfortable, and there were many men of his household with him, along with other knights. ~ That day, according to the story, was Sunday. King Arthur was at table, surrounded by people of all kinds and from many a foreign country. The monk who had come from the land of Benoic entered. He strode down the middle of the hall as far as the high table where the king sat; many noble barons were sitting there, too. He had pushed back his hood and very much looked the worthy man that he was. He had a smooth and eloquent tongue and a confident face, and his speech was loud enough for everyone to hear. “King Arthur,” he said, “God save you, worthiest man that ever was, and best—if not for one thing!” King Arthur gazed in astonishment at the good man who thus addressed him with both praise and blame in front of his men. He was flushed with embarrassment,” and all the people in the hall were shocked. The king, ever wise and courteous, returned his greeting. “God bless you, good sir,” he said, “no matter whether I am good or bad! Now that you have begun, go on 2The Old French original does not distinguish between “embarrassment” and “shame,” both of which are usually expressed by honte. Lancelot, Part I and tell me how I fall short of being the [97] best king and most worthy man in the world. I would gladly know.” ‘T’ll tell you,” said the good man. “Tt is true that, of all the kings now living or that we have heard about, you are the one who best maintains the honor of knighthood, and you have done more good, both spiritual and worldly, than any king we have heard of heretofore. But you are too slow to avenge acts of shame and injury done to you! The truth is, whoever harms a liegeman of yours harms you, for however the vassal may be harmed, the shame of it is always yours. You honor and fear and serve those who disloyally take up arms against you and attack you; and those who have served you loyally and faithfully, those you forget! Yet they have lost lands and honors, even their lives, and risk losing their souls in your service! Now I have explained how you fall short of being the most worthy man who has ever been.” When the king heard this, he felt greatly embarrassed, and the people present in the hall were all astounded, saying that they had never before heard a monk speak so well or so boldly address a man so important; and most of them had stopped eating and were looking on in astonishment. Then Bedivere the Constable came forward and saw that more than half of the knights were so intent upon following the monk’s speech that they were no longer eating. He turned to him and said, “Sir monk, stop speaking now until my lord the king has eaten, and then you can speak to him at leisure. What you have been saying has so disturbed the court that they have all, rich and poor, stopped eating.” “What!” said the good man. [98] “Sir knight, am I then to stifle the word from which everyone can benefit, just for the sake of that gluttonous and annoying vessel we call the stomach? However fine or rich the foods it swallows, it turns them into ugly filth. No, indeed! I’ll not be quiet about the thing that troubles my heart, and once I have said my piece, there will be no knight here so rash as to claim that it is not the truth. Or if there be, the matter will be settled by arms in the presence of this whole noble gathering before this day has given way to night. You have displayed the behavior of a child, coming before all these tried and tested knights to stop me from speaking. Yet you don’t know what need I have to speak or what great good may come from my words, and I certainly don’t believe that you are any more valiant or esteemed than two good men I once saw in the house of King Uther Pendragon of Britain. I mean Hervi of Rivel and Canet of Occire, who had such prowess that no other pair of knights could have replaced them. Never would they cast a poor and needy man out of court, but rather help him to their utmost; and yet they were no less influential in the household of King Uther—may God preserve his soull—than you are in the household of his son, King at eal Ol Then Hervi of Rivel stepped forward, who was in attendance at the head of the high table (for King Arthur liked company and always had in attendance knights of all ages and would-be knights both young and old). When Hervi recognized the good monk, no need to ask whether he greeted him with joy and honor! He embraced him warmly and kissed him on the mouth again and again. Lancelot, Part I Then he took him by the left hand, led him before the king, and said, “My lord, believe whatever this man tells you, for kings and princes should heed his words. Be assured that with his great courage and prowess he so far outshone any other knight in God’s creation that in dire need I would confidently have turned to him to defend my honor and preserve my head.” “Well, then,” said the king, “who is he?” “My lord,” said Hervi, “he is Adragain the Dark, the brother of Mador the Black, the good knight of the Black Isle. When King Urien was still alive, he treated our good man with great honor, out of love for his brother Mador, for the two of them had long been companions in arms.” Once he was recognized, you can’t imagine what a joyous welcome they all gave him. King Arthur himself had often seen him in the distant past, and he welcomed him with honor, as he so well knew how to do. Bedivere was abashed, though, to recall what he had just said to him. The king said to the good man, “Good sir, [100] now you may say whatever you wish, whether to my honor or my shame, for I have no doubt that you are a person whom even the most important man in the world should listen to.” “My lord,” he answered, “if not for just one thing, I would have nothing to reprove you for. But there is the death of King Ban of Benoic, which you have never avenged although he died on his way to your court. His wife, moreover, has remained a disinherited widow and has even been robbed of one of the most beautiful children ever to have lived. This matter so sullies your reputation that it is a wonder how you can dare look any honorable man in the face. And you may be certain that no failing will ever hinder your rise in the world as much as this one. Let me make it clear that I have come here for only one reason: my pity for the widow, who, out of anguish and fear of being dishonored, withdrew to a convent and took the veil. Claudas, meanwhile, is so feared throughout the land that no one has been bold enough to dare, for the sake of God and justice, to come before you with this plea.” “Worthy man,” said the king, “it is true I agree that what you are saying is right and just, but it’s also true that I have never heard this plea. In fact, word of the case did reach me a while ago; the time was such, however, that even had I heard the plea, I would not have had the means to redress the wrong. [101] For a long time I had much to do: it fell out that many men did not wish to see me triumph but would often say, and I would often hear them, that in the end I would have to flee from my land. But what I have done wrong I must put right as soon as God gives me the means. You may be sure that, once the time comes when I deem it proper to act, I will; and anyone who accuses me of failing to will be in error. King Ban of Benoic was my liegeman; I well know what I am duty-bound to do as his liege lord, and as liege lord of King Bors of Gaunes as well. May God soon grant me the power to redress this wrong, for I would very gladly do so.” Thereupon the worthy monk took his leave, as neither the king nor anyone else could detain him. When he came back to the queen of Benoic, he told her the news and comforted her, “for please God, my lady,” 2S) he said, “you will soon hear good news.” And she thanked him very much. The good man thus took leave of the queen once he had delivered his message, and returned to the monastery that he had come from. But at this point the story ceases for a while to speak of him and the two queens in the Royal Minster, and turns back to King Claudas of the Land Laid Waste. But first it speaks a moment about the Lady of the Lake, and you will hear why. 11. A Messenger from the Lady of the Lake Rebukes Claudas for Holding Lionel and Bors in Prison.’ When the Lady of the Lake found out that Lionel and Bors, the two sons of King Bors of Gaunes, were in prison in Gaunes tower, she was distressed and would gladly have made an effort, if she could, to rescue them from Claudas’s hands. She often turned the matter over in her mind and followed events closely, until she learned [102] that Claudas was to hold court in Gaunes and mount a great feast, according to a custom that the kings observed at that time. The most impressive and splendid court gatherings of the whole year were those that marked the coronation anniversary, and all the days following were meant to be worthy of the first. The feast that Claudas planned to make so splendid was to take place on the Feast of Mary Magdalene.? Two days before, the Lady of the Lake approached a beautiful and clever member of her entourage who was named Saraide,? and she said to her, “Saraide, you must go to the city of Gaunes. You will arrive there on the Feast of Mary Magdalene and deliver a message for me. It will surely not be a burden to you, for you’ll come away, according to my plan, with two very noble children, the two sons of King Bors of Gaunes. Now let me tell you how to go about it.” Then she spelled out the task in great detail, as you are soon going to hear, and she gave her all the things she might need to accomplish her mission. With that, the young lady mounted her horse and took leave of her mistress, who had great love for her and trusted her in all things, having long had ample proof of her loyalty. The girl was a niece of the monk who had made the plea concerning King Ban of Benoic’s death. She left the Lake accompanied by two squires and [103] some ten other horsemen, and they rode steadily until they came to the meadow below Gaunes at the hour of tierce? on the Feast of Mary Magdalene. Near the meadow, off to the left, was some dense forest. There the young lady and her company halted, and she sent a squire off to find out whether King Claudas was yet at table. As soon as he sat down, she knew 1Corresponds to Micha VII:XIa; Sommer III:47-50; Kennedy 57-61. July en 3«Saraide” will be called “Celise” later on; see chapter 64. 4One of the canonical hours into which the medieval day was divided, tierce corresponds roughly to 9:00 A.M. Others, with their approximate times, are prime (6:00 A.M.), sext (noon), nones (3:00 P.M.), vespers (sunset), complin (9:00 P.M.). 26 it! Then she rode off in a hurry on a fast horse, taking along no more than the two squires; each of them had a greyhound on a silver chain. Thus they rode up to the castle, where the young woman inquired whether King Bors’s children were at court or still in prison as was normally the case; she was told that they were still in prison. Claudas, for his part, was at his banquet, together with his great gathering of barons, and sitting before him was his son Dorin, whom he was making a knight. He was a handsome young man, brave, generous, and bold to a fault; he was Claudas’s only child. The court had drawn a great many people, as it was both the anniversary of Claudas’s coronation and the day his son was being elevated to knighthood, [104] and so Claudas had been more generous in the past day than he had ever been before and would surely go on giving lavishly until the court disbanded, for he had been well instructed by the great generosity that he had seen at King Arthur’s court. But the assembly was disturbed by an extraordinary event, as you are about to hear. As Claudas—to continue—was enjoying his lively banquet, the young lady from the Lake made her entrance. At that point, Claudas had had only the first course. The messenger came and stood before Claudas at his high table, holding the two greyhounds by their precious silver chains, and she spoke in a clear, loud voice. “King Claudas,” she said, “God save you! I greet you in the name of the most worthy lady in the world, who has until this day had greater esteem for you than for any other man who has ever lived. But now she cannot believe that you have even half the wisdom or the courtly virtues that she has heard of; and she is not wrong, for you are more open to reproof than I could ever have believed. I will leave now and tell my mistress what I have seen of you and your behavior.” The king looked at the young woman, who, having spoken so sternly, was about to leave with no further word, and he called her back, saying, “Young lady, you are welcome here; and good fortune to your mistress—lady or damsel, whichever she may be! It may well be that she has heard more good spoken of me [105] than there are grounds for. Since she has nevertheless sent me her greetings, if I learned of any failing in me, I would correct it to merit her good will. By the allegiance that you owe to the person you most love, tell me the truth, for I would like to know howI might become a better man.” “You have urged me to disclose the truth,” said the messenger, “and I will do so. I serve, as you have heard, one of the most worthy ladies in the world, one of the richest, and not yet married. She had heard such good reports of you that in comparison she could not admire another man in all of Christendom. She had been told that you were the most elegant and gracious king in the world, with the greatest energy and generosity, with supreme prowess and such great intelligence that, even with all the world against you, you could think your way out of any impasse. And so my lady sent me here to see whether these reports of you were true or false. What I have seen is that you lack three of the finest qualities that can be found in a knight: you have no intelligence, no kindness, no courtesy.” Lancelot, Part I “My lady,” said the king, “indeed, if those three things are lacking in me, all the rest cannot be worth much; but I don’t believe that anyone has ever had those three qualities to such an extent that he never, out of [106] forgetfulness, chanced to do something that might be called mad or base or cruel. Do tell me, though, what you have seen in me that makes you sure I have no kindness or courtesy.” “‘T’'ll tell you,” she said, “since you are asking me to. The fact is that you are basely holding the two sons of King Bors of Gaunes in prison, though everyone knows for a fact that they have done you no harm. Nor can you deny your cruelty, for no creature has a greater need for tenderness and compassion than a child, and no one can claim to have kindness in his heart who is cruel or grudging toward a child. It seems to me that with this error you have given up your claim to being kind. I will go on to show you that you have no intelligence. You must know that there is no place® on earth where, hearing of the way you guard King Bors’s children, people are not convinced that you plan in the end to kill them; and there is no one of any compassion who does not sincerely hate you for it, even if you have never done him any wrong. And I do not see how a man can commit a greater folly than to make himself universally hated. Then, too, if you were a man of refinement, you would have taken the two boys, who, [107] as many people know, are of much higher and nobler birth than you, and had them honorably dressed as the royal princes they are and had them present here at your feast. You would have gained great honor in their service. Anyone in the world who had heard of it would have considered you the most noble and the most courteous king on earth, a man who cares for orphans honorably and protects their lands. In this way, you would have won the love and affection of all people, and instead of regarding you as a villain, they would have taken you for wise and gracious and kind.” “So help me God, my lady,” said Claudas, “you are speaking the truth! You’re right, and I wholly agree. Whoever trusts bad advice cannot avoid coming to a bad end. But you have now given me such a fine lesson that I believe I’ll be a better man for it for the rest of my life.” Then he called his chief seneschal and _ said, “Seneschal, go fetch me right away the two sons of King Bors! Take with you a company of knights and squires and men-at-arms as would befit royal princes, and bring their two tutors back as well.” The seneschal carried out his lord’s order. He took a large escort of knights and squires and men-at-arms, and went to the tower where the two children were kept. Both the boys and those in charge of them were restive, as they had all spent much time weeping and moaning, for Lionel had been a disturbance all through the night and into the day. [108] Lionel, indeed, had the most impulsive nature that any child could have; nor did anyone resemble Lancelot as much as he did. Galehaut, that good man, lord of the Distant Isles and son of the Fair Giantess, once called him, on the very day King Arthur made him a knight, 5“no place” as in Micha variants, Kennedy 60, and Lecoy 377. Micha and Sommer 50 have “no one.” Lancelot, Part I Unbridled Heart, because he would not be tamed by admonition. The story will explain all that by and by.® But listen meanwhile as the story tells why Lionel had disturbed them and why they had moaned and wept all through the night and into the day. 12. The Messenger of the Lady of the Lake Saves Lionel and Bors from Claudas.! It happened that in the evening, when their supper was ready, the two boys sat down to eat together as they always did, from the same bowl. Now, Lionel was eating his meal with such great enjoyment that his tutor, Pharian, was greatly surprised and stared at him wide-eyed. When he had stared a long while and clearly given up all thought of eating, he began to cry so bitterly that the tears rolled down his clothes onto the table where they all sat. He kept crying like that until Lionel became aware of it. The boy, shrewd and articulate, spoke: “What’s wrong, good master? Why are you weeping so bitterly, and at table?” “Pay no attention, my good, dear lord,” said Pharian. “It can’t matter to you; it will gain you nothing.” “In God’s name,” he answered, “I will pay attention! I want to know all about it and, by the allegiance [109] you owe me, I insist you tell me right now!” “Ah, my lord,” said Pharian, “for God’s sake, why do you insist on knowing something that would be of no avail to your In fact, it could make you endlessly angry and upset.” “By the faith I owe the soul of my father the king,” said Lionel, “I won’t take another bite of food until I know why you have been crying!” “My good, dear lord,” said Pharian, “I’ll tell you rather than see you give up your meal.” “Speak, then,” said Lionel. “My lord,” said Pharian, “I have been crying because I remembered the great, age-old nobility of your lineage, and it pains my heart that you are in prison and another man is lord over your court.” “What are you saying?” said Lionel. “Who is it who holds court where I should?” “Who, my lord?” said Pharian. “The man who rules! Claudas, king of the Land Laid Waste, who holds court in this city which should be the capital of your kingdom! He wears the crown here and here makes his son a knight. I am grief-stricken to see that the noble family that God honored so long is now disinherited, and that that man has taken over who is the most faithless man on earth!” [110] When the boy heard that, his heart swelled with anger; he kicked the table over and jumped up in the middle of the room; his eyes turned red with fury, and his face flushed. It seemed to those watching him that the blood would burst from every pore in his head. But wanting neither to see them nor to be seen, he went up to a window to gather his thoughts undisturbed. ®See chapter 86. 1Corresponds to Micha VII:XIla; Sommer III:50-56; Kennedy 61-68. 27 Then Pharian came to him and said, “Ah, my lord, what have you done, jumping up in such anger from your meal on such an important evening as this? Come and eat. And if you have no appetite, you should at least pretend for the sake of my lord your brother, who won’t eat without you.” “Sir,” said Lionel, “I am not going to eat now, but you go ahead, you and my brother. I feel like staying here at the window for a while before I go back to my supper.” “My lord,” said Pharian, “for God’s sake, we can’t eat without you! If your anger makes you stop eating, we’ll stop too.” “What's that!” cried Lionel. “Are you not all mine to command, you and my brother Bors and his tutor as well?” They all said yes, of course. Lionel said, “Then I order you all to finish your meal. I will never eat again until I have accomplished something that I now have in mind.” “My good sir,” said Pharian, “if it is an idea that we can help you with, tell us, and we’ll give it every effort that we possibly can if it is a plan that you can and must carry through.” [111] At that, Lionel answered, “No, indeed, I won’t tell you now.” “In God’s name,” said Pharian, “I’ll leave your service at once and forever if you don’t let me know your idea! It would seem to me in that case that you have suspicions about me and don’t trust me, whereas in fact you've never found anything in my behavior to make you doubt me.” Then he made a show of being terribly upset and wanting to leave. Lionel, who loved him deeply for the compassion that he had found in him, began to weep. “Ah, sir,” he said, “don’t go away! You would be killing me! I'll tell you what I have in mind, as long as you don’t try to hinder me but do help me in good faith.” Pharian agreed. “Well, then,” said Lionel, “I plan to take revenge on King Claudas before I ever eat again.” “How,” said Pharian, “do you expect to take revenge, my good, dear lord?” “I'll tell you,” said Lionel. “I’ll send him word tomorrow that he should come speak to us, and then I’ll be able to avenge myself, for I would be daring enough to try to kill him even if he were much more powerful than he is.” “My lord,” said Pharian, “and once you have killed him, what will you do?” “What?” said Lionel. “Are the people of this country not my men? They will do their best to protect me; they’ll give me advice and support. And if their advice is not effective, help will come from God, who counsels all [112] those who need it. And if I die trying to win what is mine by right, death will be welcome, for it is better for me to die in honor than live in shame and robbed of my land. My soul, moreover, will be at peace if I have sought revenge, for if the son of a king is disinherited, he is in fact deprived of his life.” “Good sir,” said Pharian, “for God’s sake, you mustn’t do that! You would never escape alive! Such a thing mustn’t be undertaken without good planning. Wait awhile, until God gives you greater strength than you have now and enables you to avenge yourself; and I’ll help you as much as 28 I can. Be assured that I love no child of my own as much as I do you.” Pharian argued convincingly, and Lionel agreed to follow his advice and wait until he was in a better position to avenge himself. “But in that case,” he went on, “you must make sure I don’t see Claudas or his son, because at the sight of either of them I would be unable to hold myself back.” That is how the matter rested that night. Nevertheless, Pharian was deeply worried about his young lord, who he could see remained very upset, never once through the night or the next morning smiling or brightening up, whatever one might say to him. Pharian realized that it would be extremely hard to change his mood; he made great efforts to calm the boy, but he could bring no change to his grim face. When, the next day, Claudas’s seneschal went to fetch the children, Lionel had still not taken any food, but lay in bed maintaining that he was ill. Pharian’s nephew was managing to feed Bors, but it took a strenuous effort; nor would he have eaten anything, had Lionel not strongly insisted; [113] nevertheless, it was very hard on him. Pharian was at that moment sitting in front of Lionel and weeping bitter tears. That was when the seneschal came in. Seeing Lionel, he knelt before him as any worthy and upstanding man would do. “My lord,” he said, “my lord the king sends you greeting and asks that you please come attend his court, together with your brother and with your two tutors as well; it is not right that he should without you hold so splendid a court as he has undertaken to do.” Lionel had no sooner heard these words than he jumped up and said to the seneschal that he would gladly go. He made a great show of being delighted, and his tutor, watching him, had a good idea of what was in his mind and felt more uneasy over the great misfortune he was expecting than words could convey. Lionel said, “Dear master, stay and speak with these good men who have come for me, while I go into the next room. I'll be back in a moment.” With that, the boy went into the next room. He called for his chamberlain and had him fetch a large, finely wrought knife that he had once received as a present. Just as he was hiding it under his clothes, his tutor came in to see what he was doing. When he saw the knife, he wrenched it from his hands and said that he could not take it along. “No?” said Lionel. “Then I swear my feet won’t go, either! And I see all too well that you hate me to death, if you rob me of the pleasure [114] I was looking forward to!” “My lord,” said the tutor, “you are not being very sensible, for if you take the knife everyone will notice it. Let me carry it; I can hide it much better than you. And you do know that your safety is as dear to me as my own.” “Do you promise,” said Lionel, “that you will give me my knife when I ask you for it?” “I do,” said Pharian, “provided you promise me that you will not act against my will.” “I won’t do anything,” said Lionel, “for which I could rightly be blamed.” Lancelot, Part I “That’s not what I mean,” said Pharian. “Just give me your word that you’ll not use it in any way or for any thing that may bring you harm or reproach.” “Good master,” said Lionel, “do you know what you can do? Just forget the knife, if you like; or if you like, keep it for yourself: you might yet have some need for it.” With that, he came back into the main room where the seneschal was waiting for him. He mounted a horse; Bors mounted another; and with their tutors on horseback behind them, they rode straight toward the palace, where the court was being held. All the townspeople ran outside to see their rightful lords pass; they all wept, both young and old, and prayed to Our Lord that He yet restore them to their high station and bring them redress and power. Meanwhile, Pharian was lecturing Lionel and begging him please not to do anything reckless that would bring harm to him and to the people with him, for there would surely be no escape. [115] “Have no fear, sir,” said Lionel; “I am not so rash as to do anything reckless that I thought might not succeed. And even if I should want to try something, you have effectively prevented it, as you’ve left me with nothing more than my bare hands.” Thereupon, they came to the court, where there was a crowd to help them dismount. The two boys, hand in hand, came before Claudas and his great company of knights and squires. There were many knights there from the kingdoms of Benoic and Gaunes, and many of them could not for the world keep from weeping when they saw those lads, their overlords, so handsome and so attractive, who were held subject to another’s authority. Lionel walked in, handsome, with his head held high, proudly glancing up and down the great hall, and his demeanor, like his face, bespoke nobility and high birth. The brothers came before Claudas, watched wide-eyed by all around. The king was sitting proudly at the high table in his golden, throne-like chair. In front of him lay his crown on a silver pedestal as tall as a man and shaped like a large candelabrum; next to the crown, on a similar pedestal of silver, stood, hilt down and point? up, a bare sword, sharp and gleaming; above the crown was fixed the golden scepter, richly encrusted with precious stones. Claudas was eating dressed in his coronation robe, and he looked remarkably dignified and impressive, except that there was something very cruel and treacherous in his face. [116] When he saw the children of Bors come in, he welcomed them to his court and he called upon Lionel to approach; he admired the boy’s appearance and his manner, and said that he had never before seen a lad whose manner and bearing he admired more. The boy made his way forward, close to where the crown and sword were displayed. The king, who wanted to do him honor and had no wish to keep him a prisoner anymore, held out his splendid cup to him and urged him to drink. But the boy paid no attention; he had eyes only for the sword, which looked so beautiful and dazzling: it seemed to him that any man would be fortunate indeed to have a sword like the one he saw there, provided he had the manly strength to 2“point” (more) as in Kennedy 65 and Lecoy 378. Micha and Sommer 54 have “half” (moitie). Lancelot, Part I wield it well. Claudas, meanwhile, thought that he was reluctant to drink only out of shyness in front of all the people present. Just then, the young lady who had come from the Lake stepped forward; she put her two hands on Lionel’s cheeks and said to him, “Come, good prince, I’ll make you look better.” With that, she placed on his head a very beautiful garland of fresh, sweet-smelling flowers and attached to his collar a clasp of gold and precious stones, and she did the same to his brother Bors. Then she said to Lionel, “Now you can drink, good prince, for now it is clear you deserve to.” The boy, though, flushed with anger and answered, “My lady, I will drink,” he said, “but someone is going to pay for it!” [117] Then the two brothers were all ready to do something outrageous. Even if they had felt no such urge earlier, now they were overcome by the power of the herb that was woven into the garlands they wore, and the spell cast by the stones in the clasps was so powerful that, as long as they wore them, no weapon could draw blood from them or break a single limb. Lionel took the drinking cup and Bors cried out that he should fling it down, but he did not; instead, he snapped it upward with both his hands so that some of the wine splashed onto the king’s robe. And with all his might he struck it right into the king’s face so that the rest of the wine spilled all over him, and he kept striking him on the eyes and nose and mouth so that Claudas was almost overwhelmed, and he hammered the rim of the cup against his forehead so that it cut deep into the flesh and the scalp. Then he seized the crown so forcefully that the scepter fell down, together with the sword that stood beside it. With his two hands he dashed the crown down onto the palace floor so that the gems sprang out and the gold was smashed, and he trampled on it with all his might. At that, a great cry went up through the hall, as people bounded forward from the tables, some to lay hands on the children and others to pull them out of danger. Meanwhile, the king lay on the floor, made senseless by the wine that had splashed into him through nose and mouth and [118] bleeding where the drinking cup had struck his forehead. His son Dorin leapt forward to avenge his father, but Lionel seized the sword that had fallen to the ground and raised it with both hands as high as his strength would let him. Bors picked the scepter up from the ground and the two of them began to strike out in all directions. A number of the men there managed to separate them, for otherwise they would not have lasted long even if they had been two of the finest knights in the world. For all their pains they could not have lasted, for the king regained his senses, jumped up, and swore that they would never escape. His son Dorin darted after Lionel, who was heading toward the door where the young lady was guiding him to safety. When Lionel noticed him coming up, he turned around and raised his razor-sharp sword; with both hands he struck the foe, and the sword severed the left hand which Dorin had thrown up to guard himself. The blow then landed on his left cheek, cut clear through to the ear and then down into the neck, which would have been 29 hacked right through if the sword had not been stopped by bones that were too resistant for a boy who did not have all the power that would have been needed. Bors then, with his two hands, lifted high the scepter that he was still holding and brought it down as hard as he could on Dorin’s forehead, so hard that the skull could only crack. Dorin could not withstand the blow, but crumpled dead to the ground. Thereupon the din redoubled, and the king, with great bravery, came running up. He clearly saw that there were many men in the palace who had no great love for him. Still, he threw himself body and soul into his chase after the two boys, [119] brandishing a borrowed sword in his bare hand as his cloak billowed around his arm. The young woman from the Lake, who saw him thus coming up, was not so coolheaded as to avoid a moment’s fright, but she remembered her lady’s orders and cast a spell which made the two children look like her two greyhounds and the two greyhounds like the two children; that is how it appeared to all witnesses. The king came running toward the two boys whom the messenger was holding and raised his sword in order to strike. She threw herself in its path, which was an extraordinarily daring thing to do. The blow came down on her face so close to the king’s hands that what hit her was the hilt; it cut through skin and flesh from the right eyebrow down to the cheekbone, and the result was a wound that would mark her face for the rest of her life. As the blood covered her, she cried out and then said to the king, “Well, King Claudas! This is a high price to pay to come to your court! You try to kill two of the finest greyhounds in the world, and you wound me in the attempt!” The king stared, and indeed he saw two greyhounds where the two boys had been; a bit farther off he saw the two real greyhounds, frightened by all the noise and din, dashing away toward the stable. [120] He ran after them, for he thought that he was seeing the two children. The animals fled into a side chamber, and the king, who came rushing after them with raised sword, accidentally struck it into the lintel of the door, and so forcefully that the weapon splintered into many pieces. He stopped, gave his sword a long look, and praised God that it was shattered. “I believe, my good, kind Lord,” he said, “that You did that for the sake of my honor, for I would have killed those boys with my own hands and would have been reproached forever and disgraced in every court. Now I can have them put to death in a way that will preserve my honor and also ward off any reprisals.” Then he threw down the stub of a sword that he had left; he rushed at the dogs and seized them, and was convinced that he was dragging away the two boys. He handed them over to guards in whom he had the greatest trust; he gave himself some time to decide how he would deal with them. But there is no need to wonder what grief the king felt when he saw his son lying dead on the ground. Nor were the tutors of the two boys any less grieved than he, for they were sure that their young lords would be put to death. Now, though, the story says nothing more of them or of King Claudas, but turns back instead to the young lady Bie. who had come to Claudas’s court from the Lake on account of King Bors’s two sons. She contrived to save them from death and take them away, and now you will hear how she took them back to the place she had come from. [121] 13. Lionel and Bors Are Taken to the Lake to Live with Lancelot.’ When the young lady from the Lake, protecting the children as you have heard, saw that the whole court was in turmoil and that she had accomplished much of what she sought to do, she was greatly satisfied and gave little thought to the blow that she had received in the face. She led the two boys out of the court. When the two squires who were outside waiting for her saw how she was wounded, they were shocked. They bandaged her face just as she instructed them, using no more than her veil; nor did she want to put anything else on, as she was afraid of the risk.? After that, she mounted her horse and placed one of the children, Lionel, in front of her, while one of the two squires took charge of Bors. Thus they rode down through the streets and left behind them the woeful clamor of the people gathered in front of the royal palace. Everyone who saw them thought that they were carrying off two greyhounds, and even the squires thought so. They kept riding until they reached the forest where their attendants were waiting for them; none of them knew why the young lady had gone to King Claudas’s court. From there they all went off at a rapid pace, traveling along the high, narrow passes that they were familiar with. They stopped for the night where they had stopped the night before. Lionel had eaten nothing at all that day, but his great [122] ordeal had made him forget his hunger and his distress. It was late at night when they came to their restingplace. Then the young woman released the two children from the spell. She showed them to her knights and said, “My lords, what do you think of this fine catch? Isn’t it splendid?” And they said, “Indeed, it is! A wonderful, beautiful catch!” They were all puzzled and curious to know where she had found the boys, and they pressed her with questions; she, though, did not tell them the whole truth but simply said that she had done what was necessary. You mustn’t wonder whether the boys had everything they needed that night, for the messenger looked after them as carefully as if they had been her very own brothers—much more, in fact—because her lady had shown such concern for them. Nor would they have missed anything in the world, if only they had had their tutors with them. She comforted them and reassured them, saying, “Don’t be afraid, children; your tutors are not going to have any trouble.” 'Corresponds to Micha VII:XIIIa; Sommer III:56—58; Kennedy 68-70. 2The risk is no doubt that of delaying the departure and thus failing to elude pursuers. Lancelot, Part I She said that in order to reassure them, for since she had them with her, she had little regard for anything else. She gave them all the comfort she could, but forbade them, if they cherished their lives, to tell anyone whose sons they were, “for you would then be dead and gone,” she said. “But I’ll take you to a place where you will have whatever your hearts desire or your tongues can say, and your two tutors will soon be with you, too.” That was the young lady’s message to the two children, and that night she kept them with her in her bed. In the morning, as soon as she saw the light of day, she rose and set out again with her escort. They rode all the way back to her lady, who was waiting for them. When the Lady of the Lake saw the boys, she gave them a warm and joyous welcome, and a happier one could hardly be imagined. She praised the young woman for the success of her mission and [123] said that, thanks to her, she now had everything she desired. Lancelot was out in the woods at the time when the two boys arrived. When he came home, he welcomed them very joyfully, because he truly believed them to be his lady's nephews, just as she had given him to understand. Lancelot loved the company of the two boys, and whatever the reason may have been, whether it was a matter of natural ties or the effect of some God-given grace or because he believed them to be his lady’s nephews, his heart drew him closer to them than to any of the other handsome lads who were so numerous in the household. He could somehow never feel so comfortable and familiar with anyone else as with the two boys; he regarded all the others as attendants but those two he regarded as his intimate companions. From the very first day, they all three shared the same bowl at table and slept together in the same bed. That is how the three first cousins lived with one another under the guardianship of the Lady of the Lake. But at this point the story ceases for a while to speak of them and turns back to King Claudas. 14. Pharian in Conflict with Both Claudas and the Knights of Gaunes over the Fate of Lionel and Bors.’ Now the story says that, once King Claudas had captured the two greyhounds in place of the two children, he returned to the body of his son. There is no need to wonder about his grief at such a sight. His mourning was so great that greater could hardly be expressed, and yet he was not normally a man to give vent to great grief, for [124] he was of stout heart and proud and so tough that he never seemed affected by the misfortunes that befell him. But for this misfortune he could find no comfort, nor did he now grieve without good reason, for Dorin had been his only Corresponds to Micha VII:XTVa; Sommer III:58-80; Kennedy 70-98. Lancelot, Part I child and he had been generous and well-bred and brave, as the story has revealed.” But as he was mourning his loss, Claudas was not safe. The men of Gaunes had all been shocked and incensed when he had tried to destroy their two young overlords in front of their very eyes. The knights from the countryside had run for their weapons, and so had the townsmen, some of whom were very powerful and rich; and their fine sons, too, had taken up their arms as soon as they had heard the cry of the two boys facing death. Pharian and his nephew, who were as infuriated as they could be, went back to the tower and sent for a delegation of the knights who had come to the feast from the countryside and the burghers who had come from the town. They consulted with one another and reached an agreement that, if Claudas tried to kill the boys, they would give up [125] their lives to the last man, if necessary, in the attempt to rescue them. The knights from the countryside sent for their weapons, which were within the castle; since at that time it was the custom that no knight would travel to court or go anywhere far from home without his arms. When they were armed, then, they seized the tower, which was very strong. This was reported to Claudas, who was still in the palace grieving over his son. With the great valor and bravery he always showed in misfortune, he at once cast aside his grief, called his council, and had letters drafted summoning his liegemen throughout the Land Laid Waste and in all the fortresses of Benoic that he had manned to come to his aid at once. He had many of the barons of his land with him, just as he had many of those of Benoic, but he did not trust them; most, in fact, had already abandoned him and rallied to Pharian and the others who had seized the tower. Then Claudas came back to the body of his son and wept and mourned so earnestly that everyone was deeply moved, even those who had little love for him. He swooned and fell a number of times, for he was unable to remain standing. Every time he came to, he would speak as a man with great pain and anguish in his heart. “My dear son Dorin,” he said, “fine knight and brave beyond measure, if you had lived to a proper age, I cannot imagine anyone in the world remaining after your death, except one man alone, [126] worthy of being loved and feared above all other men; and if you had had a long life, you would have been feared and loved, dear son, more than he who now surpasses all others. You would have had the courage and strength and power to conquer the whole world, for there are only three things that can give a man mastery Over every earthly creature: graciousness, generosity, and pride. Graciousness means offering great feasts and good company and great pleasure to the people who are under your authority. Generosity means giving readily and cheerfully to all those who, because of their inherent worth, will put the gift to good use, but it also means giving to those of no merit at all, because of the virtue of giving itself; for the man who wants to be rightly *See chapter 8 for the earlier characterization of Dorin—a characterization, as it happens, notably different from the present one. oul generous must give to the worthy who are in need because they are worthy and to the unworthy who are in need because he himself is generous. No one, good or bad, can come within the sphere of a generous man and not receive the benefit of his generosity. But graciousness and generosity are of no value unless they are combined with the third thing: pride. Pride is a great virtue in whoever loves and cherishes his friends as much as himself and unpityingly hates his enemies; nor can it be defeated except by graciousness alone, when the two come into conflict. With these three traits, dear son, the man who dares can surpass all others. You had them. Never since the [127] world began has another man shown such good fellowship, such hospitality to stranger and intimate alike. And alongside your generosity all the generous men of any time fade into nothingness, for you were far more happy to give than anyone was to receive. Your only fear was that your gift might not please the person you so lovingly wished to benefit, that he might prefer to decline it. But pride was also so naturally a part of you that you could never have been made to love anyone vain and presumptuous. You were wicked toward the wicked; you could not even gaze at them, but used to say that one should not abuse one’s eyes by looking at an evil thing, for through the eyes the heart could smell its stench. Dear son, that was the noblest thought I ever heard a young man utter. “Whatever my face may have shown you, I loved you more than I could tell, and not so much because you were my son as because of the great virtue that was in your heart. And if I kept you at some remove from me, my dearest son, it was only because I was not sensitive enough to see the great and wonderful generosity that filled your heart; but I do not [128] think that any mortal man would have dared to see it, lest he have to equal it. My dear son, because of you I changed all my old ways.? I never had a generous hand nor could I imagine it, but sought to be generous with yours; from then on I never tried to conquer by means of my own prowess, but sought to master the world through your extraordinary valor. My dearest son, God had refined you and purged you of all defects and filled you with flawless qualities, just as gold is the purest and noblest of all metals and the ruby is the richest and most precious of all precious stones. But I believe that He made you so fine and so good and so attractive only in order to seize you from me at the very moment when I would most want you with me, only in order to make me die of pain and sorrow in anguish over your death. Yet I will surely not die soon, but live far longer than I wish; and I will take comfort in such comfort as I can find in the contemplation of the world. The more I contemplate it, the less I value it, for it will only go on decaying; indeed, this very day it has been ravaged more than mind can think or mouth can say, for this morning there were still two pillars to support it and now there is but one. The first, moreover, [129] if he had survived, would have taken so much of the burden upon himself that the other would have inevitably been crushed by the imbalance. My dear son, you were the first of these two pillars, and 3See chapter 8 for the text’s original association of a change in Claudas with the character of Dorin, the idea of generosity, and the model of Arthur. eZ King Arthur, the second. And if you had lived to a proper age, you would inevitably have crushed him; now, though, that you have been crushed by death, he can boast that all the world today is his. But no force can withstand the will of God, and so we must suffer what befalls us whether it be to our liking or not. But for what has befallen me I can never be grateful to God Almighty, nor should anyone ever attempt to console me on your death, however close to me he may be; for I could never be resigned‘ but rather want all men to see that this is an inconsolable loss.” Thus King Claudas mourned his son, bitterly grieving and so often fainting over the body that those around him all thought that he himself would soon die. But no one was more surprised than he that his heart did not split apart within him, and he blamed and rebuked himself so harshly that even many people who hardly had much love for him were deeply moved. Meanwhile, news, which travels fast, came to Lionel’s tutor, Pharian, and to the knights of the land who had rallied to him. They heard that Claudas had sent letters through the Land [130] Laid Waste to summon his liegemen and that he would attempt to remove the children from the castle by force and then kill them once he had them in his power. They pondered the matter, and Pharian at length shared the view that they should go attack Claudas in the palace. They would set it ablaze unless he surrendered the two boys, “for we have many more men,” so Pharian put it, “than they have, and we are as thoroughly and clearly in the right as our overlords whom he wants to slay. Yet if we die for them, it will be to our honor in the world and to our renown as warriors, because for the sake of rescuing his liege lord from death a man is duty-bound to put his own life ungrudgingly at risk. If anyone then dies, he dies as sure of salvation as if he were slain fighting the Saracens, the enemies of Our Lord Jesus Christ!” They all agreed to this plan and came fully armed to the palace, where Claudas was in deep mourning. There were almost thirty thousand of them—knights, ordinary soldiers, a very great number of townsmen and their sons— some on horseback, some on foot. The din and tumult were great once they were all gathered in front of the palace. Claudas heard the noise and asked what it was all about; he was told that it was men from the countryside and even from the town, and fully armed. He immediately flung on his hauberk, quickly laced his helmet on, seized his shield, and buckled on his sharp and gleaming sword. Then he took up a [131] large, heavy axe whose iron head was fierce and sharp, with a strong, stout handle braced in steel: Claudas loved more than anyone else to wield the axe in thick combat, and he knew how to do it to great effect. When he and his men were all ready, they came to the palace windows and saw Pharian in front of all the others, fully armed and mounted on a large battle horse. Claudas asked him what he and the others wanted, and Pharian answered that they were asking for their two overlords, the 4The French text reads jamais ne Vameroie, with a direct object pronoun that is triply unclear. The clause may mean “J would never love God/anyone/your death.” Lancelot, Part I sons of King Bors, who were in the palace: they demanded them back. “What are you saying, Pharian?” cried Claudas. “Are you not my vassals, then, you and all the men with you?” “My lord Claudas,” said Pharian, “we have not come here as to a court of law, but to have you return to me and to these other worthy men the children whom I had in my care. Afterwards, if you have any question to put to me or to the others, we are prepared to give full satisfaction to you or anyone else.” Claudas was quick-witted; he well understood that he could not hold out against the people of the town and he saw that in the end he would have to surrender the two boys. [132] But he would not do it easily, for he was a man so stout-hearted that, even if all the men in front of the palace, each of them individually, were equally so, there were no opponents there who could make him feel much fear. Nevertheless, whatever might happen in the end, he was not of a mind to surrender the children, but wanted to hold them as long as he could; and if it came to surrendering them, he would give them up in such a way as to avoid being blamed for cowardice. So he said to Pharian that he was summoning him in accordance with the oath of fealty that Pharian had sworn, and that Pharian should come up to him as his liegeman. “My lord,” said Pharian, “give us back the children, as it behooves you to do, and then no man among us will further oppose you on any grounds. But if you do not graciously return them, we will all risk death, and so will you and your knights; for of all the men you see here with me, there is not one who would not give up his life rather than allow the death of his true lord.” “In that case,” said Claudas, “let each one do the best he can, because I will not surrender the children unless I am forced to!” As soon as he had said that, the assault on the palace began. It was harsh and brutal, undertaken with bows and crossbows and tressed slings, and rocks and bolts and [133] arrows flying as thickly through the air as rain from the sky. Claudas and his people put up a stout defense, with knights and ordinary soldiers posted at the windows and on the battlements. The besiegers then went for fire, which they hurled into the palace with their many catapults. When Claudas saw what was happening, he threw all caution aside like the bold and energetic man he was; he ordered the door opened and ran out into the courtyard, swinging his axe and landing great fearsome blows wherever he thought them most effective. Archers and crossbowmen took aim at him in answer to his continuing strikes, and they wounded him in a number of places. But no wound or injury inflicted by his foes could keep him from steadfastly defending the entry against them with that razor-sharp axe that he wielded so well. In no time at all, he had some twenty men in sucha state that even the least injured of them was powerless to do him any further harm, and most of the other fighters were so intimidated by him that they dared not come close, but dodged his blows and kept out of his way. Thus Claudas defended the doorway with his razorsharp axe. When Pharian’s nephew, who was bold and brave, saw him doing him so much harm, [134] he was overcome with rage. He was mounted on a wonderfully Lancelot, Part I good horse and was fully armed, with helmet in place on his head, shield around his neck, and in his hand a spear with a short, thick shaft and trenchant head. He spurred his horse forward and headed straight for Claudas at the doorway; he took careful aim and struck right through the hauberk, tearing into the left shoulder. The sharp, pointed head pierced clear through the shoulder to the other side, so that from the back panel of the hauberk emerged both the blade and part of the shaft. Attacking him with all the strength in his arm and all the power of his running horse, he threw him to the ground, but he came up against the wall beside the entry and the shock was so rough that the spear shattered into pieces. The horse, meanwhile, was moving so fast that it could not stop but hurtled into the wall, smashing head and shoulders and chest? into many pieces and almost killing its rider. The horse fell dead to the ground, and Pharian’s nephew fell beside it, stunned. Claudas, leaning against the wall, was so badly wounded that the two ends of the shaft protruded from him in front and back and his red blood was flowing down to the ground from the two openings in his shoulder. Before he could move away, [135] he was struck by both arrows and bolts and by dozens® of large and small stones, so that he sank to his knees. Then a hue and cry went up from the townspeople who saw him fall. Pharian’s nephew, who had got up from the spot where he had tumbled, came running up, ready to lunge at him. His sword was drawn, ready for the great blow that he would dare to strike, for with his great store of courage and prowess he hated nothing and no one so much as he did Claudas. When Claudas saw him coming, he rose to his feet; he was thoroughly ashamed that his enemies had seen him at such a disadvantage. Then with both hands he raised his axe all the way up with all the great strength that remained in his two arms, while the other man, who hated him no little bit, came dashing up, with sword drawn and shield held over his head, and thrust at his left temple with so much force that he sliced through his helmet and the ventail below, and the blow cut a path all the way down the cheek from the ear to the teeth. But Claudas, with his axe aloft and ready, struck him a mighty blow; he landed it on top of the helmet and cut right through to the hood, so that you could have seen a three-fingers’ width of mail torn open by the blow. The axe went straight down to the shield that Pharian’s nephew had lowered when making his thrust and split it clear to the bossed center, so that it almost cut into the bearer’s arm. But he [136] jumped clear in time, going back and to the side in one deft and rapid move. The great blow that Claudas had received on his jaw had left him overcome with weakness, and the blow to his shoulder hardly made things any better for him; the wounds and injuries he had suffered from the fast-flying arrows and bolts had also worn him down and sapped his strength. Just then, some forty more were let fly at him by men who would never have dared to lay their hands on him. In the midst of it all, one knight headed toward him 5“chest” (piz) as in Micha variants, Kennedy 76, and Lecoy 378. Micha and Sommer 62 have “feet” (piez). 61 iterally, “more than forty.” 3g on a great, swift charger and struck him on the chest with a spear so roughly that it almost entered his body. But the hauberk held undamaged and the spear broke apart, while the man, pitched forward by his speed, went crashing into the king, who was knocked to the ground and sprawled there senseless. Then Pharian’s nephew, who was delighted by the turn of events, came and pulled up his hauberk in order to thrust his sword into the body, but Claudas’s men, when they saw him thus standing over their lord, came running out of the palace to rescue him. Seeing him in such a state, they risked everything, charging into those who had occupied the doorway in order to isolate Claudas; they pushed them back out and managed to raise him to his feet, but he was so badly wounded that he could hardly stand up. Then, all around him, began a melee fraught with danger, and the din of the swords and axes [137] hitting helmets and shields was so great that the whole city around the palace echoed with it. Again and again he was thrown down under the horses’ hooves by the fierce blows that his enemies dealt him with their axes and swords, but he kept being quickly pulled up by his men, who were ready to face death for his sake. The melee had been going on for a long time when Pharian came galloping up, equipped with all the arms proper for a knight on a very large horse, and behind him, coming at full tilt, were a great many of the knights of the countryside and even sons of the townsmen, and many of them were bold fighters. Pharian looked around at Claudas’s troops defending themselves smartly; and he saw Claudas himself, who had lost much blood but had nevertheless regained strength and breath and courage and was defending himself as fiercely as his body allowed. They all admired him for it, and Pharian himself said it was a great shame that such a noble prince should also be disloyal and wicked. Then Pharian’s nephew, who was filled with hatred for Claudas, ran back to attack him. Claudas saw him coming and realized that he hated him more than anything else. The king was tall and well built, and he would have had great strength if he had not lost so much blood; yet he turned to face his oncoming enemy, because he much preferred, if he had to die, to die bravely rather than show any sign or semblance of cowardice. The other was rushing toward him with sword drawn; the two of them were enraged and so [138] pummeled each other’s helmet with their gleaming, sharp swords that the helmets split open. But Pharian’s nephew had nothing to joke about, for the king had struck him so powerfully, despite being drained and weak, that he now lay stunned, face down, on the ground. Just then Claudas leapt on him, tore his helmet away, and was getting ready to cut off his head, when Pharian, astride his good horse, came galloping right through the thick crowd and struck a knight of Claudas’s who was standing ready to help the king slay his nephew. Pharian struck him so hard that his hauberk could not resist; he sent the sharp iron into his side just beside the nipple and knocked him down dead to the ground in front of Claudas. Then he left the spear in the body, pulled his bright sword from its scabbard, and dealt Claudas such a blow on his helmet that the king, in a daze, tumbled forward onto his a4 hands and knees. The nephew, who was very brave and very agile, seized him by the arms, flattened him out between his legs, and was going to run him through with his sword. With that, the war would have been over for Claudas, but Pharian jumped down from his horse, took the sword from the young man, and said, “No, good nephew! What do you mean to do? Kill the finest knight in the world, the best prince of his generation? [139] Even if he had dispossessed me of all my lands, I would rescue him from death if I possibly could, for the death of such a worthy knight could never be put right, and no man is worthy who, when it matters, fails to acknowledge the favor and honor that he has received.” “What!” said the nephew. “You bastard! Traitor! Is that what you want to do? Spare the life of the man who has shamed you in every way? who, right in front of you, with no trial, wants to kill the sons of our liege lord? What a base, cowardly heart you have! A better heart beats inside the man who seeks to shame you than in the man who does you honor, for the heart of a truly worthy man never forgets a shame that he has endured.” “That’s enough, nephew!” said Pharian. “No wrong is great enough to make a man seek the death or dishonor of his overlord when he sees him in trouble, unless he has already renounced him and left his service properly. This man is my lord, just as I am his vassal, and in accordance with the oath of fealty and the homage I swore to him, Iam bound to protect him from death and shame. As for the children of the lord whose vassal I have been from the very first, I will protect them, too, bound as I am by word and mindful of the upbringing I have shared with them.” Then he raised Claudas up by the noseguard of his helmet, and Claudas, who had heard the exchange and was frightened of dying, cried out, “Pharian, my good friend, have mercy! Don’t let me die! That was right, what you said! Here, take my sword; I surrender it to you as to the truest knight I have ever seen, and you will have the two boys as well. You may be sure, besides, [140] that even if I held both them and you in Bourges, no harm would come to them as long as they had you to speak for them, for you have now won my friendship and my love forever: in my great need you have proven your great loyalty.” : With those words the encounter came to an end. Pharian ordered everyone to move back and told the noble barons of the land that they should wait while he went for the two boys. Then he went into the palace with Claudas, who ordered that the children be brought to him, and as soon as he had done that, he fainted because of all the blood that he had lost. At that, his men, who feared he might have died, rushed over to remove the helmet from his head, then doused him with cold water until he regained his senses; but Claudas was embarrassed and rankled to have fainted in public. Thereupon, the two greyhounds were brought in, but all the people who saw them thought they were seeing the two boys. Claudas handed them over to Pharian and, anguished by the memory of his son, suddenly fell again into a faint. At that point, Pharian took the children and led them away, fully convinced, as was everyone else, that they were in fact the king’s sons. They were all overjoyed, young and old, and escorted them with great honor through the Lancelot, Part I tower; but they were angry with Pharian and blamed him for not cutting off Claudas’s head or allowing anyone else to kill him, either. He answered that they should realize it would have been a great loss, for Claudas was a remarkably worthy man, and “you may be sure,” he said, “that he was not holding the children in order to harm them.” But there were those who blamed him, and his nephew more than anyone else, for no one hated Claudas as much as he [141] did, and he was so enraged that Claudas had been spared that he was almost going out of his mind. Meanwhile, Claudas was in the palace, grieving once more over the body of his son. Before his hauberk was taken off his back, the doctors had come and removed from his shoulder the stump of the spear that Pharian’s nephew had pierced him with. Next, they attended to the cheek wound that had been so serious, cleaning and dressing it in the way they knew would be effective; and Claudas endured their treatment with fortitude and bravery. When they had treated the cheek wound and dressed the wound in the shoulder, he resumed his grieving—who would dare rebuke him for it?—and he was so overwhelmed that it is a wonder he survived. But not knowing what he still faced in the future, he put his hauberk back on and ordered that no man of his should be so bold as to lay aside any of his weapons, because he did not know what they still faced: he was well aware that he was among people who had no love for him, as had just been amply shown. After that, he had three horses that were in the great hall outfitted with armor; they were good, swift horses that he could rely on if there were any need to escape from danger. Thus King Claudas prepared himself and his men, without disclosing to anyone whatever it was that he had in mind; but this did not stop him from mourning for his son, whom he loved too much to forget. Meanwhile, Pharian and his troops were in the tower, celebrating what they [142] thought was the return of their young lords. But as soon as darkness fell, at the very same moment when the young lady from the Lake, feeding the two boys, revealed them to her men,’ the two greyhounds in the tower of Gaunes were likewise revealed and recognized. No one had ever been so shocked as everyone was at that moment. All the pain and anguish and distress of the knights of Benoic burst forth again, and in one voice they cried that they would now go kill Claudas or else be killed themselves,.for now they were sure that he had slain their two young lords. But Pharian was more distressed than all the others. He thought that he would never recover those two young lords to whom he had devoted all the love and affection he was capable of; he was afraid he had lost everything that he had nurtured and cared for. And he felt such tightening in his chest that it seemed his heart would break. He clenched his fists and slammed one into the other again and again. He tore out handfuls of his hair. He ripped his tunic to pieces, and tatters lay all about him on the ground. He clawed at his face and neck until the red blood trickled down the full length of his body, and he roared and raged so loudly that he could be heard more than an arrowshot away. From all sides people massed around him, and no 7See chapter 13. Lancelot, Part I one could see him and not feel moved to the bottom of his heart. They all wept, men and women alike, as if they were each witnessing the death throes of the creature they loved most in the world. Pharian was overwhelmed with grief, and so were all the people around him, and the noise of their cries was so great that [143] Claudas heard it clearly in his palace. He wondered what it could be, sent someone to find out, and was told that it was coming from the tower. He dispatched a messenger right away, but before he knew it, he saw the man come running back, frightened to death; he was being chased by townsmen wielding axes and swords and throwing spears and sharp knives at his back. He was so badly hit in three places that it would take a doctor to heal the wounds. The king was shocked to see his messenger come back to him like that. He asked him what was happening, and the man forced out his answer as best he could, for his loss of blood was making him very weak. “Ah, my lord,” he said, “take a horse and flee as quickly as you can! Everyone on earth is on his way here to demolish the palace and slaughter you! They say you killed King Bors’s two sons and then, instead of the children, gave them back two dogs on leashes. You’ve never seen people so bent on doing harm! As soon as they recognized me, they rushed toward me and, before I had a chance to state my message, they started chasing after me, just as you’ve seen. And now I’m going to die of my wounds, I know.” [144] Startled by these words, Claudas called for his sword, helmet, and shield. He ordered all his men to make ready, then said before all of them, loud and clear, “Ah, you kingdom of Benoic, you kingdom of Gaunes, what affliction you have brought upon me! What madness, what sin inhabit the man who overthrows another and steals his land, for neither by day nor by night will he have a moment’s peace! And the king who fails to win the love of his people can have no mastery over them. There is truly something in men’s nature that is more persuasive than outside authority and attaches them to their rightful lord far more than to any other. And so, a ruler is foolish and blind if, coveting so short-lived a thing as worldly mastery, he burdens himself with the foul sin of disinheriting another man, for no greater blow can strike a mortal heart than being dispossessed and exiled, except only the loss of his true flesh and blood: to that sorrow no other grief compares, which is a lesson I have learned all too well.” With that, he buckled on his sword and quickly laced his helmet. He had two horses attached to a newly made litter and had the body of his son laid out upon it, as he had no wish to leave the body behind. Then he went out through the main gate, mounted on one of the armorcovered horses, and together with forty of his finest knights took up the entire width of the street, all of them eager to fight off any attackers. They moved far enough down the street for their equipment and the litter bearing Claudas’s son to have cleared the door. At that moment, Pharian came riding up along with his company: [145] many of the knights of the countryside and all of the townsmen and their sons who could bear arms. Evening had already darkened the sky, but there were so many lanterns and other lights that they could see all along op) the street just as well as by day. Pharian was out in front, his lance held high, his shield firmly grasped, and he looked wonderfully impressive sitting there on his swift and sturdy battle horse. It was clear that everyone was under his command; they obeyed him as their leader and they found him loyal, now as at other times. But he was plunged into the deepest grief; his lament was loud as he recalled all the virtues first of his lord Lionel, then of Lionel’s brother, Bors. “My lord,” he said, “what bitter grief, what a bitter loss: you dead at such an age, you who were the whole world’s perfect model of a boy! You were barely past ten years old! In age you were of course a child, but in judgment and in prowess you were more than mature, though you might have been a little less impetuous. You had better looks and finer traits than all other children; you were sensible and intelligent and recognized loyal support, though never at the expense of your honor. [146] Whatever the dire outcome of avenging your shame, no man could have dissuaded you however much you trusted him; for such was your heart that, once it had understood—before we did— what was happening, no one could curb its will: we could not convince you of the harm that would come from scorning faithful counsel.” That is how Pharian lamented Lionel, and tears flowed steadily down his cheeks. Soon he reached the place in the street where Claudas and his troops were gathered to defend themselves. Claudas was the first to speak, and Pharian had all his men, both knights and townsmen, withdraw until the parley would be over. He would gladly have prevented combat, had it been possible, because he had no doubt that a battle would bring heavy losses to both sides. He was particularly afraid for his nephew, Lambegue, who hated Claudas more than anything else: he knew that in any lengthy fight one of them would certainly die. Claudas, moreover, was so skilled a knight that Lambegue, he was sure, could not long hold out against him; and if Claudas killed him, he would be so heartsick, it seemed to him, that no bond of fealty or homage could stop him from killing the king in turn, [147] if the moment were right. But that would be a breach of loyalty that he wanted to avoid if he could. Pharian contemplated all these things and felt anguished and torn. Claudas called out to him and said, “Pharian, what is this? What have you come for like this, with all these vassals of mine? Is it for my good, or do you mean me harm? Tell me. From neither you nor them would I have expected anything but good will, since to please you and them alike I have done whatever you asked, whether it would bring me honor or shame.” “Claudas, my lord,” said Pharian, “the truth is that you promised to give us back our two young lords, the sons of King Bors, and then returned two chained greyhounds instead, which was a great offense. If you doubt my word, here are the two dogs.” And he pointed to the dogs. Claudas was shocked at the sight. When he could speak again, he said, “Good Lord! Those are the two greyhounds that the young lady brought to me today as I was dining. She must have used some trick to carry off the children. Whether she meant to help me or harm me, I can’t say, but I am deeply pained by this.” 36 Pharian realized that Claudas was telling the truth, and the king went on, “My good, dear lord, you would be wrong to think that I killed or imprisoned the two children. Indeed, I am prepared to show my good faith to you and to all these people in whatever way you say I should. Yet what I’m saying [148] has less to do with them than with you, for I have tried you and found you so faithful and true in a time of great need that there is nothing you could urge that in the end I wouldn’t do. Nor, so help me God, have I ever met a knight in whom I would trust as much as I trust in you, now and from now on, as long as you care to counsel me. Tell me what it is you want me to do so that you will believe me, and I won’t hesitate to do it. You may exact an oath or a pledge of loyalty from me and all my troops, or put me into prison, if you wish—under your guard, of course, for I would not submit to anyone but you, you whom I have found to be more trustworthy and true than anyone else, Then, once you are assured that the boys are safe and sound and that neither I nor my men have usurped anything, you will restore the freedom I now have. Meanwhile, you undertake to protect me against all foes for as long as I remain in your custody.” Pharian, hearing Claudas thus place himself wholly in his power, was deeply moved. He was convinced that he was guiltless in the death of the two children and thought that the young lady might well have kidnapped them. He pondered, as far as Claudas and his people were concerned, how he could go about satisfying their will. Then again, [149] he knew for certain that, if he took Claudas into his charge and under his protection, he would not be able to ensure his safety against his nephew Lambegue, who hated him, or against the men of Gaunes and Benoic, who thoroughly disliked him; indeed, he feared that they would not scruple to seize the king from his very hands and kill him. Yet he knew, too, that Claudas was so proud and brave and bold that even if he, Pharian, agreed to receive him as his prisoner, the other would not really accept captivity: it would look like an admission of fear and cowardice, and Claudas was hardly so cornered or so shameless as to accept such debasement. Nor would he do so unless driven to it by his love for Pharian and his trust in him, for it would surely be more widely put down to cowardice than to generosity. Pharian was also well aware that, even if Claudas agreed wholeheartedly to enter his prison, he might, for lack of proper supervision, die there; and in that case, he, Pharian, would bear the shame forever; and he was well aware that he could not protect him. He did not know what he could do, and he remained buried in thought for a long while. At last, he said, “Claudas, my lord, it is true that I am your vassal, just like the men who are with me. We have no desire to offend you, as long as you are willing to uphold your commitment to us. These men disbelieve you in the matter that concerns us, but you are so eager and open in your defense that it’s hard to think you guilty of anything. I am going to report your words to them, many of whom are more valiant, more [150] worthy men than I. What they want to do I'll soon report back to you. I don’t wish to be blamed either for wrongfully helping them against you, although they are my kinsmen and my peers, or for Lancelot, Part I harming you when you are right, although you have wrongfully seized the land of my liege lords.” Then he came back to the barons of Benoic and Gaunes, the finest and most powerful of whom had been waiting for him in the street, their helmets in place and shields ready, and he repeated the offer that Claudas had made. “Now tell me,” he concluded, “what you wish to do.” They all agreed to accept Claudas as a prisoner, if that was in fact what he wanted. Then Pharian said, “In that case, I want you to give me your word that he will not be harmed or hurt by any man among you unless and until you know for certain that he has killed our two young lords. And even then, you must not proceed against him without a proper trial. Finally, it is my wish, because he doesn’t want to place himself in anyone’s custody but mine, that you leave him as my prisoner, with myself alone answerable. The shame would be mine if you schemed to kill him once I had given my word to protect him.” “What do you mean, uncle?” said his nephew, Lambegue. [151] “Do you mean to protect the traitor who dispossessed and killed our liege lords, who has insulted and shamed you to such an extent that, if all the people were as aware of it as I am, they would never again pay you the slightest heed?” “Good nephew,” said Pharian, “I am not surprised to find so little reason in your thinking, since almost nowhere do we ever see great intelligence and great prowess lodged together in a youth. And it is true that for your age you have unusual prowess, enough, in fact, to dim your view of wisdom. Let me teach you, then, a bit of wisdom, for I now have a clearer view of many things than you. If you care to heed me, you stand to gain much, not only you, but all young men who want to gain renown as great knights. Throughout your youth take care, in deliberations on important undertakings, to keep your words and your ideas to yourself until all your elders have spoken. But in battle or combat or in lists where the finest knights are gathered, take care to stand aside for no one, whether younger than yourself or older, but spur your horse on before all the others and strike the best blow you can. [152] When it comes to arms, you see, no man need yield to young or old to gain fame and honor; but in important deliberations young men should attend to their elders. The truth is that there is great honor in dying boldly and bravely in combat, but only shame and reproach can come from foolish speech and thoughtless counsel. I have just given you this lesson because you rebuked me in front of all these worthy men gathered here, who know what sense and reason are better than you do. There are perhaps many men here who, rightly or wrongly, would agree to the death of Claudas. Yet if they put him to death without any proof of crime, they would all be disgraced forever, for I see no man here, however high-born or honorable, who has not sworn him fealty and, willingly or unwillingly, pressed his palms toward him in homage. And once a knight, whoever he may be, has sworn fealty and done homage, he must keep his word against all threats, as if it were his very life. God has created no court so high that I would hesitate to defend in it that which is right, for there can be no shame in a man loyal to his bond defending such loyalty. And therefore I Lancelot, Part I wish all these knights I see before me to know that they are bound by their feudal oath to guard Claudas’s life as carefully as their own: I know no breach of faith more vile than the murder of one’s lord. But if the overlord offends his vassal or harms him, the vassal must make protest through his [153] kinsmen® within forty days. And if he cannot then obtain redress, let him renounce his homage in the presence of his peers, not in secret, for the public act bears witness to his loyalty and secrecy betokens wrongdoing and treachery. Then, if the overlord refuses to make amends to his liegeman and respect his rights, the liegeman, once he has renounced his homage, may turn on him and seize holdings of his, and he is not guilty of wrongdoing in that case. But let him take care not to kill him or cause his death, for the overlord must not face death at his vassal’s hands unless he is guilty of murder, treachery, or betrayal. Otherwise, whoever sheds the blood of his lord is a forsworn traitor, a perjurer, and a murderer, and he harbors all seven deadly sins. And so, my lords, Iam putting to you how I would like to treat the matter before us: if you are willing to assure me that Claudas, whatever his misdeeds, need not fear any of you and that you will not kill him without proper judgment in the court of King Arthur, then I will take charge of him and protect him against all foes. If you are unwilling, let each man do as he thinks best. For my part, I refuse to disgrace myself in the world forever through the vile and shameful killing of a single man and damn my soul for all time in the hereafter; for I fail to see how a man can have [154] everlasting honor in the other world if he has lost it in this one by freely choosing to be untrue. Now take counsel among yourselves and tell me where you stand.” At that, he stepped aside, and the others deliberated together. There were some who advised against granting Claudas protection and safe-conduct, since they could easily get the better of him right now: he was reduced to under a third—no, under a fifth the number of men they had, and he was not at home, not on his own ground, which they were. All the young men who were not yet knights agreed on this with a single voice, Pharian’s nephew Lambegue most vigorously. He swore that Claudas was powerless to avoid being captured or killed that very night, along with all his troops, if he still had so many. That closed their deliberations, and they came to Pharian and told him that they would not accept Claudas’s proposal, but if he were willing to give himself up to them and place himself in their custody, they would take him: they would have him in no one’s hands but their own. “In God’s name,” said Pharian, “I will not advise him to agree to that. Now you do what you like, you and Claudas. I’]] take no part in adding to his troubles; besides, he is fully knight enough to stand up to you himself. And since his offer is more than reasonable, let him defend himself with all his strength: your losses will be twice as great as his, before the fight is over.” Then he came back to Claudas and said, “My lord, defend yourself, my lord, as best you can! [155] There is no 8“Linsmen” (parenz) as in Micha variants. Micha, Sommer III:70, and Kennedy 86 have “peers” (pareuz). a7 choice, for I cannot make our men agree to peace, unless you put yourself wholly at their mercy.” “You can’t?” said Claudas. “What do you advise me to do? You are my good friend. All my trust is in you, and you must know that in this time of need I’ll follow your advice completely.” “Is that true?” said Pharian. “You trust me more than all of them do? Well, I advise you to defend yourself as the worthy knight you are. You face quite a battle, but I’m ready to be hanged by the neck, if they don’t lose two men for every one of yours!” “All right,” said Claudas, “if that’s your advice, Iam not afraid to follow it. So let them all know that I will not trade the body of my son for safety and freedom, but will carry it through their lands before their very eyes. And anyone who tries to stop me will pay dearly for it. But I beg you, above all, to remain true to me and be as steadfast in this as you are dutybound to be. I have nothing more to say, since you know what loyalty is better than I do.” “By the Holy Cross,” said Pharian, “I am your liegeman. It is right for me to give you whatever help I can, as long as you are willing to act openly and in good faith toward me. And help you I will, to the death! But first, as a loyal king, you must assure me that the two sons of King Bors, my late [156] lord, have not been maimed or murdered through your doing; and promise that, when I wish, when I say the moment is right, you will prove your faithfulness as you have offered to do. The truth is, I feel no constraint to ask you that, as I do not suspect you of disloyalty; but you will win a more eager heart that way.” “In the name of God,” said Claudas, “I am not at all displeased by what you say; in fact, I welcome it! Here, let me give you this pledge.” He held out his hand to Pharian and pledged his faith. Then, with his right hand, he pointed toward his chapel and said, “By all that is holy in that chapel, I assure you that the boys have not been maimed or murdered by my doing and that I have no news of them. And if I had them in my prison at Bourges, they would still not come to any harm through me as long as you cared to be their guarantor. That is so even though they have brought such grief to my heart that it will be with me throughout my life. Also by this oath I pledge to you that, whenever you summon me, I will surrender myself to your custody, provided that you swear to be my guarantor against all men to whom I have done no wrong.” Claudas and Pharian thus swore their oaths to each other. Then Pharian swung around to Claudas’s side. With that began the great, dangerous assault, with thick volleys of arrows and stones, and the frightful din of lances smashing [157] against shields and their splintered shafts flying up, and swords rattling against helmets; the noise of it echoed far and near through all parts of the town and reverberated through the hills and valleys round about. Claudas put up a stubborn fight at a street corner, all the while finding some assurance in the position that Pharian had taken up. Not that Pharian had turned that way to hinder the men of Gaunes and Benoic; it was rather in the hope of rallying the two sides to peace if that were at all possible, for he was convinced that in the end the local people could not get by without his help. He stood there, then, in such a way as to hurt neither side but to aid them 38 both with his desire for peace. The crowd attacking Claudas was so large and thick that most could not come near him and his troops but had to strike from afar. In that way, they did much harm to one another, and the wounded and the slain, men and horses, piled up all along the street. The night was now pitch black, too, which made things worse. The street was narrow and hemmed them in, and Claudas and his knights could fend them off so well that they were unable to make any headway; nor did their great numbers do anything but harm them. Besides, they were greatly disturbed that Pharian was not with them and not striking a single blow in the battle. [158] Without him they were at a loss for any way out. The attack and the defense went on for a long time, with many of the men of Gaunes and the countryside falling wounded or dead, for Claudas and his troops knew how to cope with an onslaught and put up a stubborn defense. As the fight was worsening and his enemies facing heavy losses, Claudas thought how he might cripple them even more seriously and decided to throw lighted torches into the street. The wind, strong and threatening, was blowing away from him toward them; it swept through the thick crowd so fiercely that even the strongest men were forced to run farther into the city for shelter, and yet many were burned. The fire caused great damage to the local people, as Claudas’s men, concerned for their own safety and barring their way, gave them no opportunity to put out the flames. So they were forced by Claudas and his men to flee farther into the city. But the flames could not leap over the city walls and spread through the many fortified houses on the other side; and as soon as the fire had died down, those who had fled into the city came out again, separated into two groups. One of them went around to take Claudas’s people by surprise, which they could do because the palace stood in a meadow by the river, away from all the houses. [159] The group headed there and came upon Claudas’s men, who had been watching for them and were more than ready to defend themselves. The other group was left to approach from within, along the street; but far from finding their foes unprepared, they found them lined up across the street and barring the passage very effectively. Claudas went galloping from one front to the other, looking very sure of the outcome. While he was thus moving back and forth, Pharian did not move from his spot. He dealt no blow with lance or sword or any other weapon, nor did anger make him strike any knight or townsman; for Pharian’s wish was to do whatever he could to bring peace to the two sides. He clearly saw that Claudas did not have enough troops to hold out indefinitely against the men of the town and countryside, but he knew that his counsel could be of great value to him, and he believed that, by taking the right stand, he could direct the local people into a settlement that would not bring them shame but would yet save Claudas: to all his people he owed such loyalty. The struggle went on this way right through the night, with light coming from torches and lanterns and houses that [160] were still burning. The local men sustained much heavier losses than Claudas and his people. Toward daybreak they asked to speak to Pharian, and he agreed. Lancelot, Part I Their complaint was about him, that he should be helping them but was hurting them instead, and they said that that was disloyal and treacherous behavior. “In the name of God,” said Pharian, “there is no question of disloyalty or treachery! The point is that you rejected my advice; and if you refuse to accept my words, then it would seem that you began with suspicion and mistrust of me. Let me tell you, too, that Claudas is in any case my lord, right or wrong. But there is no question of his wrong here: I am duty-bound to honor the act of homage and not abandon him in this time of need, even if he had done me great wrong. And whatever he may have been thought guilty of, you have no rightful claim on him: remember that he was all ready to make himself my prisoner. I made you an offer, and you refused to listen to anything I had to say. So Iam doing no wrong, it seems to me, if I turn to someone who trusts and believes in me more than in any other man. And as long as I remain at his side, he will not be overcome by you. My castle is not very far from here, and since you don’t want to trust my advice, I will give him the castle this morning as a haven and a place to defend himself. Moreover, you will see me take him there so safely that if he loses anything in the process, you will lose three or four times as much. [161] And once he is in my castle, he can wait for help from his country safely and at leisure, as ] am prepared to hold him against all of you for a whole year. And if he happens to survive this trial safe and sound, you may be sure that he will destroy every one of you, one after the other, and no one will be there to stand up for you. And so it would be better for you to trust good and loyal advice than to undertake something that you could not carry through. When you say that I am being disloyal and traitorous or that I am acting in his behalf, you are all lying. And if there is anyone so bold as to want to challenge me on that, I would accept the challenge right now or tomorrow morning at the latest.” When they heard how determined Pharian was to stand by Claudas, there was not one who did not feel alarmed. The wisest among them all drew to a side and discussed the matter at length. They said that if Claudas were to succeed in reaching the safety of his own land, he would not fail sooner or later to come back in triumph, “and then we’ll all be hopelessly wiped out; nor can we deal with this problem,” they said, “without all the great valor and good judgment of Pharian.” The wisest and noblest agreed that, if he repeated the kind of offer that he had made the evening before, they would accept it. But in no way would Lambegue agree to see Claudas remain in his uncle’s custody and under his protection, “because I am sure,” he said, “that he would defend him against all enemies, even though he should hate him more than anyone, that bastard, traitor, coward! But see to it that he stays in [162] prison; then hand him over to me, and I’ll see to it that he will never give you any more trouble.” Then a great nobleman leapt forward, the lord of a splendid castle that stood not even seven Welsh leagues away. The castle was called Hauts Murs, the Castle of the High Walls, and it stood high above the Loire not far from the Land Laid Waste. Its lord was named Grayer; he was a cousin of the late kings Bors of Gaunes and Ban of Benoic, Lancelot, Part I a man cunning and ruthless, courageous and bold. At Lambegue’s words, he leapt up and said that they should confidently swear to Pharian, if he wished, that if he took Claudas under his protection, they would all do their utmost to help him against any man who might try to force his hand. “And when Claudas is in prison,” he said, “just let me take care of the rest, together with Lambegue, who has no love for him. Once we have put an end to him and are back in my castle, I give you all leave to do your best to kill the two of us.” They all agreed to this. Then they came to Pharian and told him that if he wanted to put Claudas into prison, as he had offered to do the night before, they would not stand in his way, and “you should take pains to do it to protect your honor,” they said, “we will very willingly swear on holy relics to leave you in charge of him; and if anyone challenges you, we will do our utmost to oppose that man.” “By my faith, lords,” said Pharian, “when I made you that offer in his behalf, you [163] refused to accept it; now that he has seen your forces and your strength, he will be the reluctant one. Nevertheless, I will ask him, and not in private but in front of all of you.” Then he turned back to Claudas and in front of them all told him what they were seeking. Claudas said that he was mindful of the agreement that the two of them had made and that he would do nothing without his approval. “And you, lords,” Pharian said to the men of the town and the countryside, “what will you do?” The lord of High Walls leapt forward and said that they would all wholly abide by his decision. In this way, both sides left it to Pharian to decide, and he thought that the local people had the same sense of loyalty that he had, but they did not. Indeed, their only aim was to kill Claudas, while his thought was to protect King Claudas from death, if at all possible, and to behave so loyally toward the people that he would no more be traitorous to them than forsworn to his lord. Then he drew Claudas to one side and said to him in strictest privacy, “My lord, it took a great effort for me to hold these people back and talk them out of their reckless plan. At the same time, I don’t wonder if they are sorely troubled about the two children of the man they loved most in the world, who was their liege lord: they believe that you put them to death. It’s a wonder, then, that they are not getting themselves killed just to kill you.9 I myself have no love for you, as you well know, and would kill you if I could do so honorably and rightfully. But whatever harm a man has suffered, whatever wrath he feels, he must safeguard his honor and fear shame on this earth, for no man, if he has eyes to see, can endure disgrace and still go on living in this world. And anyone who does not maintain his uprightness has the door to Heaven barred to him [164] forever, and so an honorable man must bear his wrath and pain and harm within rather than commit some act of disloyalty or treachery that would lose him the honor of this world, toward which all prowess struggles, and the honor of the other, everlasting one, which is the great joy of Heaven. For 9Literally, “not all getting themselves killed or killing you” as in Micha variants and Sommer 75. Micha and Kennedy 92 have “not all getting themselves killed before (instead of?) killing you.” Bo that reason, you will never, God willing, die by my hand as long as I am bound to you in homage; beyond that, I offer you no assurance. But now hear why I have said all that: the people want me to hold you prisoner until there is news of the two children, and you promised me that you would accept confinement as soon as I would require it. You see how matters stand: you cannot prevail over them in this land. I’ve not said as much to them, but you will even so have to become my prisoner, and I will be your champion and defender against all enemies.” “As you say,” said Claudas. “It will not disturb me, since you have promised faithfully to grant all rightful protection. Here, take my sword right now.” When Pharian heard that, he was moved to tears, for he heard the very man agreeing to be his prisoner whom he hated more than anyone else and would in fact kill if he could do so with right on his side. But he did not know how to give him safe conduct, as he was afraid that the men of the town and the countryside would force their way past him to kill Claudas, and he!® would be forever dishonored; and [165] he was sure that if that were to happen, he would kill himself with grief in no time at all. If, on the other hand, he simply let Claudas go, he would be charged with unworthy conduct and great cowardice, and much more trouble would come of it than could ever be undone, even by someone of great power; for those who hated him would attack him and not hesitate to risk their lives trying to kill him. These were the dangers that he feared most, and he was wondering how he could protect King Claudas from death and yet respect the will of the other side. Then he said to the king, “My lord, you are relying on me for your safety, but I am afraid that, if I put you into my prison, I could not guarantee it, since too many people hate you too much. But you can do this: hand over to me just three of your most important vassals, one of them wearing your armor, and everyone will think he is really you. The three of them will stay in prison until we have heard reliable news of our young lords. Let one of the three be the lord of Saint Cirre; the second, the lord of Dun; and the third, whichever of your knights you would most like to see bearing your arms. When I call upon you in front of the people, swear to me what I ask, and I’ll see to it that your good faith will not be betrayed and my agreement with my side will be fulfilled.” [166] When Claudas heard this, he agreed to do just what was said, sure as he was that Pharian would not mislead him. Then they came back to the men who were awaiting them, and Pharian said, “My lords, I have spoken to our lord the king, yours and mine, about your wish to have him justify himself by accepting my custody until we receive credible news about the two children and know whether they are alive or dead. I have succeeded in obtaining his willing agreement, and we should all be grateful to him for that.” After that he said, “Come forward, my lord, and give me your word as a duly anointed and trustworthy king that 10«he” as in Micha variants, Kennedy 93, and Lecoy 378. Micha and Sommer 76 have “they.” 40 at a time of my choosing you will become my prisoner according to the terms that we have devised.” The king held out his hand and swore. “Now,” said Pharian, “I want you to be accompanied by the two noblest men of your land, the lord of Saint Cirre and the lord of Dun Castle, for a king should be confined not with men of no account but with the best of his barons.” Claudas answered that he would gladly go speak to the two of them in front of the palace, where one was guarding his equipment and the other was posted at the top of the street. He came to the palace, and there he disarmed and exchanged armor with a knight of his who was of the same size. He came back right away, having ordered the knight who was now wearing his armor to be sure to follow all of Pharian’s instructions so that no one would notice that he was not who he seemed; the knight obeyed. When [167] Pharian saw the three of them come along armed, he said to the two vassals that they would be imprisoned with their overlord, and they said that they would agree to nothing less. “Now swear,” he said, “that you will not leave my prison unless I permit you to.” They both so swore, and then so did the knight who was dressed as King Claudas and whom everyone in sight believed to be the king. With that, Pharian took their three swords, then told the men of Gaunes to swear that they would not force the three captives from him and remove them from the town, and he had the twelve most powerful barons of the two kingdoms swear the same oath. In that way, a peace settlement was reached between the two armies, and Claudas’s troops went off safely, as did Claudas himself. Pharian and the others went back to Gaunes, and the three prisoners were put into the great tower. The twelve who had just sworn the oath to Pharian gathered at the entrance to the tower, together with his nephew, Lambegue, and climbed to the top. At that point, unable to hold himself back, Lambegue rushed at the man who was dressed as Claudas; with a hatred greater than he had for anyone else, he struck him with a spear snatched from a holder and dealt him such a blow to the chest that his hauberk ripped and the spear went right in and there was a great spurt of blood. Lambegue was strong and quick; speared like that, the other tumbled to the ground and fainted. When Pharian saw that, [168] he seized an axe that he had long kept in the tower and, both hands gripping it high above his head, ran toward his nephew. The younger man saw him coming and shouted, “Ha! You bastard! traitor! Do you want to kill me because I’ve wounded a traitor? Let me kill him first and then you kill me afterwards! I’d love that death more than any life!” Pharian gave no answer but ran at him in a hot rage. Lambegue raised the shield that he still had around his neck in order to protect his head. Pharian dealt him a great blow with the axe, slashing downward through the center of the shield onto his left shoulder; the weapon slashed right down through the shiny mail of the hauberk and sliced into the knight’s white skin and flesh, entering a good two Lancelot, Part I inches!! into the large shoulder bone. The blow was great and struck with rage by a strong, mature knight, so that the nephew, who was a young man and not yet a knight, could not withstand its impact. He hit the ground covered with blood. There was an uproar in the tower. The lord of Saint Cirre, who had no sword, seized the spear that Lambegue had used against his fellow-prisoner, and the lord of Dun pulled a lance out of a holder. Pharian [169] unbuckled his sword and threw it to them, saying, “My lords, now defend yourselves properly, for as long as I have any life left in me, I'll not fail you. Iam very sorry to have brought you to your death, but I thought we were among loyal barons, not among traitors. Still, now we will see who is loyal and who forsworn, for we loyal men are much more numerous. Never can so many traitors come along that they will outnumber us!” Pharian spoke in pain and anger, but of the twelve barons not one made a move except Grayer, the lord of High Walls, who had boasted that he would kill Claudas. He had seized an axe like Pharian’s and now made a bold and daring dash toward him. Pharian saw him coming and lunged right at him. Both without shields, they hit so hard at each other’s helmet that the headgear, for all its strength, could not withstand all that steel. They were both very brave men and powerful, and the blows were heavy and well-aimed, so that the lining of Grayer’s helmet was split and he was so stunned that he went straight down, striking one of his shoulders painfully against the ground. Then Pharian fell, too, striking one of his knees on the ground. The knight whom Lambegue had knocked down with the spear rose, for his wound was not fatal, and, driven by his fear of the enemies he saw all around him, would gladly have defended himself, if he could; but the blood flowing out of his body in a steady stream left him more and more weak. Nevertheless, he picked up the lance dropped by the man who had caught Pharian’s [170] sword, and made a brave show of fighting back. But there was no one making an effort to attack, as the ten barons said that they would not sacrifice their loyalty for the sake of two fools: there would be no more such madness; besides, the men who had no interest in treason were all helmetless. Meanwhile, Pharian had got up and, with his axe raised, was coming at Grayer, who was sprawled on the ground in a daze. The ten barons ran up to beg him, for God’s sake, not to kill the man. But before they could finish their sentence, and as Grayer began stirring, Pharian struck him hard and aimed a mighty blow at his helmet, which he did, though, with the wrong side of the axehead, because the weapon had twisted around in his hands’ grasp. Still, he struck him face-down so roughly that his noseguard smashed back into his nose and cheeks, and he remained stretched out and senseless on the ground. Before Grayer could move again, the others pulled him away to prevent any further harm but at the same time assured Pharian and his companions of their continued support.!? 11 iterally, “more than three fingers.” l2This sentence is not clear in any of the sources. Literally, it gives “But before he [=Grayer] could recover, the others took [him =Grayer? Pharian?] away from him [=Grayer? Pharian?] and gave Lancelot, Part I By then, his nephew, Lambegue, was on his feet again, and when Pharian saw him moving away, he shouted, “Ha! You're dead, you bastard! Traitor! That’s the last time you'll ever disgrace me and try to label me a traitor!” With that, Pharian rushed at him, but his wife had just run in. She had long hated Lambegue because it was his advice that had made Pharian treat her so badly,!3 but when she saw Pharian rushing at him about to kill him with his axe, she began to shout for mercy, then dashed in front of Lambegue, saying, “No, [171] noble Pharian! Don’t kill the best knight in the world! For that’s what he’ll surely be, if he can live long enough! It would be too great a loss to knighthood, if he were slain; and you would be spiting yourself. If you must use that axe, use it on me and let him gol You can’t kill him without killing me, too!” When Pharian saw his wife ready to sacrifice her life for the sake of the man who had brought her great hardship, he turned away from Lambegue and rushed at Grayer, whom the others had just raised with great effort, and dealt him a blow that knocked him right out of their hands and back down to the ground. At that point most of them became angry and swore that they would not tolerate such an attempt to kill a man who belonged to their company. They rushed at Pharian and struck him with spears and swords, tearing into his body from all sides and making his red blood stream from wounds all over. Yet he was very lucky, and no wound proved fatal. But when Lambegue saw the blood dripping from all those wounds, his heart could not take it: the very nature of family love moved him to pity for the man who was his uncle and his rightful lord. He seized his sword and, wounded as he was, rushed at them, slicing and hewing wherever he could reach, driven by a surge of strength and daring. Then Claudas’s men, the three prisoners, joined him in the attack, and they held [172] nothing back. When the ten barons saw that Lambegue was risking death for the sake of his uncle, whom they had thought he hated so much, they were deeply moved and said that an outsider had to be mad to come between members of the same family. Then the richest and most powerful of them sprang forward, the lord of a castle named Lambrion, who was a man of great judgment and worthiness and had been a knight of great prowess; he was also very close to Pharian, and the two of them had long felt much affection for each other. He stepped between Pharian and the men who were attacking him, and succeeded in stopping the fight before there was any loss of life. But the wounded included some of the most prized knights, him [=Grayer? Pharian?] assurance both of them[selves] and of all their force, and his whole company with him [=Grayer? Pharian?].” That the statement moves from focusing on Grayer to focusing on Pharian seems indicated grammatically by an occurrence of “his” in the following sentence which can only refer to Pharian. See Kennedy’s note (II:115) in support of this view. It is entirely possible, however, that our translation reflects a misinterpretation and would be better replaced by “... the others pulled him away and offered both him and his retinue the protection of their troops and themselves.” This interpretation seems to gain support from the barons’ readiness to defy Pharian a few paragraphs below, when the latter strikes Grayer down a second time. 13See chapter 7. 4a Thereupon they all disbanded and left the tower, except that Pharian and his household stayed. He had his armor removed, and two of the hostages, who were worthy men and had stayed with him, looked at his wounds; the third one was badly injured, and Pharian’s wife attended to him. Then she made sure that her husband was not in danger, but to the other wounded she gave only passing attention, except to Lambegue, whom she attended with much more care than anyone would have expected. He was determined to remain in the tower because he was afraid that the men of the town might return to the attack, and he preferred to die alongside his uncle, if need be, rather than be safe outside with all the others. As for Pharian, he was much less angry with him than he had so clearly been during the fight, for now he knew that in a crisis Lambegue was incapable of allowing him to be shamed or harmed. But above all else he marveled at his wife, who had so hated Lambegue yet now had come running to his side in a moment of great need, and with such good will as to risk injury and death for his sake. And through that act she so won her husband’s heart that he had no desire to hold any past misdeed against her any longer, but forgave her utterly the behavior that had caused his bitterness. [173] And his nephew he forgave for attacking the knight in his charge, which had caused him great anger. Thus Pharian was in the tower, and those who had attacked him were gone, some of them regretful that they had not slain him. But those who were faithful were hardly sorry, for they well knew that, had they slain him, they would be forever deemed disloyal and would be dishonored. But now the story leaves off speaking of them and goes back to the two boys, who were with their cousin Lancelot in the care of the good Lady of the Lake. 15. Pharian’s Nephew Lambegue Is Brought to the Lake and Observes How the Lady Cares for the Three Young Cousins.’ When, as the story says, the two boys had been at the Lake for three days, they were not nearly as strong and fit as they had been on their arrival. That was because they missed their tutors, whom they loved very much. The Lady of the Lake was dismayed to see their sad state and asked them what was wrong that they were so thin and pale, but they told her that they did not know, because they were too afraid of her to dare say. She then asked Lancelot to find out, and to him they admitted that they would never do well until they had their tutors back, for they did not dare speak as freely to anyone else as [174] they did to their tutors: they had found more tenderness and caring in them than they could hope to find in anyone else. Lancelot wanted to know who they were and something about their circumstances, and Lionel revealed that they were the sons of the late King Bors of Gaunes and 1Corresponds to Micha VII:XVa; Sommer III:80-90; Kennedy 98-111. a2 what misfortune had made them flee. He also told him in detail how he had struck Claudas at his table and wounded his son. Lancelot loved him for it and admired him. Then he asked whether Claudas had died, and Lionel said no, but his son had, which “makes me even happier,” he said, “than if I had killed Claudas.” ‘Td say it turned out very well for you,” said Lancelot, “but now be sure to remain as brave in the future as in the past, for a king’s son, it seems to me, must show far more prowess than another man.” All these words Lancelot repeated to his guardian, pointing out that the two brothers would never eat until they had their tutors back. Very touched by this, she sent for them and saw that their cheeks were hollow and wan and their eyes red and puffed from the tears they had shed; nothing was left of their color. Indeed, they were both so forlorn and dejected that they could not possibly smile or look cheerful. She asked them, “Children, what is the matter?” But they did not dare admit anything until she [175] added, “I know,” she said, “that you are uneasy and I know why: it’s because you miss your tutors. If I send for them, will you feel better? Tell me, and I promise to send for them. Will you thank me for that?” Then Lionel, who was in a sorrier state than his brother, said that, with their tutors back, all would be well again. “In the name of God,” she said, “you will soon be well again, since I am going to send for them this very night.” “My lady,” said Lionel, “what makes me especially impatient to see them is that I very much fear they may be dead: I am afraid that Claudas may have had them killed, as he has nothing but hate for them.” “Well, don’t be troubled now,” she said, “for you will soon have reliable news. But now cheer up! Otherwise, I can’t love you! You must eat, and the two of you must help each other to feel better along with my son, because I wouldn’t want your tutors to find you in such a sorry state when they come. If within three days you are not as plump and healthy-looking as you were when you were brought here, you may be sure that your tutors will not come. They would have reason to believe that we had let you starve to death.” ‘ “Please, my lady,” said Lionel, who was taken in by the threat, “please [176] don’t let that happen! I’m sure that if they saw us thin and pale, they would realize it was only because we missed them. Nevertheless, we’ll eat as much as you like if you promise to send for them this very night.” The Lady smiled with delight and promised that she would send for them right away. “My lady,” said Lionel, “send them some sign, something to cheer them. Here: our two belts. Tell the messenger to show them the belts first of all, and I know that they will come to us at once.” She took the two belts, fashioned by a single hand to look identical, and came back to her room. She turned to one of her attendants, not the damsel who had rescued the boys, but another, and said, “You will go to Gaunes and find out, you and the men escorting you, how things are with King Claudas and the people of his kingdom. Depending on what you learn, you must find a way to keep utterly out of sight of Claudas’s men but to reveal yourself to the tutors Lancelot, Part I of our two boys. You will inquire, just as I am instructing you, into everything that has happened and everything that people say about the two children and their tutors and where they [177] are. If you can speak to the two men in private, do so and give them the greetings of their young overlords; and as a sign, give them these two belts, by which they are to know that the boys are safe and well. After that, you will persuade them, by that sign,* to come see their two lords, because in their absence they refuse to eat or drink. But take care that neither they nor anyone else find out who you are or where you come from.” The messenger said that there would be no need to repeat such a warning. “Now,” said the Lady, “let me tell you how to go about the rest. You will tell them to come in such secrecy that no other living being may come with them. Then lead them along such odd paths and by-ways that no one could follow your trail. According to my plan, you will soon be met, somewhere along the road, by a spy that I have sent to get some idea of what lies ahead, and with his help you will have less to do than if you were all by yourself.” With that, the young lady left, along with two young men on horseback, and they rode until they met the spy. He reported how peace had come about between Claudas and the people of Gaunes and how Claudas was now being held hostage, and what extraordinary things the two tutors had done, one protecting Claudas and the other trying to kill him.? He reported everything that had happened in the armed struggle as faithfully as a stranger can learn and repeat such matters. Then the young woman [178] continued on her way to Gaunes. She arrived to find the town in turmoil, with Pharian and his household besieged in the tower because the people now knew that Claudas was not being held there as a prisoner, after all. She saw that they were mounting a violent attack against the tower and was filled with fear for the two tutors who were up there. She asked questions here and there about the reason for the assault, as if she knew nothing at all about it, and was told the whole story. Then she asked various of the people outside the tower whom they considered the town’s most loyal vassal. Once she knew his name, she found a way to approach him, saying, “Good sir, you are regarded as a very wise man and unshakably loyal. I have something to tell you, provided you give me your faithful promise not to reveal what I have told you to anyone. You may be sure that it would be to the advantage of your two young lords and would bring you great joy.” Hearing these words, hearing her speak of his joy and his lords’ welfare, he turned pale with excitement. “Which two lords do you mean?” he asked. “I mean,” she said, “the sons of King Bors, who was once lord of this city and the land all around.” “Ah, young lady,” he said, “before anything else, tell me if the two boys are still alive!” “Yes,” she said, “they are safe and well, and I have come here because the person in charge of them wants their *Micha’s text at this point erroneously repeats the last clause of the preceding sentence. 3Literally, “the other killing him.” Lancelot, Part I people to know how they are. The children, moreover, have sent along tokens that I am sure their two [179] tutors up there will recognize. For that reason, I need very much to speak to them, and I ask you to please help me reach them.” “My lady,” he said, “I will do whatever I can to bring you together, But please tell me, if you can, where my two lords are and whether they are in the hands of Claudas or other enemies.” “I can tell you,” she said, “only that they are safe and well and comfortable, and cared for by persons who love them as much as you or more and have no fear of any man who might wish them ill. But the place where they are you may not yet know.” “My lady,” he said, “I am going to see what I can do to help you see their two tutors, but if you don’t mind, I’l! tell our men that I have heard reliable news of our lords; that will make them very happy.” “My lord,” she said, “that’s all right, but there mustn’t be any further questions. What I’ve disclosed to you I have told you in confidence.” “No one,” he said, “is going to force you to reveal any more.” Then he embraced her and went back to his people. He told them that he had just had news of the two children, that they were safe and well and out of the hands of Claudas and their other enemies. There was rejoicing throughout the town as soon as the news was known. At the same time, the man to whom the messenger had spoken succeeded in drawing his men back from the tower so that she could slip in and see Pharian and his nephew Lambegue. When she [180] showed them the belts, their joy could hardly be contained. Then she told them, just as her mistress had instructed her to do, how the two boys were not eating or drinking and how pale and thin they had become without their tutors. The tutors were overjoyed, though, to hear from her that the children were well and that she promised to take them back with her. Pharian then went to the tower window and called to the leading men of the city and countryside to report the news just as he had heard it. They answered that if he could show them the boys, they would not stand in his way. He came back to the young lady and said, “My lady, as you can see, there is a great problem here. My men and I are in prison here, and I won’t be freed until some of these people have seen the two children. You see, they think that I myself betrayed them and brought about their death.” “In God’s name,” she said, “I couldn’t dare bring them here; but if you and your nephew come with me you will both see them. I can’t show them to anyone else, though: that has been expressly forbidden.” “My lady,” said Pharian, who was very clever, “let me tell you, then, what we can do. I will tell my nephew to leave here with you; as you know, he is the tutor of the younger boy. If he can persuade the person who is caring for them to let them be seen [181] by the barons of this land, then I can be released from here. Otherwise, I don’t think it is possible, and I certainly don’t want you to be blamed for anything. Well, since you have been ordered to return with me and my nephew, you may have him at least, but you 43 must swear to me on holy relics that you will not deliver him into the hands of King Claudas.” The young woman agreed. Then Pharian spoke again to the men outside, saying that some of the most important among them should go with his nephew, “and this young lady will show you the children, and I will remain here in prison until you have seen them. But as soon as you know that they are safe and well and out of reach of Claudas, I want to be released, together with these other prisoners. You must swear this on holy relics before my nephew can start out on this trip.” The barons all promised to do so, convinced in any case that they would never see the children safe and well again. The relics were brought in; the damsel took her oath first, and then it was the turn of the barons of Gaunes, that is, those that Pharian wanted to designate. But because the barons did not know what to expect—a betrayal, perhaps, or something else—[182] they decided to choose only one of their number to make the trip, one whose report they could and would trust. So they chose the very man to whom the young lady had spoken earlier: Leonce of Payerne, the richest man in the kingdom and the most loyal, a first cousin to the late King Bors, and a good fifty years old or more. But before leaving, he asked the messenger in which direction she would be leading him, whether they would be entering Claudas’s territory, and the like; and she said that in the place where she was taking him Claudas had no power. Thereupon Leonce and Lambegue rode out behind the young lady, and they traveled until they reached the edge of the valley near Neorange, at the entrance to the forest that was called Briosque. On that side of the forest was the lake that harbored the children they were going to see. Then they came to a gentle stream that was separated from the forest by a beautiful, broad meadow. The young lady said to Leonce, “My lord, I am in the service of someone other than myself. When I left for Gaunes, I was expressly forbidden to bring back to the two boys anyone other than their two tutors; and I would not dare disobey that order. For that reason, you will have to wait here until morning while I go with this other knight to where the children live; we’ll do what we can to have you [183] join us. One of these squires who are here with us now will come back tomorrow morning to tell you what we have found possible.” “My lady,” he said, “since I have to stay here, tell me where I can find shelter.” “Of course,” she said; “just follow me.” Then they rode upstream until they noticed, a bit to the right, Charosque Castle, which was separated from the castle called Brion only by the forest aptly named Briosque. The young lady pointed out the castle to Leonce, and he and his squires went to seek shelter there while she and Lambegue rode on to the Lake. It was nighttime when they reached there. They went right in, and Lambegue was amazed to see how daringly his guide rode into that large body of water at such an hour, but he said not a word until he found himself in front of the great gates to an imposing house. He looked around but saw no trace of the broad lake that he had just seen, and he was astonished. The young lady went first, and he 44 followed. Then she went to the room where the children were, Seeing her, they ran out to greet her. And when Bors recognized [184] his tutor, there could be no question of the joy he felt, for he gave him more than a hundred kisses. But when Lionel heard that Azs tutor had not come, he asked for no more news but rather stamped back into the room. In an alcove he saw the damsel who had brought him and his brother here; she was dressing her face wound, which was still far from healed. Seeing it, he wondered where the wound had come from, as he had not noticed it earlier. “My lady,” he said, “who hurt you like that? That was a terrible thing to do to you.” “Yes, indeed, Lionel,” she said. “Should I not then be loved by the person on whose account it happened? For his sake I was glad to let it happen, glad to be wounded in order to save his life!” “Of course,” he said, “he should love you as much as himself, and he should never refuse or deny anything you want.” “And if someone had received such a wound for your sake,” she said, “how would you reward her?” “Well!” he said, “so help me God, I would love her more than anyone else, and trust her and fear her!” “In that case, Lionel,” she said, “I wouldn’t want not to have been injured. You see, I was struck trying to protect you from being killed, when a sword was about to come down upon your head. Now you see how much of a reward your owe me?” “How much? I surely owe you as much [185] love as I do my own life! And you are much better to me, and kinder and more considerate, than Pharian: I sent him word about how unhappy I have been, but he hasn’t come to me, even though I loved him and believed that, even if I had power over the whole world, he would really be more in charge that I would be. You, though, risked your life for me, and didn’t ever: know me! God punish me if I ever attend to any tutor but you as long as you are willing to teach me, for a better teacher than you I couldn’t have. The person who deserves the greatest trust is the one who loves the most.” When the young woman heard that, her heart ‘was moved to tears. She took the boy in her arms and, as she softly wept, kept kissing him on the eyes and mouth. At that moment, Lambegue came into the room; and Lionel greeted him as soon as he saw him walk in. Lambegue knelt in front of him and asked how he had been. “Not well,” said the boy, “but thanks to God Iam now much better. I’ve forgotten some of my pain and troubles.” Meanwhile, the young woman kept her arms around his neck. Lambegue said to him, “My lord, I bring you greetings from my uncle, your tutor.” “You are Bors’s tutor,” said Lionel, “because you have come to cheer him up, but Pharian is not mine! [186] Still, how is hee” “My lord,” he said, “he is safe and well.” Then he told him about the troubles and problems that he faced trying to defend to the good men of his land. “And what of Dorin, Claudas’s son?” said Lionel. “Did he recover from the blow that Bors dealt him?” Lancelot, Part I Lambegue laughed and said that he had recovered as much as death would allow. “What do you mean?” said Lionel. “Is he dead? Really and truly?” “My lord,” he said, “I saw him stretched out lifeless in his coffin, cold and dead.” “Now,” he said, “let no one else ever attempt to do battle for what I have inherited! He won’t succeed. And God keep Claudas alive long enough for me to show him the reward a man can have for seizing someone else’s land!” That is how Lionel spoke, and all the people who heard him utter those proud words were struck with admiration, but the Lady of the Lake was particularly pleased and she listened so intently that she could think of nothing else. Then Lambegue told Lionel how he had come to the Lake and on what terms, and explained that Pharian would not be released from prison until Leonce, the lord of Payerne, had seen him and his brother Bors. At that point, the Lady of the Lake asked Lionel what he would do, whether he would see Leonce or not. “My lady,” he said, “I’ll do whatever this young lady advises.” [187] “Really?” said his guardian. “Are you so bound to her?” “I am, my lady,” he said. “Whom should I obey, if not her? She paid a very high price for me.” With that, he pulled the veil away from her face so that everyone could plainly see the wound. And the lady who was mistress of the entire household said, “There’s no doubt it was worth it, with you as the prize; for, as God is my witness, you will surely be a right honorable man, provided you survive to the age of manhood.” That is how they all spoke to one another. The Lady of the Lake proposed to go the next day to the river below Charosque to meet Leonce of Payerne and show him the two boys that he was waiting to see. Lambegue and the two children agreed to that plan, which the Lady favored because she did not want the boys’ abode known to such people as spied on them sometimes, waiting for an unguarded moment: once it were known where they lived, they might easily be kidnapped either on the way to their distractions in the woods or on the way back. While they were speaking of this matter, Lancelot came in, freshly awakened from a nap, for he had risen early that morning and had spent the whole day in the woods. The Lady had the habit of never taking the evening meal until he appeared—or the midday meal, if he was at home—for ever since he had learned how to serve, she would not {188} eat until he had cut some meat for her and poured some wine into her cup; and then she would have him take his seat. Indeed, she took, in watching him, as much pleasure as a woman could who had given a child all her love, all the devotion that comes with raising him; and her love for him was far greater than would usually mark such a bond, for no woman could ever have greater love than she for a child not borne in her own body. Lancelot came walking down through the great hall. On his head he wore a crown of splendid red roses that stood out beautifully against his fine blond hair; and yet it Lancelot, Part I was August, when it is not natural for roses to last long. But the story insists that for Lancelot, as long as he lived in the Lake, no morning ever came, in summer or winter, when he had to go without a garland of fresh red roses for his hair, no matter how early he arose; the only exceptions were Friday and the eve of the great feasts and all of Lent. On all other days, Lancelot had a new crown of roses every morning; yet he could never watch closely enough to make out who it was that brought it to him, even though many times he lay in wait to find out. But once the two boys had come to join him, there was no morning, however early he arose and received his garland, when he did not take it apart and make three out of it and [189] in that way share it with them. Everyone who saw that thought that it stemmed from a great nobility of heart. He came walking through the great hall, then, as you have heard, and he knew that the Lady was in the so-called sideroom when he saw the throng of young men who always clustered about her. But the first person in the crowd to notice him was Bors, who was sitting on his tutor’s lap. Bors ran up to him and said, “My lord, look! My tutor has come!” Then everyone went up to him: the Lady and a very handsome knight who was her lover, and two other knights who were with him, then one person after another, for they all had great respect for Lancelot. The Lady embraced him and tenderly kissed him on the eyes and mouth, and Lambegue, seeing this remarkable welcome, had to wonder who the youth could be. When the Lady stepped back, Lancelot came up to Lambegue and greeted him so hospitably that the visitor said he had never seen a lad of his age whom he found so admirable; he was sorry not to know who the boy was, and was eager to find out as soon as he could. With that, they went to the evening meal. They all sat down once Lancelot had carried out his serving duties, for no one would have been so bold as to take his seat before he too was ready. And yet, since the two brothers were sons of a king, [190] he had at first not wanted to eat with them, until the Lady insisted that he both serve and take his place at table just as he had done before their arrival; and she said that he had no reason not to obey her, since “no matter what I ever ask you to do,” she said, “no one will have grounds for considering you low-born.”4 As you heard a short while ago, they decided to go to the river at Charosque the next day. They went to bed right after eating, because the Lady and her party wanted to rise early in the morning. They awoke very early and, having heard Mass, set out on horseback. The Lady of the Lake took along the two children and Lancelot, who was glad to go, as well as her lover and two other knights, all fully armed; besides, there were as many as thirty squires and men-at-arms. Lancelot 4As noted in Lecoy 378, this paragraph is not clear in Micha (or in Sommer 87), where it would give, literally, “Thereupon they sat down to the meal, and when Lancelot had carried out his serving duties, he sat down, for none of them would have been so bold as to sit down before he was seated, and nevertheless he was a king’s son (they were king’s sons?), and the two brothers likewise; yet he did not want at first to eat with any of them, until the Lady insisted that he serve them just as he had done before and she said. ...” Our translation is based on Micha variants and Kennedy 107. a5 rode constantly alongside his guardian, followed by a young man bearing his bow and arrows. He had a little sword, just right for his size, that hung from the front of his saddle, and he kept a stick or the like in his hand to throw at animals or birds, which no one could do straighter than he. Lambegue took great pleasure in gazing at him. After a while, he asked Bors who he was, but the child could give him no more help than to say he thought he was really the Lady’s son. At last, they came to the river. A [191] squire had been sent ahead to the castle where the lord of Payerne had spent the night, and now he was leading him toward the Lady’s escort. When he saw all those armed men, he took fright, suspecting some treachery. He said to the squire, “Young man, go tell Lambegue to come speak to me.” The squire did so, and Lambegue rode out for the meeting. Meanwhile, Leonce dismounted from his riding horse and mounted on a battle horse instead; and when Lambegue was in front of him, he asked him why all those armed men were there. Lambegue answered that it was to protect the children. “Am I safe from betrayal?” he asked. “Yes,” said Lambegue, “you are, though they do have a mortal hatred of Claudas. You must trust me, for you know very well that I have never been a friend to traitors.” Then they both turned back toward the children, and when the lord of Payerne saw them, he hurried forward to kiss them, and he wept with deep and tender feeling. When their guardian was pointed out to him, he dismounted and, kneeling before her, said, “My lady, please guard these two boys well. Their father was the most honorable baron and the truest that my eyes have ever seen, apart from King Ban, who was his brother and his elder and, as everyone knows, more skilled at arms. If you knew their ancestry as well as I do, my lady, you would watch over them with utmost care and with all the virtue that I discern [192] in you. For however high-born they may be by their father, it is as nothing beside the nobility that they have inherited from their mother: the Scriptures? teach us that she and her forebears come from the noble lineage of great King David. And what greatness they may achieve we can hardly tell, but we know that the people of Great Britain are eager to be delivered from the extraordinary things that have befallen them and that it will be by a man who comes from the lineage of these children’s mother. Thus they may yet rise to a greater achievement than you think. My lady, if you do not plan to protect them, now and in the future, from the hands of their enemies, give them to me and their tutors, because we would rather take flight than not protect them with all our power. And God willing, they will not remain dispossessed forever: Our Lord will take pity on them, and if their prowess is worthy of the valiant lineage that they come from, they will yet make their enemies tremble. Let them but appear confidently in their rightful lands once they have taken up arms, and they will find no native son >“Scriptures”: a cognate translation of French eseriptures, which would perhaps be better rendered here by the less specific word “writings.” It is, after all, not clear, except retrospectively from chapter 21, that the speaker is referring (mistakenly, of course) to the Holy Scriptures rather than some other authoritative work. 46 who would not risk his life and his property for their sake. And so they will easily recover their inheritance.” At these words, Lionel was overcome by somber thoughts, and heavy tears welled up in his eyes. [193] The young lady who had been struck in the face because of him looked at him and took his hand, saying, “What is it, Lionel? What are you thinking about? Are you ready to leave me, though you said only last night that I would be your only tutor from now on?” He looked at her ashamed and said, “Dear, sweet lady, that’s still true! I was only thinking about my father’s land and how I would gladly have it back soon, if I could.” Lancelot had seen the boy’s tearful face and felt troubled by it. He darted forward and said, “No, cousin! You mustn’t cry over your lack of land! There’ll be a lot of it in the future, unless some cowardly heart robs you of it! And if you won control in some secret way, then wouldn’t you be shamed if you later lost the land while all eyes were on you? See to it, rather, that you are man enough to conquer it with boldness and strength!” These words astonished the wisest persons present and made them wonder how a boy could speak with such maturity. But it was the Lady who was especially astonished, not by the boy’s wise words, but by the fact that he called Lionel his cousin, which brought the tears in her heart so visibly to her eyes that no one could escape noticing it. She said to the lord of Payerne, “My lord, don’t worry about the children. I have undertaken to defend and protect them from all their foes; [194] and there is no reason for them to leave me and go away with you, as I have two or three more fortresses where they can feel quite safe from Claudas’s power. It’s time for you to leave now. You may tell all those who care about the boys’ welfare that they are safe and sound, among good friends and perfectly comfortable. Who I am, though, you will not know, and you must not inquire any further. I love the children more than any other woman except their mother, not in order to lay claim to their lands or titles—thanks to God, I have more than enough of my own—but for themselves, because they are lovable, and, even more, for the sake of someone else.® And you,” she said to Lambegue, “tell your uncle for me that he should come see his young overlords and that he should not take up arms in their land to champion their cause: if they live, they will recover their land honorably, and much more besides.” “My lady,” said Lambegue, “I will go back to my uncle now, but the roads that we have traveled on are so tortuous, I find, that no one can avoid getting lost.” ‘T’ll have one of my young men show you the way,” she said, “when you are ready to come back. But be sure you travel with no more than two or three other persons.” Then the Lady gave him a guide, and he took his leave, first of the Lady and then of all the others. But it was not easy for him to rouse the lord of Payerne, who was staring at Lancelot [195] like a man under a spell: he felt sure he knew who the youth was. Now the Lady turned back to the Lake, taking the children with her. When she had gone some distance, she called Lancelot aside, off the road, and said softly, “Prince, 6“someone else” is surely Lancelot. Lancelot, Part I how is it that you were so bold a while ago as to call Lionel your cousin? He is a king’s son, a prince, of much higher birth and more noble than people think.” “My lady,” said Lancelot, who was embarrassed, “the word just came to my lips all by itself; I never gave it a thought.” “Then tell me,” she said, “in all truthfulness, who do you think is the nobler young man, you or Lionel?” “My lady,” he said, “that’s a very hard question, and there is no one I owe greater truthfulness than you, my lady and my mother, but I know nothing about the nobility of my lineage. But I owe you a truthful answer: J would never let myself be overcome with tears like him—not for such a reason! Besides, I’ve been taught that all people have come from a single man and woman. I don’t know on what grounds some are more noble than others, unless they gain nobility through prowess the way they can gain land and recognition. But you can be certain of this, that if it took great courage to be a noble man, I think I would be one of the noblest.” “Yes, my dear son,” said the Lady, “that’s what we’ll see. And I’ll add that only a lack of courage can stop you from being one of the most noble men in the world.” “Is that true, my lady?” he said. “Are you saying that as the person who really knows?” She said yes, absolutely. “My lady,” he said, [196] “God bless you for telling me that so soon! With your help, I am going to reach what I never thought I could; and I’ve never longed to have anything so much as I have longed for nobility. Now I am not disturbed if these boys have served me and shown me respect even though they are princes, because I can yet reach their level and be as worthy as they or even more.” With these words, great-hearted and high-minded, Lancelot so stole away his lady’s heart that she loved him more than ever and could not imagine being without him; indeed, the love that she had for him grew and strengthened every day. And if not for her great desire for his welfare and progress, she would not have been so pained to see how strong her love was growing; for she clearly saw that the boy would soon be big and welldeveloped enough to become a knight and go out in quest of adventures and extraordinary feats in strange countries far and wide. And then, it seemed, he would be as good as lost to her, since she would not often see him; nor could she imagine how she would get on without seeing him, and she gave this so much thought that she could barely think of anything else. Such thoughts were on her mind as the Lady rode back to the Lake. She had always loved and cherished the children, but now she began taking pains to satisfy their every desire, and all out of love for Lancelot. She thought to herself that she would hold on to them as long as she could; and when Lancelot became a knight, she would still have Lionel and Bors to take care of; and when Lionel went off to be knighted, [197] she would at least have Bors. In that way she tried to console herself for one departed with one still left. But at this point the story takes leave of her and the children and her whole household, and turns back to Leonce of Payerne and Lambegue on their way home. Lancelot, Part I 16. Pharian and Lambegue Are Caught in the Conflict Between the Men of Gaunes and King Claudas.' Now the lord of Payerne and Pharian’s nephew Lambegue were on their way home, together with their squires. Sometime after they had left the river of Charosque behind them, Leonce asked Lambegue whether he knew the boy who had called Lionel his cousin, and he answered no. “I am sure,” said Leonce, “that, whoever he is, he is going to be brave, proud, and wise, if he lives to manhood. I have never heard any other lad of his age speak so nobly. His guardian may well be pleased with herself, because if she were not the wisest and worthiest woman of all, she would not have such children. The boy, though, is not wrong to call my lord Lionel his cousin, for I think he is, on both father’s side and mother’s, and I am certain this is not just an idle thought.” “Really?” said Lambegue. “You think he is his cousin, and on both sides? Whose son would he be? As far back as you go, King Bors had no brother,” and my lady the Queen had no more than one sister, the queen of Benoic.” “Iam sure,” said Leonce, “that the boy was born [198] to King Ban of Benoic: no one has ever resembled him so closely.” “Good Lord!” said Lambegue. “What are you saying? Everyone knows that that boy died together with his father. Still, whoever this one is, he won’t fail to be an upstanding man.” “What?” said Leonce. “You think the boy died? I am sure this is he. I recognize his looks. I feel it in my heart.” Lambegue was filled with wonder. When they reached Gaunes, they went to the tower, which was guarded day and night lest Pharian or the hostages escape. Their news brought such a burst of joy that it could hardly be described, and with it the guards were removed from the tower and Pharian saw no more need for his wariness. He planned to send the prisoners back to King Claudas in the morning, and he himself would escort them as far as their safety required. That is what Pharian had in mind, but the men of the town and the countryside saw things very differently, for they were afraid, and quite sure, that King Claudas would return to the attack and could not fail to kill them all or strip them of everything and send them into exile, “so if we let the hostages go,” they said, “we are as good as dead. Let’s make sure they remain in our hands. Besides, Pharian has deeply wronged us, and we have found him to be forsworn and faithless, for he had promised us to keep King Claudas [199] in his prison. So let’s seize him first and then the others. And if Claudas is as niuch a friend of theirs as seems to be the case, he will put an end to his Corresponds to Micha VII:XVIa; Sommer II1:90-91; Kennedy ITI-113. 2As noted in Lecoy 378, it is surprising that Lambegue should be unaware of the existence of King Ban. This is especially so in view of his next statement, that “that boy died together with his father.” a7 hostility rather than have us destroy them all before his very eyes.” They all agreed to this proposal, in the belief that it would bring them peace with Claudas. They decided to seize the captives the next day, as soon they made a move to leave the tower, or that very night, if they started out then. Thus they planned their treason—not all of them, but those who sided with the lord of High Walls.3 They immediately armed forty knights and two hundred of their best soldiers with hidden weapons, and at each of the three gates to the city they posted a group of eighty soldiers and knights. Meanwhile, Pharian was thinking that if he could lead his prisoners to safety, he would gladly do so, though not in such a way that everyone could see them leaving the city, since he was not sure of what everyone had in mind. But then he gave up his earlier idea and planned instead to take them during the night to his castle, where he would hold them. Once there, he was not afraid that anyone could harm them in defiance of him, and he knew for a fact that Claudas would not scruple in the slightest to force his way into the land. He believed that once he had the hostages in his power, he could bend Claudas [200] to his will. He found it intolerable that the people of the town or the good men of the countryside might be destroyed while he was still capable of seeking a settlement, for in that case he would be dealing them the death blow himself. That was Pharian’s plan. At night, once he had slept awhile, he made his way out of the tower together with the three prisoners, including the one who was still badly wounded as a result of Lambegue’s attack, and Lambegue too was with them. When they came to the Breton Gate, which was so called because it looked out toward Brittany, they were set upon. They fought back very well, but to no avail: in the end, they were all wounded and captured, and they were taken back to prison in the tower. And so Pharian was confined, along with his nephew Lambegue and the three men who were hostages for King Claudas. Now the story leaves them for a while and turns back to the king. 17. The Conflict Between Claudas and the Knights of Gaunes Is Resolved, Thanks to Pharian and Lambegue.' King Claudas, according to the story, did not forget the shame that the men of Gaunes had brought on him, or the death of his son, which still deeply pained his heart, and he longed to take cruel revenge. He summoned his troops to gather in the greatest numbers possible, so that at the end of the month he stood before the city of Gaunes. When the barons who had not agreed to the treasonous capture of Pharian heard [201] that Claudas was closing in, they felt all the distress of knowing that destruction and death were 3The apparent contradiction between this statement (“not all”) and the statement two sentences earlier (“all”) is in the original. ICorresponds to Micha VII:XVIIa; Sommer III:91I-104; Kennedy 113-130. 4g) certain unless they could come to some sort of settlement with him. They would be in violation of their oath, however, if, not honoring the faith that they had sworn to Pharian, they failed to come to his aid against anyone threatening him. They finally agreed to release both him and all his companions from confinement. They came to Gaunes and at the tower pretended to be filled with hate for Pharian. The men guarding the tower let them in without any challenge, since they thought that these barons hated Pharian as much as those who had put him into prison. At once they set Pharian free and fell to their knees to beg his forgiveness. They begged him to have mercy on the land and on them, as Claudas was about to attack with great forces and “no one but you can negotiate a peace settlement. You may be sure that we did not consent to the act of treason; and to convince you of that, we will hand over to you, if you wish, the men who were in fact guilty of its “If you do that,” said Pharian, “I will consider myself satisfied.” “We will,” they said, “unless they take flight. Of course, we could not hand them over to you if they took flight.” [202] Both sides thus agreed that the wrongdoers would be handed over to Pharian unless they fled. The barons made their solemn promise, and Pharian made a promise to do his best to help them reach a settlement with Claudas; and if peace could not be had, he would share their fate. The local men felt greatly reassured, because they believed that Pharian was on very good terms with King Claudas. Meanwhile, those guilty of treason were brought together and came before Pharian to beg forgiveness and surrender themselves to his authority. This was all managed by Leonce of Payerne, who was a man of great intelligence. Pharian did not wish to harm or humiliate them, for he found more than enough honor in seeing men much higher-born than himself come to beg mercy of him; and so, at the urging of their peers, he put aside his anger. After that, they prepared as best they could to defend the city. When Claudas appeared before the gates, Pharian called together all the noble men who were inside and said, “My lords, I want to go out and speak to Claudas, to see whether I can reach any settlement with him.” They answered that they were very much afraid that Claudas might have him killed or thrown into prison. “I do not believe,” said Pharian, “that he would do that. Nevertheless, it is true that no one has either as much good or as much evil in him as people think. I have been very loyal to him in time of need, so that he should not behave disloyally or treacherously to me now. But I want you to swear on holy relics, you who [203] are the most powerful men here, that, if he kills me, you will immediately kill the three hostages that you hold.” They all swore just as he wished. Then he left the town and rode unescorted and fully armed up to the king’s army. Claudas’s men recognized his trappings and the remarkably fine horse he rode, and the best among them welcomed him warmly and showed him great respect. He rode on to Claudas’s tent. Then he removed his helmet, and Claudas, of course, recognizing him, welcomed him warmly. Indeed, as soon as he saw him, he ran toward Lancelot, Part I him with his arms outstretched and kissed him on the mouth, eager for his friendship. Pharian drew back and said, “Claudas, my lord, I cannot gladly kiss you until I know it is right.” “Why do you say that?” asked the king. “Because,” said Pharian, “you have come to besiege this city, it seems to me, and it is filled with my kinsmen and peers and men who have pledged me their allegiance, people I have undertaken to protect from you. It is now clear to me that, if they are harmed or go to their death, it will be on account of me alone.” “Why,” said Claudas, “have they shut me out of the city? It belongs to me, and they are all vassals of mine!” ‘T’ll tell you,” said Pharian. “It is quite right, if people see armed troops coming against them, to stand fast and look to their defense [204] until they know whether they can really expect peace or war. And because we didn’t know what troops we faced, that’s what the city did. But if you promise to come into your city with peaceful intentions, I’ll have the gates opened with no delay, and you will enter.” “The next time I enter,” said Claudas, “it must be to punish the people inside! Otherwise, I will never enter that place again.” “My lord,” said Pharian, “I have agreed to protect them. I beg and beseech you, as your liegeman, not to disgrace me but to approach them in peace as your liegemen. Then if they have done you any wrong, they will make whatever amends you wish.” But Claudas said that he would do nothing of the sort, and his highest barons said to him that, if he did not avenge the death of his son “and the great shame that they brought on you, you will lose all honor on this earth.” Then Pharian stepped forward and said to Claudas, “My lord, it is true, my lord, that I am your liegeman, and never so much as when you needed me and I did not abandon you. Now things have changed so that power is in your hands and you no longer have any need of me. Since you refuse to trust my counsel or listen when I implore you, I renounce my homage to you. It seems to me that from now on you would have little fondness for me and would look at me with suspicion and mistrust. I will go elsewhere, then, [205] to find confidence and love. And you, lord barons and knights,” he went on, “you who consider your lord shamed if he doesn’t take vengeance on the people inside the walls, now we will see how well you help him! You didn’t speak in such terms when he was in danger of dying in front of this castle and I freed him with my own hands just as the sword was poised to run him through! Listen to me, all of you and Claudas too: there are so many of us inside the walls that you will have a stiff battle. But if any man among you ventured to say that the barons of Gaunes have wronged your lord here and should be dispossessed or slain, I am prepared to fight him in their defense at this very moment!” Thus Pharian offered to do battle right in front of King Claudas and he held out his pledge, but there was no knight who dared accept the challenge. *“it is right” as in Micha. Micha variants have “what right I have”; Sommer 93, “what right I have to it”; Kennedy 115, “that I have a right to it.” Lancelot, Part I Claudas, looking very angry, said to Pharian, “What are you doing, Pharian? You are my vassal. How can you come here to quarrel with me over my deadly enemies? How can you be so eager to take their side against the knights of my household?” “In God’s name,” said Pharian, “I am not your vassal! Nor are they your deadly enemies—yet. Take care that you not turn them into such enemies! I am offering in their behalf to satisfy whatever demands you choose to make, just so long as you loyally pardon them as your men.” Claudas said that he would do nothing of the kind, [206] nor would any argument make him consider it. “My lord,” said Pharian, “I have renounced my allegiance to you. From now on I want you to know that you have no greater enemy than me. I am going back, then, right now, without asking your leave and on unfriendly terms. But first I summon you to fulfill your promise, for you gave me your true word as king that you would become my prisoner when I summoned you to do so. By your faith, I now summon you to do so!” Claudas answered that he was not bound to him by such a promise, and Pharian said that he was prepared to prove it then and there, if Claudas dared fight. “Pharian,” said the king, “you’re mad, trying to provoke me into a fight in front of my troops! Well, you won't have your battle, because if I killed you, it would be more to my harm than to my good. Now I summon you to keep your sworn word to me, as you bound yourself to do, and not give up your homage. I have not betrayed my loyalty to you, nor have I ever knowingly done you any wrong.” “Claudas, my lord,” said Pharian, “if I had not been your liegeman and if you attempted to defend yourself, I would have the strength to overcome you; but I must honor the oath I once swore to you, whatever the outcome, good or bad. At the same time, I urge you to remember your word. You may be sure of this: you have no greater enemy than me, and you will never again enter the town of Gaunes, because there are many men ready to stop you. There is not a single man capable of bearing arms who would not gladly end your life if he could. And from now on you will have to be wary day and [207] night, and you will never again sleep in peace but, unless I die, will again and again hear rumbling and cries all around you and see your tents ripped apart and overthrown and your men wounded and killed one after another.” “What are you saying?” said Claudas. “Am I to fear you, Pharian?” “Yes, indeed,” said Pharian, “as long as I can wield a sword! And you may well fear more than prison. And if you live longer than I do, you can still expect death from me, or else the undying soul means nothing. If you have ever cared for the lord of Saint Cirre, now you can go tell it to his spirit, for before my next meal his head and the heads of his two companions wiil be as far away from their bodies as a mangonel can hurl a stone.” With that, he spurred his horse and galloped away from Claudas, heading from the field back to the city. Twenty knights or more, though, came dashing after him, their shields held high and their lances in place for an attack. When he became aware of them, he continued all aig) the faster toward the city gate, and there his nephew Lambegue, who was posted above, shouted to him, “What’s this, uncle? What’s it going to be? Are you going to let them come after you and attack, and not even lift an arm?” At that, Pharian turned around and gave one of his pursuers such a thrust with his spear that head and shaft went right through the body, and both the knight and his horse fell to the ground in such a way that the man’s right thighbone [208] broke and the spear splintered into many pieces. Pharian pulled out his sword and rushed toward the others, while the men inside opened the gate and came riding out to rescue him. But Claudas came charging up with a stick in his hand and drove back the men who had given chase to Pharian, cursing and calling them names and swinging at them with his stick until it broke apart. “Bastards! Cowards!” he shouted. “I'll destroy every one of you!”—for they had come close to disgracing and destroying him forever. During this time when Claudas sliced through the crowd and drove his men back, he was wearing a drab, hardmeshed tunic and had an iron cap on his head; his sword was at his side, and he was riding a strong, swift horse. Meanwhile, knights came pouring through the gate, with Lambegue, Pharian’s nephew, ahead of all the others. He was armed to look very much the dashing knight, and he was on a horse that he was clearly proud of. He held his spear couched and ready as his horse rushed forward, both spear and horse heading straight toward Claudas, but he cried out while still at a distance that the king might well prepare either to flee or to defend himself. Claudas turned his horse in the direction of the shout. Lambegue shouted, “By the Holy Cross, Claudas, you have asked for this! You'll slink right back to you-knowwhere, if my steel can cut through your iron mesh!” When Claudas saw himself confronted by the man who [209] hated him more than anyone else, he felt more than a slight shudder, as he had no spear, no helmet, and no shield, and he was very frightened of dying if he let Lambegue come near. He turned slowly to retreat, while his challenger came spurring toward him, reproaching him with sharp cries of “Traitor!” Claudas put hand to sword and, head bent, continued moving back. He was all alone, since his men were afraid of him and had withdrawn as soon as they had seen him scatter Pharian’s pursuers. Lambegue shouted, “What’s the matter, traitor? Turn around to face your deadly enemy! There’s nothing I want more than your death, you faithless coward, ready to betray my uncle and kill him!” When Claudas heard the man who hated him more than anyone else come galloping up behind him, calling him a coward and a traitor, he felt himself grow tense. He realized that there was great danger in any delay, for he would have to face the point of the spear with no shield to protect him; yet, if he simply backed away, he would hold himself shamed for the rest of his life. No; he feared a life of shame more than a decent death, and he would stake everything on the mercy of Our Lord. He raised his right hand and made the sign of the cross, then grasped his sword and turned [210] his horse to face the man rushing forward. He made for his challenger with no further thought of death or cowardice, shouting 50 loudly, “Lambegue! Easy now, Lambegue! You’ve no need to rush! You’ll get me soon enough. But whether or not I can prove I’m no traitor, you can see right now that I am not exactly a coward!” Seeing him approach, Lambegue felt a greater thrill than ever before. He was coming at top speed, since he had started far away and the horse was a swift and eager animal of great strength. The king was not hurrying to meet him, but waiting with his sword drawn.3 Lambegue, hurling the spear with all his might, hit the upper part of his chest; with all his wrath and his speed, he would surely have killed him, had he hit him just a bit below that point. The shock was great enough, however, for Claudas to think that he would die in an instant and unconfessed; but he held himself erect in the saddle and, for all the impact of the blow, never staggered; nor did the mail of his tunic give way and rip. The king was a man of great strength, and the spear shattered against him. Then, as Lambegue came galloping past him, Claudas struck his visored face so hard that the helmet, for all its strength, could not stop the sword from penetrating to the iron mail that covered his head and trunk. Shock and pain [211] knocked Lambegue back against the rear saddlebow, and he saw stars. Meanwhile, King Claudas, under the delayed impact of the hit that he had received, lay slumped over his saddlebow, unmoving. A great cry had gone up, and the most valiant knights leapt into their saddles. Lambegue made his way back toward the king and found him slumped forward, senseless, with his two hands on the horse’s neck. He drew his sword in order to cut off Claudas’s head, but the horse would not stand still and the blow landed on the king’s iron cap, slicing the brim away from the crown, then coming down onto the hood of fine mail and smashing many of the links into the flesh of neck and head. Already hurt by the spear, Claudas was hardly helped by this new blow; he was so stunned that he lost his sense of hearing for a long while and lost all control of his head and body; he collapsed onto the ground. Lambegue was eager to dismount, but Claudas’s men, wildly rushing toward him, put a quick end to that desire. When he saw them coming at him, he was so bitterly disappointed that he almost went out of his mind and would gladly take out on anyone the revenge that he was so grievously being robbed of. Then he covered his chest with his shield and gave his horse a kick of the spurs; with sword drawn, he made straight for a man he [212] saw about a stone’s throw in front of the others. The man was coming along with spear ready for the attack and spurring as fast as he could: the spear just shattered against Lambegue’s shield! And with his sword Lambegue struck him such a blow to the face that he sliced away his whole noseguard just below the eyes. As he pulled his sword back, he saw the man’s face all red with blood, and then the man went tumbling from his saddle onto the ground. When Lambegue saw the others wildly dashing toward him, he brandished his sword and settled 3This statement about Claudas’s immobility seems to be in contradiction with the phrase “Seeing him approach” at the beginning of the paragraph and with the slightly earlier statement that Claudas “made for his challenger”; the (apparent?) contradiction is in the original. The subject of the phrase “was coming at top speed” seems, in any case, to be Lambegue. Lancelot, Part I himself firmly in his stirrups, then covered himself with his shield and started to meet the attack, but just then his uncle Pharian came spurring toward him, seized his rein, and, like it or not, pulled him straight off to the gate. But Claudas’s men had been moving along fast enough to reach them, and they dealt them great blows on their helmets and there were those who shattered spears against their bodies. Still, uncle and nephew made their way inside the walls, together with a number of others who had gone out to help them. But Pharian and his nephew did not leave the fight shamefully, for they kept turning around toward their fastest pursuers and protecting each other with fine blows; and neither of them was left with a sword not reddened by blood. They were back in the city, then, and the gates were closed and portcullises lowered. Pharian and Lambegue went straight to the tower, but not as knights who had rested and been idle! They both showed the marks of their work, for both had lost blood from many cuts, [213] and their helmets were ripped and battered, and their shields pierced by thick lances and cut up by swords and torn at top and bottom. When the three knights held hostage for Claudas saw them in such a state, they were frightened for themselves, especially when Lambegue, in a rage, said to his uncle, “My lord, by God! let me kill these traitors! Claudas deserves it, for his disloyalty, for trying to have you killed!” “No, nephew,” said Pharian. “These men have done nothing to deserve death. Nor has their lord ever betrayed me, except once, and it was not something that would justify a valiant man’s death.”4 Thus Pharian, with a great deal of effort, calmed his nephew down. Then they took off their helmets, and in no time there was a squire there to tell them to go to the gate where the fight had taken place: Claudas wanted to speak to Pharian, and the squire had been sent by the barons of the city, because they were impatient to hear what Claudas had to say. At that, the two mounted their horses once again, ordered their helmets to be brought after them and, when they reached the gate, ordered it opened for them. There, an unarmed knight sent by GClaudas told Pharian that the king was waiting for him outside and that he was all alone; he wished Pharian to proceed alone as well, as he had withdrawn all his troops; and what the knight said was true. [214] Pharian rode off all by himself. At his approach, the king asked him to say truthfully, by whatever loyalty he had left, how the three prisoners were doing. Pharian answered that all three were safe and sound. Claudas had been very much afraid that they had been killed, for he felt that Pharian was vigorous enough to do it and Lambegue treacherous enough. He said, “Pharian, you were wrong to give up your homage to me. I ask you to show your loyalty and change your mind, since I have not given you grounds to renounce it.” 4Pharian is alluding to Claudas’s seduction of his wife, recounted in chapter 7. Lancelot, Part I Pharian said that he would not, “because I could not love you and remain your vassal,” he said. “That would make me traitorous and untrue.” He tried one argument after another, but to no avail. Then Claudas said, “Pharian, take care my hostages are not harmed—and gO away now, since you refuse to listen to me. And yet I offer you what you were just asking for: to become your prisoner whenever you wish, just as I should.” “What are you saying?” said Pharian. “I promised you as my liegeman,” said Claudas, “that as soon as you summoned me, I would become your prisoner; and as soon as you are my liegeman, I am ready to go wherever you say, provided you have sworn to me that I need not fear anyone and that you have had no news of King Bors’s children. But if you refuse my offer, then go away, for if you are no longer my vassal, I have nothing more to say to you, for either better or worse. Just tell the chief barons in the city that they should now come see me,” and he gave him ten names. [215] Pharian then went back and sent the barons to Claudas. As soon as he saw them, he said, without greeting them first, “Lords, you are all vassals of mine. I have loved you, yet you have so misbehaved toward me that it could hardly be put right if I insisted that the amends match the wrong done. But I do not insist, though you know for a fact that I have the forces and the strength to capture all of you behind those walls: in the end, you cannot stand up to me. You have sent Pharian to sue for peace, but he has renounced his homage to me; and since he does not wish to be my liegeman, I would not negotiate with him, for I could not trust him. I’l] tell you how you could reach a peace settlement with me. And by all the relics in your city, there won’t be any other way; and if I have to defeat you by arms, I’ll have you all killed and torn apart! You must first swear to me that you were in no way responsible for the death of my son Dorin, and must then hand over one of your men to do my bidding, whatever it may be. If you refuse, then turn around and go back, and defend yourselves as well as you can, for there will be no end of attacks on you; and from now on I will have all the support of my lord the king of Gaul. And then, if I capture you by force, I swear to God that your only ransom will be your own bodies.” [216] When they heard that, they were both pleased and saddened—pleased that they could have peace and saddened that they would have to give up one of their own, since they knew that, whoever he might be, death could be his only way out. “My lord,” said Leonce of Payerne, “we have heard your wish, and we will comply. What man do you ask us to hand over? Tell us, and you will have him, if he is a man that we are empowered to surrender.” “lll tell you,” said Claudas. “I want Lambegue, Pharian’s nephew!” “Ah, my lord,” said Leonce, “that cannot be! We would be traitors, if we were in effect to take the life of the finest young man in the whole kingdom, the one in whom we have placed our greatest hope. May we never, God willing, gain our peace through murder or treason! Whatever the barons of the kingdom want to do, I at least, God willing, will never advise them as you wish.” Bul “And you, lords,” said Claudas to the nine others, “what do you say? Will you let yourselves be destroyed along with your city, rather than surrender Just one knight?” They answered that they would do nothing against the advice of Leonce, as he was the most worthy man of the realm. “Now you [217] may leave, then,” said Claudas, “and from now on you can expect no truce or peace from me. But first I ask you as my liegemen to return my three hostages, or else you must swear on holy relics that you have no news of the children of King Bors, whether they are dead or alive.” “My lord,” said Leonce, “we have no news of the children. Then, more important, you did not consign the hostages to us but to Pharian, and we swore to him that we would help him against anyone trying to do him any harm. Since we have so sworn, we cannot, we must not, go against our word. That would be an act of disloyalty; and nothing can shame a man more than to be stained by disloyalty.” “I want you to know,” said Claudas, “that you must return them, or my heart will no longer have any love for you. And take care that not one of them die, or all of you will die. Go now! And let each man look out for himself as well as he can!” They turned back sorely troubled, for they understood that the city could not hold out against Claudas. When they came back and Pharian saw their grim faces, he was curious and alarmed. He asked them what news they brought from King Claudas, and they answered that it was very bad. “Tell me,” he said. “We cannot have a peace agreement,” they said, “unless we hand over your nephew Lambegue for Claudas to deal with as he sees fit. That is how we can have peace.” “And what have you agreed to?” said Pharian. “What!” said Leonce of Payerne. “In God’s name, I can’t imagine a knight [218] like him, and a knight who has helped us so much, delivered up to death with my backing.” All the wise men of the city and the countryside were present at this meeting. Pharian said to them all, “My lords, what do you think of the condition that Claudas has given to these barons?” They all agreed with what Leonce had said, and every one of them said that, God willing, such a woeful condition would never be granted. And the wise men said that they would hold out as well as they could; and when they could hold out no longer and if God were unwilling to guide them, they would go out, by God, and down to the end make the enemy pay dearly; for worthy men must not try to save themselves through murder or disloyalty. When Pharian heard this, he was pleased; he felt great esteem for these men and wanted, if one day he could, to reward them for such loyalty to him. They pledged themselves to stand fast and then they separated, each one going to his lodgings and Pharian and his nephew going to the tower. When they removed their armor, Pharian went up to the battlements and looked all around at the extraordinary forces that were gathering. It was clear to him that the town could not defend itself successfully, for there was far too Bye little food on hand for the great number of people within the walls. And he began to weep softly and sigh from deep within his heart. As he was sighing and weeping, his nephew Lambegue came up. Hearing him moan and lament that way, [219] he moved toward him very quietly, one step at a time, so that Pharian would not notice him. He listened as Pharian said to himself, “Ah, good city, honored by our forefathers, home of worthy men and true, seat and dwelling of kings and house of upright judges, place of joy and gladness, court of fine knights, honored town of valiant householders, countryside full of loyal vavasors and good laborers,” fruitful land filled with every good—ah, God! who can bear the woe of seeing all these things destroyed to save the life of one young man! Ah, Lambegue, dear nephew, would to God, who gave His life for us, that I were in your place! So help me God, I would run to Claudas to save the gracious land of Gaunes from devastation; whatever the outcome for myself. For there would be great good and honor in a death that would bring about such a benefit.” Pharian said nothing more but began to sob. Lambegue then stepped forward and said, “My lord, please, sir, stop weeping! By the faith I owe you, this city will never be ruined for the sake of my life! And since, as you say, there is such honor to be attained, I will go to my death [220] confidently and with joy.” “Ah, dear nephew,” said Pharian, “you’ve caught me by surprise! I didn’t mean I wanted you to die! May God never let me see that; nor, please God, would I ever urge you to it! But we'll rely on His mercy, and if there is no way out, we can still’ make a sortie and attack Claudas’s camp: we might yet be fortunate enough to free ourselves forever.” “There’s no point in all that,” said Lambegue. “Since the city can remain at peace just by surrendering me, that is the way it must be, and no one will be hurt.” Pharian was sorely troubled; he wept and almost killed himself with grief. Then he said to his nephew, “What are you saying, good nephew? Are you really going to give yourself up to Claudas?” “Yes, dear uncle, I am,” he said. “That will be the end of all the trouble. By my death I can save this fine city and all the good men who live here. I must do it, because I have heard you yourself say that, if you were in my place, you would go to your death, and confidently. If you would do it, I want to do it, because I know that you would never do anything that would dishonor you.” “Good nephew,” said Pharian, “I see you can’t be stopped. I want you to know it grieves me and at the same time it gratifies me. It grieves me because you will have no defense against death; and it gratifies me because no knight will ever have died so honorably as you, since all the people of this country will be saved through you.” [221] 5“Gaborers” as in Micha variants, Kennedy 124, and Lecoy 379. Micha and Sommer 100 have “lords.” 6“benefit” as in Micha variants, Kennedy 124, and Lecoy 379. Micha and Sommer 100 have “honor.” 7Literally, “we cannot do worse than make a sortie.” The context makes it clear that Pharian envisages the sortie in a positive light. Lancelot, Part I Thereupon Lambegue went to see the barons. He called them together and said, “My lords, if you hand me over to King Claudas, how will you be sure of having his friendship and a firm peace?” They wanted to know why he was asking. “Because,” he said, “if you can be sure, then the decision to have peace is already made: I am ready to make myself his prisoner.” At those words, they all began to weep, and they said that they would never allow that, as it would be too great a loss if he were to go to his death at such an age; for he could yet attain very great honor. He answered that no urging could move him and no one could make him change his mind, and “don’t be afraid that Claudas will kill me; I am sure that he wants to keep me in prison.” They said that they would not allow it, because if Pharian found out, he would take leave of his senses and kill all the men who had agreed to the plan. “As far as he is concerned,” said Lambegue, “I can reassure you all, for it is with his backing that I have decided to undertake this.” At once they had Pharian join them. They reported to him, in all his anguish, what Lambegue had told them, and he said that Lambegue was so determined and so sure he could not die a more honorable death that he could not be held back. When the barons heard that this was how the matter stood, they sent Leonce of Payerne to lord Claudas in order to find out how he would assure them that, [222] once Lambegue was his captive, their quarrel would give rise to no further trouble or problems. When Claudas heard this, he answered that he would give them whatever assurance they wanted. “The barons,” said Leonce, “want you to take an oath before them and before the most respected members of your court.” Claudas agreed. “And they will swear to me,” he said, “that my son did not die at their hands or with their accord.” He answered that they would gladly so swear. The two men arranged the matter for the next morning and then gave each other a preliminary pledge. In the morning, both sides took their oaths, and Claudas’s hostages were accordingly set free. Then Pharian came to his nephew and said, “Lambegue, my dear nephew, you are going to your death, to the noblest death any knight has known, but I want you to go to confession first.” “Why, my lord?” said Lambegue. “Are you afraid that I'll die?” “Yes, indeed,” he said; “I know for a fact that you can’t escape.” “So help me God,” said Lambegue, “I’ll never fear death as long as you can carry a shield. What torments and racks my heart is rather that I have to hand myself over to the mercy of my deadly enemy. That is the anguish that surpasses all other woes. Death itself, you see, is only joy [223] and pleasure alongside the anguish of saying or doing something that is hateful to my heart. But if you want me to go to confession, I will, since nothing you wish could be a burden to me.” Lancelot, Part I Then he called the bishop himself and confessed to God, in his hearing,® everything that his heart could disclose by way of his tongue. After that, he asked for his arms, and his uncle said to him, “My dear nephew, at this point you need to ask not for arms but for mercy.” “God forbid,” said Lambegue, “that I should ever ask Claudas for mercy! I would not have had mercy on him yesterday had I defeated him. Nor, please God, will I ever stand before him or any other great lord like some goodfor-nothing, looking like a thief or murderer sentenced to death! No, P’ll go like a knight, wearing my helmet and bearing my shield, and I’ll hand him my sword and my arms without a single word. And there is nothing for you to worry about or fear: I give you my word, to you my lord and my uncle, I will not attack anyone or insult anyone.” He convinced Pharian to grant him his arms. When he was dressed and astride his horse, he commended everyone to God and then rode off, looking so cheerful that people were dumbfounded; and he did not allow anyone to accompany him. Pharian, though, and the men with him showed no [224] cheer at all, but let their grief ring through the town of Gaunes as if each one of them had lost the creature he loved most in the whole world. Lambegue rode as far as Claudas’s tent and dismounted. He saw that Claudas, who had learned that he would arrive armed, was fully armed too, and beside him stood some of his knights, also armed, for he had had enough experience of Lambegue to feel unsafe in his presence; and the three prisoners had told him how Lambegue was doing of his own free will what no one would have dared ask of him. Lambegue stood before Claudas, neither falling to his knees nor saying a word; but he drew his sword out of its scabbard, gazed at it and sighed. Then, without a word, he dropped it at Claudas’s feet. Next, he pulled his unlaced helmet from his head and dropped it as he had his sword; and his shield followed the helmet. Claudas picked up the sword and raised it as if about to strike Lambegue on the head. Everyone seeing this shuddered, and even the most ruthless began to cry, but Lambegue did not wince. Then Claudas ordered that his hauberk and iron leggings be immediately removed, and squires sprang forward to take them off. With his armor removed, Lambegue stood draped in a tunic of fine, blood-red cloth, a remarkably handsome knight, well-built in body and limb, and with no beard or moustache on his face. He remained standing in front of the king, not saying a word, never looking straight at Claudas but only askance, and never opening his clenched right fist. [225] Claudas said to him, “Lambegue, how could you be so bold as to come into this camp? Don’t you know that I hate you more than any other man?” “Claudas,” he said, “now you know that I am not afraid of you.” “What!” he answered. “You see your death at hand and you still defy me?” “Death,” said Lambegue, “doesn’t frighten me.” 8“hearing” as in Micha variants, Kennedy 126, and Lecoy 379. Micha and Sommer 101 have “honor.” "S] “What do you mean?” said the king. “Do you consider me kind and merciful?” “I consider you,” he answered, “the most ruthless and cruel man who has ever lived. But if you want to go on living, you won’t be bold enough to kill me.” “Who would stop me from killing you?” said Claudas. “Wouldn’t you kill me, if you had the upper hand?” ‘It will be a while before I have the upper hand, since that is how God wants it,” said Lambegue, “but I have never desired anything so much as that.” Then Claudas laughed and, taking him by the hand, said, “There is one thing that the man whose companion you are can boast of: that he is bound to the boldest knight who rose from bed this morning, the knight with the staunchest heart of all. If you lived to the right age, you would be a model of knighthood and, so help me God, I’d be sorry to have killed you, even if it had gained me half the world. Just a while ago, all I desired was your death, but I can’t ever desire it again, because no one else has ever shown the valor that you have, exposing yourself to death in order to save other people. And even if I wanted you to die, I would cherish you out of love for your uncle Pharian, to be fair about it; for I can’t deny that he [226] saved me from death, and, with me, many of the men who are in this camp.” Then Claudas presented him with a splendid robe that was his own, but Lambegue refused to accept it. Yet Claudas begged him to remain with him, but Lambegue said that he would never give his homage or allegiance to any living man unless his uncle did so first. At once Claudas sent for Pharian, and the messenger found him outside the gate, fully armed, with his helmet laced on, and lying in wait for a chance to kill Claudas should Claudas have killed his nephew. Pharian appeared before the king and was told, “Pharian, I have now given you some return for your services to me: your nephew placed himself in my power expecting to die, and I have released him for your sake and because of his great valor. And only this morning I would not have accepted the whole world as ransom for him! I want you to know that of all knights you are the two whose service and company I would most love to have. Step forward and take up again the homage due me; and I will give you back all the land that you have held from me and make you even richer with fertile fiefs and and large revenues.” Pharian, who was a very sensible man, did not want to step out of line and offend the king; he felt much indebted for the way Claudas had treated his nephew, forgiving him everything out of love for Pharian. [227] “My lord,” he said, “I am very thankful to you, one of the worthiest men of the world, both for what you have done for me and for whatever else you want to grant me; and so I do not reject your service or your offer; indeed, I value them highly. But there is a great obstacle to doing as you wish, and that is that I have sworn on holy relics that I would never accept a fief from any man in the world before having reliable news of the children of my lord King Bors.” “Let me tell you, then,” said Claudas, “what you can do to show your good will. Accept your land from me without an act of homage or fealty, and set out in search of the 54 children whenever you like; I will even, if you like, provide some of my men to go with you. And when you’ve found them, bring them here or anywhere else, and I will put the whole fief into your possession until they are of an age to bear arms. At that point, let them promise me homage and hold their land from me; and you do homage to me once you have found them.” “My lord,” said Pharian, “I would not do that right now. Who knows but that events may soon force me to invade your land and attack your forces without warning; and that would be a grave wrong if I were beholden to you and had made the mistake of doing homage to you. But I am prepared to make a different pact with you. I will give you my word as a knight that, whatever the fate of the children, be they found or not, I will offer homage to no one else [228] without informing you first, assuming you are alive. Now ask no more of me, for I will do no more.” “I know quite well,” said Claudas, “why you and Lambegue refuse to be my liegemen. You told me once that you had never loved me and never could.” “My lord,” said Pharian, “if I said that to you, it was nothing but the truth, for I have never had any affection for you. But you have now done more for me than all my services to you could possibly have merited, and for that reason you might yet win our hearts. However, I dare not and must not offer you any further assurance, given the obstacle you have heard me speak of. But wherever my nephew and I may be, your person is in no danger from us: there will be no surprise attack. Now please let us leave on our quest.” Seeing that he could hold them no longer, Claudas agreed and gave them leave, according to the terms that they had reached. In no time, Lambegue was armed again, and when he was astride his horse, Claudas presented him with a spear of sharp-edged steel and solid wood, because he had not carried such a weapon into his tent. With that, the pair left the king’s tent, went back to the city, and took leave of all the barons who were there; and Pharian took his wife and sons with him. Thus peace was made between the kingdom of Gaunes and Claudas. But now the story falls silent about them and turns to Pharian and the children of King Bors of Gaunes, [229] who were in the Lake under the gentle care of the good Lady. 18. Pharian and Lambegue Rejoin the Boys, and Pharian Dies.’ Once, according to the story, there was peace between Claudas and the barons of Gaunes, Pharian and his nephew, the chronicle goes on, went to rejoin the two children. They were guided along the way by the young man whom the Lady of the Lake had sent back with Lambegue for that purpose. They reached the Lake after three days of riding. 'Corresponds to Micha VII:XVIIIa; Sommer III:104—-105; Kennedy 130-132. Lancelot, Part I There they were greeted with great pleasure, but Bors was Clearly more delighted to see his tutor Lambegue than Lionel was to see his, for he was very angry with Pharian for having delayed so long; besides, he was so in love with the young lady who had brought him from Gaunes that he no longer enjoyed any company as much as hers or showed anyone else the same submissiveness and love. It was only her order that made him run to Pharian with outstretched arms the moment he saw him, and then to Pharian’s wife, who had treated him and his brother with great respect. But a moment later he reproached Pharian very harshly, speaking his words as if they had been rehearsed: “Pharian, sir, 1 owe you no gratitude for coming to see me, whereas Bors has every reason to love his tutor, who has already been here to console him. And if it were up to me rather than my lady, you would never, as a matter of fact, have been sent for, since I can do quite well without your lessons from now on.” [230] Lionel was well on his way, and he was not about to stop. Hearing all of this, the young lady who was so fond of him sprang forward and swore that he would lose all her love if he went on speaking so outrageously; he should instead obey Pharian in all things. Pharian, for his part, was left pained and dumbfounded by what he had heard. Yet he managed an answer that was more restrained and courteous than his heart would have liked. “My lord,” he said, “I am not about to give any weight to what you are saying, however hurtful it may be; for nothing should come between a young lord and his servant, no matter how outrageously he speaks to the man. But if you were of the age of my nephew Lambegue, you would eventually repent. In any case, many people are well aware of the efforts I have made to protect your land from being ravaged and laid laste; and many worthy men would have been killed and slaughtered if, with God’s backing, I had not helped them.” “What kind of protection of my land was it,” said Lionel, “to rescue Claudas and save him from death!” “I defended him,” said Pharian, “as I was duty-bound to do, and as I would do again tomorrow if the terms were the same as they were that day.” Just then the youth who had led the two tutors stepped forward and said to Lionel, “Ah, my lord, don’t say such things about your tutor! By the Holy Cross, I think he is one of the most faithful knights ever to bear a shield. I am sure of it, and would say [231] a lot more if he and his nephew were not here; but if I said it in front of them, people would think I was saying it to curry favor.” That brought an end to the exchange between Lionel and his tutor, but the young man who had been to Gaunes went on to recount the feats of arms that he had seen Lambegue and Pharian perform, and how Lambegue had risked death to save the town and its people, and what Claudas wanted to give to him and to Pharian if they both became his vassals. The squire had so much praise for the two of them that the Lady of the Lake, like everyone else, gazed at them in awe. Only a moment later, Lancelot came back from his day in the forest and greeted his companions’ tutors with great warmth. Lambegue told Pharian about the boy’s mature words when Lionel had been weeping over his land that day Lancelot, Part I by the Charosque river. After that, he told him how Leonce, the lord of Payerne, had thought the boy was the son of King Ban. Through the evening, Pharian watched Lancelot’s behavior with wonder, the way he moved and walked, and his charming way of speaking; and he admired him more deeply than any other boy he had ever seen. Thus for a long time the tutors remained together with the three children, until the day came when Pharian died. There was great [232] mourning for him, as he had been considered a remarkably worthy and honorable man. His wife thereafter remained with the Lady of the Lake, along with her two male children, who would later be knighted by Lionel himself; the elder was named Anguin and the younger, Tatain, and they both grew up to be very handsome and brave. But at this point the story stops speaking of them for a while, as of the three cousins and their life together, and turns back to the two queens who were sisters and were living together at the Royal Minster. 19. Reassured in a Dream That the Three Young Cousins Are Alive and Well, Queen Evaine Dies.' Now the story says that the two royal sisters lived on at the Royal Minster until they were both worn out with vigils and fasts, with weeping and brooding night and day. The queen of Gaunes had heard the news of her children’s capture and how Claudas wanted to kill them and then a young woman carried them off with great cunning. And since she did not know where they were or whether they were being treated well or ill in the place they had been taken to, she was very troubled, and so was her sister, the queen of Benoic, who was heartsick over the matter. But it was the mother, of course, who bore the brunt of it, and she rapidly lost more and more of her strength, though that did not stop her from going to matins every night. But the blameless, pious life that she led was as nothing next to the holy life of her sister, Queen Elaine of Benoic, who [233] was never without a rough and scratchy hairshirt under her thin white shift. Once she had taken the veil, she never again ate meat, even during illness. Twice each night she rose—once before or after matins, according as they were sung early or late—and recited what prayers she knew, and did it all in the dark, because she did not want to be noticed; but every night through winter she would rise twice. She never ate outside the refectory, and she always slept in the dormitory. Her footwear was never so sturdy that she did not feel the ground right through her soles. She kept the rule of her order and remained silent both within the cloister and without, so that she would never speak without the permission of the abbess, except when, away from other people, she lamented to Our Lord and implored His mercy. Many a day she ate nothing but grass and many a day she ate nothing at all. Whenever she 1Corresponds to Micha VII:XIXa; Sommer JII:106-107; Kennedy 132-134. 2) was dazed from chanting and staying within the cloister, dazed from vigils and fasts and prayers, she rested, but face down, on elbows and knees, and like that she would listen as one of the convent’s three chaplains recited the lives of the saints. That was the life that Queen Elaine of Benoic led throughout her years at the Royal Minster, and? Our Lord made it clear to her that her service was [234] pleasing to Him: her face was fairly dirty, yet it remained rosy and fresh? and so beautiful that no stranger could have suspected even a seventh of her piety. She lived this way for a very long time. Her sister, though, had a sallow and unwholesome look. One time Queen Evaine would go to bed and then wake up so sick that everyone thought she was dying; another time she would hurry to matins as soon as she could rise, and then attend all the other offices as well. But her face always showed the suffering of her body, for it was very thin and wan; and her voice was so hoarse and weak that it seemed to whoever heard her that she was about to die. But it was particularly when she heard that her children were lost, and then had no other news, that she began to grow worse from day to day. She stopped rising from her bed and she would unendingly pray to Our Lord that, if her children were alive, He send her unmistakable news of it before she took leave of this world; but if they were dead, she did not want to know it, as she wished to leave the world in good conscience and did not want any earthly loss to hasten her death. A vision came to her once, while she was at prayer. It was as if sleep had come over her and her spirit had been pulled from her and sent flying far away. It seemed to her that she was at the [235] edge of a beautiful garden beside a great, dense forest. Within the garden there were various large and beautiful houses; and as she watched, she could see a number of children come out of the houses, but there were three in particular who seemed to be the leaders of all the others. One was much taller and more handsome than the other two, and he stood in the middle, and the two who flanked the tall one were being guarded by two men. As she observed them, she recognized Pharian and his nephew Lambegue. (It was when Pharian was still alive.) Then she suspected that the two children were hers, but she could not make out who the third was; but even of her own children she was far from certain. At that point, a man came up to her whom she did not know, and hurried her back to the abbey; and she was very upset and troubled that she had not recognized the three chiildren. When she awoke, the frustration that she had felt in her dream still distressed her. She looked down at her right hand and saw three names written on it: Lionel, Bors, Lancelot. Suddenly she was elated and she began to weep with joy. She sent without delay for her sister, who was in church, and recounted her dream to her. “And I tell you, dear sister,” she said, “your son is by far the most beautiful child of all; I have never seen one finer or more handsome.” Literally, “and nevertheless.” 31 iterally, “white and red.” 56 Then she went on to explain how she [236] had seen him, and she made the queen of Benoic very happy. “Dear sister,” said the queen of Gaunes, “now I realize that Our Lord wants me to take leave of this life, for He has fulfilled all my desires. I commend my soul to Him.” She did not delay to make a thorough confession, and very soon thereafter the spirit left her body. She was buried with all the honor due a queen, and her sister, the queen of Benoic, mourned her deeply. But at this time the story has nothing more to say about them and their life, and turns instead to King Arthur. 20. King Arthur, Receiving Banin at Court, Regrets Not Having Come to the Aid of King Ban.’ At this point, the story says that one Easter Day, at the beginning of April, King Arthur was at Carhaix, a fair city of his that was well furnished in every way. After High Mass, the king sat down to eat. Now, it was a custom of King Arthur’s at that time to celebrate Easter more splendidly than any other holiday, and I will tell you why. He held court in high style, wearing his crown, only five times a year: at Easter, Ascension, Pentecost, All Saints’ Day, and Christmas. There were many other holidays when he held court, but not, as they said, in high style: Candlemas, for example, and mid-August, or the feastday of the town where he happened to be, and on many another day when people came along whom he wanted to receive with honor and rejoicing. In that way, King Arthur was often busy holding court, but the Easter court was the most important of all and the one most dedicated to God, and the Pentecost court was [237] the most lively. The reason the Easter court was the most important and the most honored is that that was when Our Savior freed us from everlasting woes. That was the day He rose again, having destroyed our death by dying and, by coming back to life, restoring and strengthening our lives. For this reason Easter was the most important feast of the year and the one most honored in King Arthur’s household and many another place. The Pentecost court was the liveliest and gayest, because once Our Savior was in Heaven after the redeeming act of Easter, then, because God had promised to send the Holy Spirit to the people, to give them the comfort they needed (for, as you know, they were just like sheep that had lost their shepherd), on that day God sent them that comfort to console them for the man of flesh who had been one of them. And so they had him back with them, not in flesh but in spirit; and that confirmed their joy. Thus Easter Day was the beginning of our great joy, and the Pentecost its confirmation. Thus Easter was established as the highest and most honored holiday of the whole year, because that is when we were redeemed and our life restored; and Pentecost is rightly the liveliest, because that is when our joy was confirmed. 'Corresponds to Micha VII:XXa; Sommer III:107~111; Kennedy 134-138. Lancelot, Part I On Easter Day, as I was saying, the king was at Carhaix with many of his barons and [238] knights from all over the kingdom. After the meal, it was inevitable that many of the lithe young knights who were there would feel like entertaining themselves and having a good time, and so they threw themselves into amusements of many kinds. Some played backgammon or chess or some other kind of game, and others sang and danced or watched the ladies dance. Still others, some of them members of the household and some of them visitors from elsewhere, went to joust. After the jousting, they set up a target for tilting, such as was customary in those days, and many valorous young men went at it. However, no one from Arthur’s household took part in that, since for them it was not a usual practice; but the next day a number of them jousted once with nothing more than shields and then, later, fully armed. The day when the visitors jousted was Easter Day itself. The winner was a certain knight whom the story spoke of a while ago: Banin, the godson of King Ban of Benoic.? Banin was a Slight man, but he was remarkably skillful and agile and strong. He had long done battle against King Claudas and had done him great harm; with his gains in combat as well as his private means, he had succeeded in making his journey outfitted splendidly and accompanied by three other knights, noble young warriors like himself. He had come, then, to King Arthur’s court, to that place where knights poor and rich, eager for advancement and fortune, all stood to gain; for in [239] those days no one, wherever he came from, was considered worthy if he had not spent some time in the house of King Arthur and if he did not know the knights of the Round Table and the Watch:? if so, he was considered tried and tested. Once Banin had defeated all the participants on one side or another in the jousting, many a man of some importance looked at him with new respect, for in those days feats of prowess were more greatly admired than ever since. In those days, too, it was customary at all courts at which King Arthur wore his crown that, when suppertime came, the knight who had done best among the visitors in the jousting would serve the first course at the Round Table. It was a way of introducing him to people and initiating companionship, and it acknowledged that through his prowess he was eager to advance himself. As soon as he had served, he would go sit at the table of Arthur himself, across from the king but not exactly opposite him. You need to know, too, that at his high table King Arthur always seated his tablemates on the same side as himself, leaving the day’s winner at jousting alone on the other side, the better for him to become acquainted with everyone. When Banin had served the first course at the Round Table, Sir Gawain himself and Kay, the seneschal, led him before the king and seated him. The king looked at See chapter 2. 3Apart from mentioning in the final paragraph of this chapter that the Watch (l'Escargaite) is composed of one hundred fifty knights, our text provides no definition of this institution. It is referred to elsewhere, especially in the Perceval of Chrétien de Troyes, but nowhere is anything more suggested than that it is separate from the Round Table and less prestigious. Lancelot, Part I him very warmly, for he always felt great fondness for a fine knight. After the first course, conversation grew more lively, the king speaking to his knights and they to him. Know, too, that on a [240] feast day when he wore his crown, his vassal kings would never share his table; instead, each one sat at his own large table, in order to give more honorable seats to the worthy men he knew. The king spoke to the knights to right and left and watched Banin, who kept his head lowered and never said a word. He seemed abashed to be in front of so great a man as King Arthur and to be sitting there as an object for everyone to gaze at, there was no doubt no other reason. The king, wanting to pull him out of his embarrassment, said very courteously, “Sir knight, don’t be so shy at table: it seems to me you're not shy at arms! It’s true that many men of importance are looking at you, but it is to your honor in every case.” At that, Banin raised his head, but in his embarrassment he blushed; his face turned red and all the handsomer, and it suited him very well. The king asked him his name. “Banin, my lord,” he said. “What land were you born in?” said the king. “In the kingdom of Benoic, my lord,” he said. “Benoic?” said King Arthur. “Do you mean the Benoic that King Ban held when he was alive?” And Banin said that, yes, he was from that Benoic. “Did you ever know King Ban?” said Arthur. “My lord,” said Banin, “he was my godfather.” The king looked at him and saw tears come to his eyes, and he was deeply moved. Then he became lost in thought. [241] All hunched over, the king brooded about the matter for a long while, as tears rolled down his cheeks and fell upon the table. While he was brooding so, Sir Gawain and Kay the Seneschal became aware of what was happening. “My lord,” said Sir Gawain to the other, “what shall we do? I am afraid that he won’t appreciate it if we rouse him from his thoughts.” “By God, that’s right,” said Kay, “if he is thinking about something he likes. But let’s not let that stop us, because his brooding is too out of place right now.” “I assure you,” said Sir Gawain, “I’ll pull him out of it, even if he were to hate me for the rest of my life.” Then he went up to Arthur and would have given him a push to bring him out of his thoughts, but Kay grasped his arm and said, “Wait, sir! I’ve just thought of a way to rouse him.” “How?” said Sir Gawain. “T’ll show you,” said Kay, “but you mustn’t move!” With that, he rushed over to a horn that was hanging on a stag’s horn strap, pulled it to his lips, and blasted out a sound that seemed to make the whole hall tremble, and the queen’s rooms, too. The king was startled by the blast [242] and asked Sir Gawain, whom he saw standing in front of him, what it was all about. “Well, what it’s all about,” said Sir Gawain, “is your brooding. It’s an insult to everyone, since you should be showing good spirits and a warm welcome to all these people who have come to your court. Instead, here you are, B/ brooding and weeping! It would be a nasty thing if they were to think of you as a child, when you're supposed to be one of the wisest men in the world!” “Gawain, my good nephew,” said Arthur, “I was both right and wrong in this brooding of mine. I was wrong to do something my barons found insulting, but right because I was thinking about the greatest shame I have ever experienced since I first wore the crown: I was thinking about King Ban of Benoic, who was one of the most honorable liegemen I ever had and who died on his way to see me. His appeal reached me, but to this day I have done nothing about it. This shames me more than anything else could do.” “My lord,” said Sir Gawain, “you are of course right to think about it, but in the proper place and at the proper time, when something can come of all that thought. Right now is not the time to be mourning. Later, when you see the time and place are right, you can go back to your thoughts, but with some readiness to act as well.” The king understood and realized that what his nephew was saying was right. He wiped his eyes dry and made an effort to look cheerful, but he could not look as cheerful as he had before, because his heart would not let him. [243] After supper he called Banin aside and asked him for news of King Ban’s wife and son. Banin told him that his lady had taken the veil and that no one knew anything for certain about the son but that most people thought he was dead. For those bits of news the king gave Banin many rich rewards; and because of his prowess, the queen, that very evening, took him into her service. She used to do as much for all the young men who won at jousting and tilting on the important holidays, and she would give them presents and tokens of her affection and from then on retain them as her knights. Through his prowess, Banin succeeded within the year in becoming one of the one hundred fifty knights of the Watch, taking the place of Gravadain of the Valleys of Galorre. But now the story speaks no more about him. The general story recounts his deeds and exploits,* but this account now turns back to Lancelot and the Lady of the Lake and their life together. 21. The Lady of the Lake and Lancelot, Now Eighteen Years Old, Discuss the Meaning of Knighthood and Then Leave for King Arthur’s Court at Camelot.’ At this point, according to the story, Lancelot had been in the care of the Lady of the Lake for a long time and had reached the age of eighteen. He was such a handsome young man that it would have been pointless to 4The “general story” (i contes del commun) probably refers to the entire network of Arthurian romances. The figure of Banin recurs in several of them and may, of course, have occurred with greater development in still others that have not been preserved. Corresponds to Micha VII:XXIa; Sommer III;111-119; Kennedy 138-148. 58 seek a handsomer anywhere in the world, and he was so bright and well-behaved that there were never any grounds for blame or correction in anything he undertook. When [244] he was eighteen years old, he was strikingly tall and robust, and the Lady bringing him up realized that it was now right and timely for him to enter the order of knighthood and that it would be sinful and grievous if she delayed it, for she had often cast lots to see what the future would bring and she knew very well that great honor was in store for him. If she had been able to delay the event, she would gladly have done so, since, with all the caring and motherly love that she had devoted to him, she would find it very hard to live without him. But if she were to forestall his entry into knighthood at the right age, she would be committing a mortal sin as great as treason, for she would be depriving him of something that he could not easily recover later on. At the end of his eighteenth year, a little after Pentecost, Lancelot went into the forest and came upon the largest stag that he had ever seen in his whole life. In order to show this extraordinary animal to others, he shot and killed it. Once he had killed it, he found it to be as fat as a stag would normally be in August, and his companions were all astonished to see it. He had two squires carry the animal back to the Lady, and she too was astonished at how fat it was for the season and was surprised by its great size. Everyone found the stag an extraordinary sight, and the Lady was thoroughly delighted. Lancelot had remained in the forest. For a long while he lay resting on the green grass under an oak, because of the day’s great heat. When the heat subsided, he mounted his hunting horse and rode back to the Lake, looking very much like a man emerging from the woods. He was wearing a forest tunic, fairly short and [245] green, with a crown of leaves on his head to shield him from the heat. He had his quiver hanging from his belt, for wherever he went he was never without it, but one of his squires was carrying his bow. Sitting erect in his saddle, firmly settled in the stirrups of his large hunting horse, he reached the manor and made straight for the courtyard, where the Lady was waiting for him. When she saw him, tears welled up from her heart into her eyes. She rose from her seat at once and went into the great hall; she leaned against the far wall and stayed there, lost in thought. Lancelot came in after her, but as soon as she saw him, she fled into another room. Seeing her dart away, he wondered what could be wrong and went after her. He found her in her main room, lying on a wide couch. He hurried up to her and saw that she was sobbing and weeping bitterly. He greeted her, but she answered with neither a word nor a glance. He was very surprised, since he was accustomed to being greeted with a ready kiss and embrace whenever he appeared. He said to her, “My lady, tell me what’s the matter! If anyone has upset you, don’t hide it from me. I wouldn’t expect anyone to dare upset you as long as I live!” When she heard these words, she let go a flood of tears. She was in such a state that not a single word could come from her lips: her sobs made speech impossible. Finally, though, she managed to make herself understood: “Ah, prince, go away, or else my heart will burst!” Lancelot, Part I “Yes, my lady,” he said, “I’d rather go. [246] There’s no point in staying here and bothering you like this.” With that, the young man turned around, went for his bow, picked it up and hung it around his neck, buckled his quiver back on to his belt, then went to his horse, put on the bridle, and led the horse out into the courtyard. But the woman who loved him above all else realized that she had spoken too hastily and that he was going off too upset; and she knew him to be so proud and so determined that he could not tolerate any hurt to his heart or body. The Lady sprang up, dried her face and her red and swollen eyes, and hurried into the courtyard, where she saw the young man mounting his horse and looking extremely upset. She ran forward, seized the reins, and said to him, “What is it, young sir? Where are you off to?” “To the woods, my lady,” he said. “Dismount,” she said. “You’re staying here.” He dismounted, and she took the horse and had it stabled. Then she took him by the hand up to her room; she sat down on a couch and had him sit down beside her, and she urged him, in the name of the trust that he owed her, to tell her, promptly and truthfully, where he was planning to go. “My lady,” he said, “I had the idea that you were upset with me, since you didn’t want to speak to me; and since I was in your bad graces, I had no desire to stay here.” “What do you have in mind to do, my dear prince?” said the Lady. “Do, my lady?” he answered. “Well, I would go to a place where I could work at [247] advancing myself.” “Where might you go? You must tell me.” “My lady,” he said, “I would go to the house of King Arthur, and there I would serve some worthy man who could eventually make me a knight. They say that the worthiest men are at King Arthur’s court.” “Really, my dear prince!” she said. “Do you aspire to become a knight? Tell me.” “Yes, my lady,” he answered, “that is what I would like more than anything else: to belong to the order of knighthood.” “But,” she said, “do you really dare face that? I think that if you knew what a great burden knighthood is, you would never be tempted to take it on.” “Why, my lady?” he said. “Do you mean that knights have to have stronger bodies and better limbs than other men?” “No, prince,” she said, “but a knight needs things that other men don’t need; and if you heard them named, even your bold heart would tremble.” “My lady,” he asked, “are these things traits that can be found in a man’s heart or body?” “Yes,” she said, “of course; for Our Lord has made some men more valiant than the others, more fearless and more kind.” “My lady,” he said, “in that case, whoever lets fear stop him from taking up knighthood must feel base and worthless, for everyone should always aspire to improve himself and acquire good qualities. And a man should hate himself if he lets idleness rob him of something that everyone can have; I mean the powers of the heart, which Lancelot, Part I are a hundred times [248] easier to have than the powers of the body.” “What difference is there,” said the Lady, “between the powers of the heart and those of the body?” “My lady,” he answered, “I’ll tell you what I think. It seems to me that a man without bodily virtues can still have virtues of character. He can be refined and reasonable, gracious and loyal, fearless and generous and bold. These are all powers he can have within his heart, even if he can’t be tall and strapping, or run fast, or look handsome or attractive. Such attributes, it seems to me, are bodily virtues; and I believe a man is either born with them the moment he leaves his mother’s womb, or not. But traits of character, it seems to me, are in the grasp of anyone who is willing to make an effort; everyone, I'd say, can develop courteousness and graciousness and the other qualities that stem from the heart. That is why I think that if a man fails to become worthy, it is only for lack of will. In fact, I have heard you often say yourself that nothing but his own heart makes the worthy man. Nevertheless, if you were to explain the great burden of knighthood, which should keep even the boldest from becoming knights, I would very gladly listen.” “T will describe the qualities it takes, then,” said the Lady, “though not all of them, because I don’t have the understanding to describe them all. Still, listen closely to what you hear, and make [249] an honest judgment with your heart and mind, for however great your eagerness to be a knight, you must not let the eagerness stop you from thinking it out first of all. The truth is, man has been granted reason and understanding so that he can consider what is right before undertaking anything. “Bear in mind, then, that knighthood was not established lightly or because knights were in the beginning nobler men or of higher birth than other men; indeed, all mankind is descended from a single father and mother! But when envy and covetousness began to grow in the world and might began to win out over right, at that time all people were still equal in rank and birth. But then came a time when the weak and the peaceable could no longer withstand or hold out against the strong, so they established over themselves champions and defenders who would protect them and uphold justice and drive back the strong who were wronging and oppressing them. “This task of defense was conferred upon those men whom people commonly deemed the most worthy: men who were tall and strong and handsome and lithe, loyal and brave and bold, men who had all the virtues of heart and body. But knighthood was not given to them lightly or without a price; no, a heavy burden was placed on their shoulders. Do you know what it was? In the beginning, when the order of knighthood began, it was required of anyone who wanted to be a knight and [250] was legitimately chosen that he be courteous and not base, gracious and not a scoundrel, compassionate toward the afflicted, generous and helpful to the needy, ready and able to foil thieves and murderers, an upright judge unswayed by love or hatred—love that might weigh against the right or hatred that might plead in favor of the wrong. A knight must not, out of fear of death, do anything that might bring him dishonor or even a hint of it, but must fear a shameful D9 act more than death. Above all, knighthood was established to defend the Holy Church, for the Church cannot take up arms to avenge herself or return harm for harm; and this is why knights were created: to protect the one who turns the other cheek when the first has been hit. Know, too, that in the beginning, according to the Scriptures,? no one but knights dared to mount a horse—a cheval, as they said—and that is why they were called horsemen, or chevaliers. “But the arms that a knight, and no one but a knight, bears were not given to him groundlessly; indeed, there are good grounds for them, and they have great meaning. “The shield that hangs from his neck and covers his chest signifies that, just as it protects him from blows, the knight must protect the Holy Church from all evildoers, whether thieves or unbelievers. If the Church is assailed or at risk of attack, the knight, as her son, is duty-bound to come forward and take the blows. [251] He must be her champion and defender, for if a mother is beaten or insulted in front of her son and he does not avenge her, he should be denied his daily bread and locked out. “The hauberk worn by a knight to protect all parts of his body signifies that the Holy Church is likewise to be enclosed and protected by the knight’s defensiveness. He must be so keenly watchful and well prepared that no evildoer will ever come up to the front door or the back door of the Church and not find the knight there, alert and all ready to bar his way. “The helmet on the knight’s head, which is the most visible part of his armor, signifies that he must likewise be visible to all people as the enemy of those who would harm or injure the Holy Church. He must be like a watchtower, a sentinel’s post that from all sides can be seen rising high above all other buildings to frighten off criminals and thieves. “The lance that the knight carries, which is so long that it pierces his foe before he reaches him, signifies that, just as the solid wooden shaft and sharp steel head make unarmed people back away for fear of death, the knight must be so bold and brave and determined that fear of him will travel far and stop any thief or evildoer from daring to come near the Church. They will rin away for fear of him, with no more power against him than unarmed people have against the sharp-steeled lance. “The sword girded to the knight is sharp [252] on both sides, and not without good reason. The sword, of all weapons, is the most honored and noble, and the one with the greatest worthiness, for it can harm the foe in three ways: it can be used head on, to stab to death, or sidewise, to cut to the right or to the left. The double edge signifies that the knight must be a soldier of Our Lord and His people. With one edge, the sword strikes those who are enemies of Our Lord and His people,? and mock His faith. With the other, it has the task of taking vengeance on those who try to shatter human fellowship, that is, those that rob 2«Scriptures”: see chapter 15, note 5, and further occurrences in the present chapter. 3“and His people”: probably the scribe’s erroneous repetition of the same phrase in the preceding sentence; this second occurrence blurs the distinction between the two edges of the sword. 60 one another and those that kill one another.* That is the power of the two edges; the point is rather different. The point signifies obedience, for everyone must obey the knight. And it signifies obedience on just grounds, for it stabs; and nothing, not even a loss of land or property, stabs a man’s heart as cruelly as having to obey against his will. That is the significance of the sword. “The horse that the knight sits on and that takes him wherever he needs to go signifies the common people, for the people must likewise bear the knight and attend to his needs. The people must search out and provide him with everything he requires to live honorably, so that he may protect and defend them night and day. [253] The knight sits astride the common people, for, just as the knight spurs his horse and guides it toward the goal he chooses, he has the task of guiding the people according to his will and in legitimate subjection; indeed, the people are under him, and that is where they are meant to be. “In that way you can see that the knight must be a lord over the people and a soldier of God, for he must protect and defend and safeguard the Holy Church, that is, the clergy, whose task it is to serve the Holy Church, and widows and orphans, and the tithes and alms instituted in the Church. Just as the people support him materially and secure for him whatever he needs, so the Holy Church is bound to support him spiritually and, through prayer and alms, secure his everlasting life, so that God may be his savior in the life to come just as he is the defender and protector of the Church on earth. Thus the task of meeting all his earthly needs falls to the people, and the Holy Church must attend to the needs of his soul. “A knight must have two hearts, one hard and solid as a diamond and the other soft and yielding as hot wax. The one which is hard as a diamond must be set against the disloyal and the ruthless, for, just as the diamond cannot be reshaped by polishing, the knight must remain pitiless and cruel toward the wicked who [254] abuse and trample on justice as much as they can. And just as soft, hot wax can be molded and shaped as one likes, people who are good and compassionate should be able to bring out all the knight’s graciousness and kindness. But let him take care not to show his heart of wax to the wicked and the disloyal, for all the good he did for them would be an utter loss for him. The Scriptures tell us that a judge damns himself when he saves a guilty man from death and lets him go; and if, with a diamond-hard heart, he rages against good people whose only need is for mercy and pity, he loses his soul. For, according to the Scriptures,” a man who loves disloyalty and wickedness hates his own soul; and God himself says in the Gospels that what one does for the needy one does for oneself. “Whoever is ambitious to become a knight needs to have all these traits. And whoever is not willing to behave as I have explained would do well to keep away from 40One might well expect “those that rob and those that kill,” but the original does specify reciprocal action. “Scriptures”: here and a few lines above, unlike earlier instances, there can be little doubt that the speaker is referring to the Holy Scriptures. There will be a final occurrence of this word a few paragraphs below; there, preceded by the word “Holy,” the reference is entirely without doubt. Lancelot, Part I knighthood, for if he strays from the right path, he is shamed first of all in the eyes of the world and then in the eyes of God. The day he enters the order of knighthood, he vows to God that he will behave according to the teachings of the man who dubs him a knight, and who is better able to explain it all,” added the Lady, “than I am. If he then breaks his word to Our Lord God, he rightly loses all the honor that he was looking forward to in heaven. In the eyes of the world, he is also [255] shamed with good reason, for the honorable men of this world cannot tolerate a man in their midst who has forsworn himself before his Creator. The youth who would be a knight must have the purest and most clean of hearts; if he has not, let him not set himself such a goal and aim so high, for it is better to go through all of life without being a knight than to be dishonored on earth and lost to God. Knighthood is a greater burden than people think! “Now, prince,” she said, “I have set out some of the traits that mark a true knight, but not all, since I don’t know them all. Now tell me what you prefer: to enter the order or to give up the idea.” “My lady,” said the boy, “has there ever been, since knighthood began, a knight who had all these virtues?” “Yes, young sir,” she said, “quite a few. The Holy Scriptures bear witness that they lived before the death of Jesus Christ, at the time when the people of Israel served Our Lord faithfully and loyally and fought to uphold and glorify His law in spite of the Philistines and the other unbelieving peoples who were their neighbors. Among them were John the Hyrcanian and Judas Maccabeus, the good knight who chose to be beheaded rather than renounce the law of Almighty God and who never let the unbelievers make him turn his back in shame. [256] And there were his brother Simon® and King David and many another that I won’t speak of now, who lived before the coming of Our Lord. “And after the Passion came knights who were strong with all true virtues. There was Joseph of Arimathea, the noble knight who with his own two hands took Jesus Christ down from the Holy Cross and laid him in the sepulcher. And there was his son Galahad, the great king of Hoselice, which was later called Wales in his honor,’ and there were all the kings descended from him, whose names I don’t know. There was King Pelles of Listenois, who was also of that line and the greatest of them all in his lifetime; and his brother, Helain the Fat. All these men were true, courtly knights and truly worthy men, who honorably upheld knighthood before God and the world.” “My lady,” said the young man, “if there have been so many men full of all the knightly virtues that you have just explained, it must take great faintheartedness for a man to reject knighthood and shun it, for fear of not being able to attain all its ideals. Still, those who do not have the daring to become knights I don’t blame for being fainthearted, and I have no blame for the others, either, for it seems to me that everyone must follow his heart, whether it is For John the Hyrcanian, Judas Maccabeus, and Simon, see | Maccabees. 7«Wales” translates Gales (Gallesin modern French), with the initial syllable gal- suggesting the relationship to Galahad. Lancelot, Part I cowardly or valorous. But as far I am concerned, I know for sure that, if I one day find someone willing to make me a knight, I won’t let the chance slip by for fear that knighthood might be [257] misplaced in me! God may well have put into me more talent than I know, and He is certainly powerful enough to give me whatever intelligence and valor may still be lacking. However things turn out, I won't let fear of any kind stop me from receiving the high order of knighthood, if I find someone who can grant me that honor. And if God chooses to grant me the right qualities, I won’t be displeased, but I am prepared in any case to devote to it my heart and body and effort and toil.” “Are you saying, prince,” asked the Lady, “that your heart is in agreement with your will to be a knight?” “My lady,” he answered, “there is nothing I long for so much as that. All I need is to find someone who will help me accomplish what I want.” “By God,” she said, “what you will shall be done! You will be a knight, and it won’t take long. That’s why I was crying just now, when you came to see me—when I said that you should leave or else my heart would break inside me. I have devoted to you all the love that a mother could devote to her child, so that I don’t know how I can possibly do without you: it will be a heavy burden for my heart. But I would rather endure my own suffering than keep you away from the high and honorable order of knighthood, and I am sure I won’t be pained for nothing. Moreover, if you knew who your father was or what lineage you come from on your mother’s side, you would not hesitate, I think, to set your sights so high, for no one [258] with such a background should have a cowardly heart. “But you will hear nothing more from me about this until Iam ready. Don’t ask me any questions, then, for Iam not ready now. “You will soon be made a knight, though, by the worthiest man in the whole world, King Arthur himself. We will set out this very week, so that we can reach him no later than the Friday before Saint John’s Day,® which falls on the Sunday following this one. That’s very soon, but I want you to become a knight on the Feast of Saint John, with no further delay. Just as Saint John was the most laudable and meritorious man that a woman ever conceived through fleshly union, may God, who was born of a virgin in order to redeem His people, grant you likewise the gift of surpassing in knightly excellence all the knights living today. And much of your fate I know.” Thus the Lady of the Lake promised the boy that he would soon be a knight, and he could not have been more overjoyed. “Now take care,” she said, “that no one know about this, and I’ll see to everything you need without drawing anyone’s attention.” The Lady prepared what the boy needed; indeed, she had long ago put together for him the outfitting of a knight: a white hauberk that was both strong and light, a polished silver helmet of splendid beauty, a shield as gleaming white as snow with a beautiful raised center made of silver. She wanted him to have nothing that was not silver-white. She also had ready for him a sword that in 8The Feast (nativity) of John the Baptist, June 24. 61 many a place had been well tried out before becoming his (and once he had it, it went through more good tests); it was of just the right size, not heavy, and remarkably sharp. [259] A spear was prepared for him with a short, thick, and rigid white shaft and a sharp, pointed tip of silvery iron. Along with that, the Lady had set aside for him a large, strong, swift horse of proven speed and daring, and it was pure white as freshly fallen snow. For the young man’s knighting, she had had made clothes of white satin, a tunic and cloak, and the cloak was lined in ermine, so that he should have nothing that was not white, and the tunic was lined inside with white silk taffeta. In this way the Lady prepared everything the young man needed for his knighting, and then she set out very early on the third day. It was a Tuesday, and the Feast of Saint John was coming only a week after the following Sunday. The Lady took to the road and traveled to King Arthur’s court in high style, for in her escort she had as many as forty riders all dressed in white and mounted on pure white horses. She was also accompanied by five hundred knights and her lover, who was a valiant and handsome man. The Lady also had with her three young ladies, the one who had suffered an injury for the sake of the children? and two others, and the three who more than deserved their place in the group, Lionel and Bors and Lambegue as well, and with them many other young men. After much riding, they came to the sea and set sail, and they arrived in Great Britain on Sunday evening, at the port of Floudehueg. From there they rode with [260] proper royal credentials to Camelot, where they were told King Arthur would be for the Feast. They traveled straight on until they came Thursday evening to a castle named Lawenor, some twenty-two English leagues from Camelot. The next day, the Lady set out very early in order to make the most of the morning, since the heat was great, and she rode through a forest that stretched as far as two English leagues from Camelot. She was remarkably withdrawn and downcast, for she was heartsore to think the lad was about to leave her, and she sighed and wept tender tears. But now the story stops speaking of her for a moment and speaks of King Arthur. 22. Lancelot at Camelot: Queen Guenevere, Knighthood, the Adventure of the Wounded Knight, and Departure for Nohaut.’ That day, the story says, King Arthur was at Camelot, where he had gathered [261] a great number of knights and planned to hold court on Saint John’s Day. It was a Friday morning, and the king rose as soon as he could see the light of dawn, because he wanted to go shooting in the woods. He heard Mass as early as he ever could and, as soon as he had done so, mounted his horse and rode out of town °This is Saraide, rescuer of Lionel and Bors in chapter 11. 'Corresponds to Micha VII:XXlla; Sommer 111:119-131; Kennedy 149-166. 62 through the Welsh Gate,? together with some of his companions. Sir Gawain, his nephew, was one of them, his face still bandaged because of the wound that Gosenain of Estrangort had inflicted on him only three weeks before: he had accused him? of disloyalty in front of the king’s whole court, and the two of them had fought in the presence of the king.* Also among them were Sir Yain the Tall, son of King Urien; Kay, the seneschal; Tors, son of King Ares of Altice; Lucan, the wine steward; Bedivere, the constable; and a great number of other barons of the king’s household itself. When the king was less than three bowshots from the forest, he saw two horses emerge bearing a litter and moving along at a rapid but gentle pace. He could see that the litter was coming straight toward him, and when it drew up, he saw in it a knight fully armed except for shield and helmet, which were missing. The knight was wounded, with broken sections of two spears stuck in his body, their iron tips piercing right through the front and back panels of his hauberk. A sword, moreover, was half embedded in his head just above the flap of his hood of mail, and the half that protruded was all covered with blood and thoroughly rusted. [262] The knight was tall, handsome, and well-built, but the story does not at this point reveal his name; sometime later, however, it will tell what his name was,° how he was injured, and why the weapons remained stuck in his wounds so long. When he came face to face with the royal party, he asked for the king, and there was no lack of men to point him out. He stopped the horses and greeted the king, while the king, looking at him with astonishment, gladly halted to listen. “King Arthur,” he said, “God keep you! Everyone bears witness that you are the best of kings, the most true and powerful, the one who helps the helpless, and counsels, aids, and supports them. God keep you so!” “My good man,” said the king, “may God bless you and give you health! You certainly need it, it seems to me.” “My lord,” said the knight, “I come to you for help and assistance. They say you never fail a man in need, and so I ask, please, that you help me.” “What kind of aid,” said the king, “are you asking for?” “I beg you,” said the knight, “to see that I am relieved of this sword and these spears that are killing me.” “Of course,” said the king, “gladly.” He himself reached for the spears to pull them out, and the knight cried out, “No, my lord! Don’t be in such a hurry! That’s not the way I can be [263] freed of them.” “How, then” said the king. “My lord,” he said, “it is necessary that the man who frees me of these weapons first swear to me on holy relics that he will do his utmost to avenge me on all those who say they have greater love for the man who did this to me than they have for me.” 2«Welsh Gate”: no doubt one that faces in the direction of Wales; see “Breton Gate” in chapter 16, p. [200]. 3The original does not make clear who had accused whom. 4This incident is not reported elsewhere. 5“his name”: see chapter 84. Lancelot, Part I At those words, the king stepped back and said to the knight, “Sir knight, that’s a very serious thing you've just asked. The man who wounded you like this may have so many friends® that no knight in the world, even two or three knights, could attend to them all. But if you like, I will avenge you on the man who did this to you, provided he is someone I can kill without disgracing myself. If not, if he is a vassal of mine, there are many knights here who will be glad to take on the burden for the sake of fame and renown.” “You will not, either you or someone else, take vengeance,” said the knight, “on the man who did this to me. I myself have avenged myself on him: I cut off his head after he had treated me like this.” “In the name of God, then,” said the king, “I would think you’re quite well avenged! And I wouldn’t dare assure you of anything more, as I’d fear breaking my promise. Nor would I advise anyone else to do so.” “My lord,” said the knight, “I had been told that all help and assistance could be found in your house, but now it seems to me I was mistaken. Nevertheless, Il] not leave you until I see if God will show me some favor, for if there is as much valor in your court as people say, then I’l] not have to leave still disabled.” “I welcome you,” said the king, “to stay in my house as long as you like; you will be perfectly welcome.” [264] Thereupon the knight rode off toward Camelot. At the king’s court, he had his squires carry him up to the great hall and place him in the finest and most splendid bed of the many that he saw there. At that time, there was no servant in the household so bold as to bar a knight from entering the king’s quarters and taking any bed he wished, however splendid. And so the ailing knight was accommodated. Meanwhile, in the forest, the king and his companions spoke at length about the knight, and they all said that they had never before heard a knight make such a mad request. Yet Sir Gawain said that, please God, he would not leave the king’s court still in need of help. “T don’t know,” said the king, “what he’ll do, but I want all my companions to know that anyone of them agreeing to such recklessness would lose my love forever, because it is a risk that no knight, or two or three or twenty or thirty, could undertake with any chance of success. We don’t even know why this knight lays down such rash terms, whether it is for or against the interest of my house.” That is how the king and his companions spoke about the knight. The king spent the whole day in the woods, shooting until evening was close; then he turned back. When he came out along a path leading to the highway, ’ he looked to his right and saw the Lady of the Lake and her party coming along. Leading them he saw two boys on foot who were driving along two white packhorses. Atop one of the packhorses was loaded a small, light tent, one of the finest and [265] most splendid anyone has ever seen; and atop the other were the robes that the young man was to wear S“friends” translates amis, which may also mean “relatives.” 7Jeading to the highway” as in Micha variants and Kennedy 151. Micha and Sommer 121 stop with “a path.” Lancelot, Part I for his dubbing, together with ceremonial dress and an outfit for riding; these were in two chests, and tied on top of the chests were a hauberk and a set of leg armor.® Next came two squires mounted on two pure white horses, one of them carrying a snow-white shield and the other a strikingly handsome helmet. Next came two more, one of whom was carrying a pure white lance. After them came a great number of servants and squires, and then the three young ladies flanked by knights, all riding white horses. The whole party proceeded in twos along the road. The Lady herself came last, together with her young man. She was teaching him how to behave at the court of King Arthur and at the others that he would come to, and she urged him, for the sake of her love, to let nothing impede his knighting on Sunday; that was what she wanted and, if he were not knighted, it would be a great misfortune. He answered that he would seek no delay; in fact, had he his own way, he would already be a knight. As they went on speaking, the procession made its way toward the king. He and his party had been watching the strangers with some astonishment, because they were all dressed in white and were riding [266] white horses. Gesturing toward them, the king said to Sir Gawain and Sir Yvain that he had never seen so large a group ride along in such elegance. Word reached the Lady that the king was near; she quickened her pace, passed her whole party along with the young man, and came up to the king, who, as soon as he had seen her hurry along so attractively, had stopped to wait for her, not doubting that she wanted to speak to him. The Lady was wearing a splendid outfit, all of white satin, with tunic and cloak trimmed with ermine; and she sat on a gently ambling small saddle horse that was as beautiful and shapely as could be imagined. It was a fine, splendid horse, with a bridle of pure white silver and breastplate and stirrups to match. The saddle was of ivory, delicately carved with tiny images of ladies and knights, and the trappings, which reached to the ground, were all white and made of the same satin that the Lady was wearing. Such was the array of horse and rider as the Lady came before the king. Beside her was the young man, clad in a fine Breton cape of white wool; he was remarkably goodlooking and well built, and was mounted on a robust courser that could carry him along with speed. The Lady lowered her wimple from in front of her mouth and greeted the [267] king, though not so quickly that he could not greet her first. “My lord,” she said, “best of the kings of this world, may God bless you! Arthur,” she went on, “I have come to you from afar, come to ask a favor which you may not deny me, since it cannot injure or shame or hurt you and will not cost you a thing.” “My lady,” said the king, “even if it cost me something dear, you would have it, as long as it brought no shame to me or harm to my friends. What is the favor? Don’t hesitate to tell me, since it would have to be very great for me to deny it.” “My lord,” she said, “thank you very much. I ask you, then, for this young man of mine, to make him a knight 8“together with ... leg armor” as in Micha variants, Kennedy 151, and Lecoy 379. Micha and Sommer 121 have only “together with another outfit and a set of leg armor.” 63 when he requests it and with such arms and equipment as he has.” “My lady,” said the king, “I am glad you have come here, and thank you for bringing me this fine young man. I will gladly make him a knight whenever he wishes. But you promised me that you would not ask for a favor that would injure, shame, or hurt me. Yet in what you request there is something that would bring me shame, if I did it: it is not my habit to knight anyone wearing any robes and bearing any arms but mine. But leave the young man with me and I will gladly make him a knight. I’ll give him whatever is proper for me—arms and equipment and the accolade— and leave it to God to add the rest, I mean, prowess and all the other good traits that a knight must have.” “My lord,” she said, “it may well be that it is your habit to confer knighthood only with your own things; [268] no one, perhaps, has ever asked you for anything else. But if you are asked and you comply, there is no shame for you in it, it seems to me. The fact is that this young man cannot and must not become a knight with any arms or robes other than the ones right here. If you wish, you will make him a knight; and if you do not wish to do so, I will seek someone else. I will even make him a knight myself if need be.” “My lord,” said Sir Yvain, “if the lady wants him knighted the way she says, don’t refuse. Even if it means making an exception, you mustn’t just let him go, nota fine fellow like this! I don’t remember ever seeing such a goodlooking young man.” Thereupon the king granted the Lady her wish. She thanked him earnestly and then presented the young man with the two packhorses and two of the most beautiful saddle horses in the world, both pure white, and she also gave him four squires to serve him. With that, the Lady took leave of the king, although he begged and urged her to stay; but she said that it was impossible. “My lady,” said the king, “since you do not wish to stay, which I am very sorry to hear, tell me at least who you are and what your name is. I would be very glad to know.” “My lord,” she said, “from as worthy a man as you it would not be right for me to hide my name. I’l] tell you: I am called the Lady of the Lake.” The name puzzled him, as he had never heard it before. With that, she left the king, escorted almost as far as a bowshot by the young man. She said to him, “My dear prince, you are about to leave me. I want you to know that you are not my son, but were born to one of the finest knights and most honorable men in the world and to one of the best and most beautiful ladies ever to have lived. You can’t know any more about either father or mother right now, but soon you will know the whole truth. [269] Take care to be as beautiful in your heart as you are in body and limb, for you have as much beauty as God could bestow on any child and it would be a great wrong if your prowess did not prove its equal. And take care to ask the king tomorrow evening to make you a knight. And once you have been knighted, don’t delay a single night in his house, but start your travels through all lands in search of wonders and adventures, so that you can gain fame and renown. Never stop in one place longer than you have to, and take care 64 that you do all you can not to be surpassed by anyone in feats of chivalry. And if the king asks you who you are or what your name is or who I am, just say that you don’t know, except that I am a lady and that I brought you up. I have likewise forbidden your squires to say anything more than that. But let me tell you this much before I leave: I want you to know that I meant no indignity in having you serve the two king’s sons who have lived with you, for you are of no less noble birth than they and they are both first cousins to you. I have devoted to you all the love that can grow out of raising a child, and for that reason—in remembrance of you—I will keep them with me as long as I can. And when it’s time for Lionel to become a knight, I’ll still have Bors.” When Lancelot heard that the two boys were his cousins, he was wonderfully happy and said to the Lady, “How good of you to tell me this! [270] I feel so much better now, relieved to know of your comfort and overjoyed for myself!” At that, the Lady took a small ring from her finger and put it on the boy’s finger, saying that it had the power to uncover and reveal all magic spells.? Then she bade him farewell, kissed him very tenderly, and spoke these parting words: “My dear prince, I leave you with this teaching: the more you succeed in harsh and dangerous adventures, the more confident you will be of succeeding in others. And when now and then you find a challenge that, with all your God-given knightly skills, you cannot meet, remember that there is no man born who could do so in your place. I would say much more but can’t. My heart is very heavy, and I find it hard to speak. Be on your way now, my good, fair, gracious prince. Sought after by all men and loved by all women more than any other knight, that’s how you will be. I know.” Then she kissed his mouth, his cheeks, and his eyes with tenderness and turned away, so choked with sorrow that she could not utter another word. The boy was deeply moved, and his eyes filled with tears. He ran over to his two cousins, kissed Lionel first and then Bors, and said to Lionel, “Lionel, you mustn’t feel overwhelmed or hopeless if your land is in the hands of lord Claudas. More friends than you think will help you recover it.” After that, he kissed everyone else one by one and then galloped off to join the king and his companions, who had been waiting for him. The king took him by the chin and saw that he was so handsome and so well made in every [271] way that nothing could have been improved. Sir Yvain said to the king, “Look at him well, my lord. I doubt you have ever seen another lad with so beautiful a face. God won’t have been at all unkind to him if He has given him virtues that can match such beauty.” Sir Yvain and the others went on like that so long that the young man was quite overwhelmed. The king was aware of it but did not break in with any questions about his background, which he decided to leave for another time. He said to Sir Yvain, “Yvain, I am putting you in charge of the lad. No one could teach him how to behave better than you.” He gave him the boy’s hand, and Sir Yain thanked him. °For the ring in Chrétien de Troyes, see Lancelot, 1. 2335-50. Lancelot, Part I When they all reached Camelot, people gaped and crowded so thickly around the boy that you could hardly take a step. Together with his squires, he dismounted at Sir YWain’s lodgings, and all the people who saw him said that he was the handsomest young man they had ever seen. The next day, which was Saturday, he came to Sir Yvain and said, “My lord, please tell my lord the king that he should make me a knight as he promised my lady to do, and I want it to happen no later than tomorrow.” “Are you sure, good friend?” said Sir Yvain. “Wouldn’t it be better to wait a bit and gain some practice at arms?” [272] “My lord,” said the young man, “I have no wish to remain a squire any longer. I am asking you to tell my lord the king that he should not delay but make me a knight tomorrow.” “All right, then,” he said; “gladly.” Sir Yvain went to the king and said to him, “My lord, your young man has asked me to tell you that he wants you to knight him.” “Which young man?” said the king. “My lord,” he said, “the one who was given to you last evening and whom you placed in my care.” As he spoke these words, the queen came into the room, along with Sir Gawain, the king’s nephew. But the king, looking at Sir Yvain, said, “You mean the young man dressed in white, who was presented to me by that lady?” “Yes,” he answered, “that’s the one I mean.” “Really?” said the king. “He wants to be a knight already?” “That's right,” said Sir Yvain; “tomorrow, during the day.” “Gawain,” said the king, “have you heard? Our young man of last evening already wants to be a knight!” “Indeed,” said Sir Gawain, “he’s right. I think that knighthood would be perfectly fitting in his case. He is very goodlooking and seems to be of noble birth.” “Who,” said the queen, “is this young man?” “Who, my lady?” said Sir Yvain. “By far the handsomest young man your eyes could ever see!” Then he told her how the boy had been brought to the king the day before and how striking his guardian was. “Really!” said the queen. “He arrived at court last evening, and he wants to be a knight tomorrow?” “That’s right, my lady,” said Sir Yvain; “he is very eager.” “Oh, I would very gladly see him,” said the queen. The king said, “By God, you will! and in him surely the fairest and most well-built youth you could ever see.” With that, he told Sir Ywain to go fetch him and “see that he is dressed as splendidly as you know [273] the occasion demands; I am sure he has all the right clothes.” Then the king himself told the queen how the Lady of the Lake had required that he be knighted in no arms or robes but his own, and that she was indeed called the Lady of the Lake. The queen marveled greatly at it all and was impatient to see the boy. Sir Yvain went to the young man and saw to it that he was dressed as elegantly as he could be, and when he found no more to improve, he led him to court on his own Lancelot, Part I beautiful horse. Nor was there anything secret about their going, for the throng around them filled the whole street. The news spread through the town that the beautiful young man who had come the evening before would be knighted the next day and that he was on his way to court in knightly dress. The townspeople, men and women, sprang to their windows, saying, as they saw him pass, that they had never seen so handsome a young man. He reached the palace courtyard and dismounted, and the news of him spread through the great hall and through all the rooms, and knights and ladies and maidens hurried forth, and even the king and queen came to the windows. When the young man dismounted, Sir Yvain took him by the hand and led him up to the great hall. The king and queen came toward him, took him by the hands, and led him toward a couch, where they sat down. He sat down in front of them on the green rushes that [274] covered the floor. The king gazed at him with pleasure; he had thought him handsome the day before, but it was nothing like the beauty that shone from him now, it seemed to him the boy had grown bigger and stronger. Meanwhile, the queen prayed that God make him a man of honor, for He had given him extraordinary beauty. The queen looked at him tenderly, and he looked at her, too, every time he could do so without being noticed. He wondered where all the beauty could come from that he saw in her, and beside hers the beauty of the Lady of the Lake or of any other woman he had ever seen lost all its value for him. Nor was he wrong to admire no other woman as he did the queen, for she was the sovereign of all women and the very font of beauty. But if he had known all the great worthiness that was hers, he would have gazed at her even more gladly, for it surpassed that of every other woman, rich or poor. She asked Sir Yvain the young man’s name, and he answered that he did not know it. “And do you know,” she said, “whose son he is or where he was born?” “No, my lady,” he said, “only that he is from Gaul, since he speaks the language the right way.” Thereupon the queen took the boy’s hand and asked him where he was from. At her touch, he started as if suddenly awakened, and he was so taken with the thought of her that he did not know what she was saying. She noticed how flustered he was, and asked him a second time, “Tell me,” she said, “where you’re from.” He looked at her helplessly and said with a sigh that he did not know. She then asked him what his name was, and he answered that he did not know that, either. The queen realized right away that he was [275] flustered and troubled, but she dared not think that it was because of her; and yet she did somewhat suspect so, which made her stop her questioning. Not wanting to worsen the boy’s confusion, she rose from her seat and, in order to keep anyone from having the wrong idea or noticing what she suspected, said that he did not strike her as being a very sensible young man and that, whether wise or foolish, he was in any case ill-bred. “My lady,” said Sir Yvain, “you and I don’t really know what he is like; and it may be he’s been forbidden to tell us his name or anything about himself.” 65 She said that that might well be, but said it in a whisper, so that the boy did not hear it. The queen went to her room. When the time for vespers came, Sir Yvain took the young man’s hand and led him to the service. After vespers, the king, the queen, and their knights went behind the great hall into a lovely garden on the banks of the stream that ran by the king’s dwelling. Sir Yvain took the young man there, too, and following them came a crowd of other youths who were to be knighted the next day. When they left the garden, they went up into the great hall by a staircase on the river side and had to pass through the room where the knight was lying who had a sword and two spear shafts stuck in his body. His wounds gave off such a stench that the knights covered their noses with their cloaks and ran through as fast as they could. The young man asked [276] Sir Yvain why they were doing that. “Because of a wounded knight, my friend,” he said, “who is lying in one of these beds.” “My lord,” said the young man, “why is he in bed up here? Wouldn’t he be better off in quarters in town?” “No doubt,” said Sir Yvain, “but he chose to be up here, to have whatever help God may care to send him.” Then he told him how the man who would relieve the wounded knight would have to swear on holy relics to avenge him, and he told him what form the vengeance was supposed to take. “My lord,” said the youth, “I would like to see the knight, if you don’t mind.” “Then you'll see him,” said Sir Yvain. “Let’s go.” Sir Wain took him to the knight, and the young man asked him, “Sir knight, who did this terrible thing to you?” “A knight, young man,” he said. “And I killed him.” “Why don’t you have someone withdraw the weapons from your body?” said the youth. “Because,” he answered, “I’ve not yet found a knight bold enough to take on the task.” “Good God, why?” he said. “By God, I'll do it right now if you like, as long as it won’t take too much strength to pull them out!” “Go ahead,” said the knight, “provided you’re willing to meet the terms.” “What are the terms?” said the young man. “Such,” said Sir Yvain, “that they could probably not be fulfilled by any two knights or three, or even by twenty!” At which point he spelled out the rules, and the young man stopped to think for a moment. Sir Yvain, who was not slow-witted, took him by the hand and said, “Come. You're not ready to think about something so serious.” “Why, my good lord?” said the young man. “Because,” he said, “some of the bravest [277] men in the world are under this roof, and they won’t take on this task. You, who are not yet a knight, should certainly not!” “What do you mean?” said the wounded man. “He is not yet a knight?” “No, indeed,” said Sir Yvain, “but he will be tomorrow morning, and he is already dressed for it, as you can see.” Hearing Sir Yain say that he was not yet a knight, the young man dared not utter another word, except to bid the wounded man farewell; and the latter said he hoped God would make him a worthy knight. Then Sir Yain took him 66 to the great hall, where the tables were set up and covered with cloths, and they sat down to eat. Afterwards, Sir Yvain took the youth to his lodgings and, when darkness fell, led him to a church, where he kept vigil all through the night; not once through the night was he allowed to sleep. In the morning, Sir Yvain took him back to his quarters and told him to sleep until High Mass. Then he took him to the church with the king, for on the great feast days the king always heard Mass at the richest and most important church in the town he was in, and in any case he went to High Mass every day. Just before they left for the church, the arms of all the youths who were about to be knighted were brought, and they armed themselves according to the custom of the time. Then the king gave each one the accolade, but he did not gird them with their swords until they would come back from the church. After the accolades, they went to hear Mass all armed, as was the custom at that time. [278] As soon as Mass had been said and they had come out of the church, the young man left Sir Yvain and went up to the room where the wounded knight was lying; he told him that he would now remove the weapons if he wished. “Yes, of course,” said the knight, “according to the terms that are set.” He repeated the terms, and the other said that he was all ready to take the oath. He went over to a window and, holding his hand out toward a church he could see from there, swore, as the knight’s squires looked on, that he would do his utmost to avenge him on all men who would say that they had greater love for his assailant than they had for him. The knight was very happy to hear that and said to the young man, “Good sir, now you may set me free! I welcome your attempt!” With that, the young man grasped the sword that was stuck in the knight’s head and pulled it out so gently that the knight felt almost nothing; after that, he removed the spears. Now it happened that a squire who had just seen what he was doing ran down to the courtyard in front of the great hall where the king was girding the new knights with their swords, and reported to Sir Yvain how the young man had helped the wounded knight. : Sir Yvain dashed off to the knight’s room like a madman. He found the knight now freed of his torment, saying to the youth, “Ah, my good knight, with God’s help you are going to be a worthy man, if you can stay alive long enough! Now I would soon be all better,” he said, “if I had a doctor to [279] look after me.”!® At the sight of Sir Yvain, the young man said to him, “My lord, find him a doctor, please!” “What’s this?” said Sir Yvain. “Have you set him free?” “I have, my lord, as you see,” he said. “I felt so sorry for him that I couldn’t bear to see him suffer anymore.” 10“t1e found the knight . . . look after me” as in Kennedy 160. Micha’s punctuation would give: He saw the knight who was now freed and said to the youth, “Ah, my good knight, with God’s help you are going to be a worthy man—f you can stay alive long enough!” “Now,” said the knight, “I would soon be all better, if I had a doctor to look after me.” Lancelot, Part I “That was not a wise thing for you to do,” said Sir Yain, “and people are going to say you were out of your mind to do it. Some of the finest knights in the world are right here, and they said no to this challenge, because they could not have met it. Yet you, with no idea of what was involved, took it on, and I am very troubled by it. So help me God, I would rather have seen the knight leave this court still in need of help, whatever shame that would have brought upon the king and his house and whatever harm it might have done to the knight! For in that case, with a long enough life, you could have amounted to something great.” “My lord,” he answered, “if I am to die as a result of this, it is much better that J die than this knight, who is no doubt a man of great prowess, while no one knows yet what I amount to, and nothing I have done can be blamed on the king or his household. But for the love of God, my lord, send for a doctor to take care of him!” And Sir Yvain, with pain in his heart, answered that the knight would not die for want of a doctor. He sent for a doctor, then took the young man to the great hall. The king was there and had already heard the news that the youth had freed the knight of his weapons. “Is it true, Yvain?” said the king. “Has your young man freed the wounded knight?” “Yes, my lord, he has.” “Well,” said the king, “you mustn’t be very glad of it, and it’s a wonder [280] you allowed him to! I don’t thank you for it, since you have allowed the most attractive young man in the world to undertake something that is sure to be the death of him.” “My lord,” said Sir Yvain, “in the name of everything I owe you as my lord, I wasn’t there when he did it, and then I berated him for it. I would rather have broken my arm than let him free the knight!” “Well,” said the king, “you would not have been wrong, for I have never seen another man risk as much obvious harm as this one. He has undertaken something that no one could carry through to the end.” The young man broke in, “Please, my lord, think of this: isn’t it better that I die than one of the most outstanding knights of your household? I don’t yet matter very much.” At that distressing thought, the king bowed his head, and tears came to his eyes. In little time the rejoinder made its way through the palace to the queen, who was sorely upset by it. She was afraid that the young man was so in love with her that he had undertaken to free the wounded knight with her in mind; she said that it was a sad and woeful thing. Everyone bemoaned his prospects, and because of all this sad distraction the king did not remember, nor did anyone else, that he had not yet girded the youth with his sword. But now the tables were set, and the newly dubbed knights, laying aside their arms, went to sit down to their meal. When the king had been awhile at table, there came into the hall a knight dressed in full armor except for his helmet and ventail, which he had thrown back over his shoulders. He stood before the king and greeted him. “King Arthur,” he said, “greetings to you and your knights [281] from the lady of Nohaut, whom I serve! My lady sends Lancelot, Part I me to you with word that the king of Northumberland has gone to war with her and is now besieging one of her castles. The king has caused her great harm and has killed many of her men and ravaged much of her land. He is calling on her to keep an agreement that my lady does not acknowledge in the slightest. Talks between them were carried on awhile through knights and clergy, until the king said he was ready to press his demands in accordance with the terms of a judgment. Now, the Judgment is that, if the king wants to go ahead with the matter, my lady must defend herself as best she can, with one knight against one, or two or against two, or three against three, or as many as she can manage, as she likes. And so my lady appeals to you, as liegewoman to liege lord, to help her in this time of need. She asks that you send her a knight capable of defending her honor in combat with another knight, for she will agree to a fight with a single knight proving her innocence.” “My friend,” answered the king, “I will be glad to help her, as I know I must, for she is my liegewoman and holds all her land from me. But even if she now held nothing, she is so worthy and gracious a lady, so noble a woman, that I could not hesitate to help her.” Thereupon, those who were serving offered the message-bearer a meal, and talk of help for the lady came to a stop. But as soon as they began to remove the tablecloths, Sir Yvain’s young man rushed over to the king and, kneeling before him, said in the most straightforward way, “My lord, you have made me a knight, [282} and I thank you. Now I seek a favor of you: that you allow me to offer the help that this knight has asked for.” “My friend,” said the king, “you don’t know what you are asking for. You are so young and so new at this that you don’t know what the great burden of knighthood means. The king of Northumberland has many fine knights, and I am sure that he will assign this fight to the one he deems the very best. You are not yet of an age to cope with such a heavy burden, and it would be a great loss if you were through some mischance defeated, for you face a very bright future. You are so handsome and noble-looking and stouthearted, it seems to me, that you must surely come from a family of great nobility. You came to me with greatness and idealism in your heart, yearning to win honor and fame, and I would be very grieved if any favor I might grant you were to lead to your death. Besides, you have undertaken a task daunting enough to hold you for a while. I hope that God will grant you to succeed in it, for the danger you face is very great.” “My lord,” said the young man, “this is the first request I have made since you dubbed me a knight; you should not deny me it. Look to your honor, and don’t deny me something I seek in a reasonable way. So I ask you again: send me to help this lady. If you refuse, it will be demeaning to me; people will lose respect for me, and I myself will think less of myself. That’s what will happen, so [283] help me God, if you don’t allow me to be her champion; it wouldn’t take more than a single knight!” Then Sir Gawain and his cousin Sir Yvain stepped forward and said to the king, “Please let him do it, my lord! We are convinced he’ll succeed. Nor can you decently deny him the chance.” 67 “You're right,” said the king. “I agree that, with God’s help, he’ll succeed, and I will gladly grant his wish. All right, my friend,” he went on, “I give you leave to rescue the lady of Nohaut, and may God grant that your deeds bring you praise and fame and do me honor!” “My lord, I thank you very much,” said the young man. Then he took leave of the king and Sir Gawain and the other companions, and Sir Yvain took him to his lodgings to arm him. The knight who had come for help came up to the king and said, “My lord, I will leave now, since I see that you have granted the battle to your new knight. You are sure, I trust, that he is the right man for such a task.” “The fact is,” said the king, “that he asked it as a favor; otherwise I would have sent one of the best knights of my household. Still, I do believe he’ll succeed.” “My lord,” said the other, “if you allow me, I will leave now.” “Yes; God be with you,” said the king. “Greet your lady for me and tell her that, if she is afraid that her fight cannot be won by one [284] champion, I will send her two or three or however many she wants.” “Thank you very much, my lord,” he answered. With those words, he left and went to Sir Yvain’s lodgings to see the young man who was arming himself. When he was fully armed except for his head and hands, the youth said to Sir Yvain, “Ah! my lord, I forgot something!” “What’s that?” said Sir Yvain. “My lord,” he said, “I have not taken leave of my lady.” “It’s good you remember now,” said Sir Yvain. “Let’s go see her.” “Good sir,” said the young man to the knight, who was waiting for him, “start out by yourself; I’ll catch up with you as soon as I’ve spoken to my lady the Queen.” And to his squires he said, “And you, go with him and take all my equipment.” Then in secret he told one of his squires to take his sword as well, for he was eager to owe his knighthood to a hand other than the king’s. !4 “My lord,” said the knight who was waiting for him, “I'll go ahead as far as the woods and wait for you there.” “Yes, go,” said the young man; “I’ll follow you right away.” Thereupon the knight left, along with the young man’s squires. Then, together with Sir Yvain, the young man went to court, passihg through the great hall where the king and many of his fine knights were still lingering. The flap of the young man’s hood of mail was hanging open, so that his face was exposed. He and Sir Yain reached the queen’s room. [285] Seeing the queen, he did not hesitate but knelt before her and warmly gazed at her as long as he dared. But then embarrassment overcame him, and he suddenly lowered his eyes, while Sir Yain said to the queen, “My lady, this is the young man you saw last evening, whom the king has knighted. He is here to take leave of you.” “Really?” said the queen. “Is he already on his way?” lt must be remembered that Lancelot has not yet been through the final stage of knighting, the girding with the sword. It is this stage that will determine whose knight he is. 68 “Yes, my lady,” said Sir Yvain, “he is going to help the lady of Nohaut as the king’s champion.” “Good God! Why is my lord allowing him to go? Didn’t his freeing the wounded knight give him enough to do?” “There’s no doubt, my lady,” said Sir Yvain, “that this is disturbing to my lord the king, but the young man asked it as a favor.” At that, everyone within earshot said, “That’s the young man who freed the wounded knight! God, what a bold thing to do!” “God!” said the ladies and the maidens who were there. “Look how handsome and elegant he is, and how well built! He must be a man of great prowess.” Then the queen took him by the hand and said, “Stand up, my dear sir; I don’t know who you are. You are perhaps of nobler birth than I know; if I allow you to remain on your knees in front of me, that’s not very proper of me, is ite “Ah, my lady,” he sighed, “first you must forgive me for behaving so brashly toward you.” “What brashness do you mean?” she said. “My lady,” he said, “I left here earlier without your leave.” “My dear friend,” she said, “you are so young that you can only be forgiven for such a misdeed: of course I forgive you!” “Thank you, my lady,” he said. Then he added, “My lady, if it were agreeable to you, I would, wherever I might be, look upon myself,” he said, “as your knight.” “Yes,” she said, “go right ahead.” “My lady,” he said, “now, with your leave, I will go.” “Goodbye,” she said, “goodbye, my dear friend.” And he whispered [286] to himself, “All my thanks, my lady, for letting me be that.” Then the queen took his hand to raise him, and he was thrilled to feel her bare hand touch his. He took leave of the ladies and maidens, and Sir Yvain led him back out through the great hall. At his lodgings, he covered the young man’s head and hands with armor and, as he was about put on his sword, he exclaimed, “Good Lord, sir! But you’re not a knight!” “How’s that?” said the youth. “Simple,” said Sir Yvain; “the king has not girded you with the sword! Let’s go to him right now, and he’l] do it!” “My lord,” said the other, “wait here a moment. I’ll run after my squires to get the one they’re carrying, because that’s the only one I’d want the king to gird me with.” “T’ll come with you,” said Sir Yvain. “No, my lord,” he answered. “I’ll dash after them as fast as my horse can go, and then I’ll join you right back here.” He left, and Sir Yvain remained waiting. But the young man had no wish to come back, for his aim was to be knighted not by the king but by a certain other person, who he believed would benefit him more. Sir Yvain waited for him for a long while; then, seeing that he was not coming back, he went straight to the king and said, “My lord, we have been tricked by the young man who has gone off to be Nohaut’s champion.” “What do you mean?” said the king. Lancelot, Part I “Well,” he said, “you didn’t gird him with a sword.” And he went on to tell the king how the young man was supposed to go fetch his sword and come right back. The king was surprised and wondered why he had not come back, since Sir Yvain had told him that he was not yet a knight. “Well,” said Sir Gawain, “I think he is a nobleman of very high standing,.and I am sure he was offended by the fact that [287] my lord the king did not gird him with the sword before all the others. That’s why he has gone away.” The queen said that that might well be true, and many of the knights agreed. But at this point the story stops speaking of the king and queen and their whole entourage, and turns to the young man on his way to rescue the lady of Nohaut. 23. The New Knight Champions the Lady of Nohaut.’ Now the young man was riding after the knight who had come to seek help and after his own equipment, which he had sent out with him. He caught up with the knight and his equipment at the edge of the forest. They rode together through the woods until the hour of nones, when it was very hot. The young man took off his helmet and gave it to one of his squires, and he became very quiet and thoughtful. The knight, who was riding ahead of him, turned off the road onto a narrow path, and he followed. When they had gone a bit along the path, a branch hit the young man in the face, hurting him. He was jolted out of his brooding and, looking up, realized that he was no longer on the main road. “What is this?” he said to the knight. “Wasn’t the way lovelier and more direct by the main road than by this narrow path? “Yes, of course,” said the knight, “but it was not so safe.” “Why, my good lord?” said the young man. “I won’t tell you if I don’t want to,” said the knight. “You will, by God!” said the other. “You have brought me more harm and trouble on this trip than you think.” “Trouble?” said the knight. “What trouble?” “Such,” said the young man, “as [288] you could never remedy. But now tell me why the main road is not safe.” “I won’t tell you,” said the knight. Then Lancelot took his sword from the squire who was carrying it and turned right back to the knight. “Now you'll tell me,” he said, “right now, or you’re dead!” “Dead?” said the knight, and he began to laugh. “Do you think you can kill me so easily?” “Yes, indeed!” said the young man. “You’re dead unless you answer me right awayl” “I am not so easy to kill as you think,” said the knight, “but I’ll tell you before you start a fight with me. If I let you do that, I would be serving my lady poorly. Come back, Corresponds to Micha VII:XXIIIa; Sommer IJJ:132-143; Kennedy 166-182. Lancelot, Part I then,” said the knight, “and I'll show you why I led you off the main road.” They turned back along the path, the young man and his equipment following the knight, and were soon on the road again. They had not gone far along the road when they found, a bit off to the right, a large block of stone beside a beautiful spring. The young man went over to the spring and looked off into the distance; he saw a smart pavilion pitched in the open countryside. “My good lord,” said the knight to the youth, “now I'll tell you, if you wish, why I left the main road.” “Go ahead,” he answered. “In that pavilion over there,” said the knight, “is a girl guarded by a knight who is a good half-foot taller than other knights [289] and stronger and better built. He is very harsh and cruel toward all men he overcomes—and that means all those who start a fight with him—for he is so strong that no one can withstand him. That’s why I led you off the road.” “I want to see him,” said the young man. “If you trust me,” said the knight, “you won't.” “I will,” he answered. “I swear,” said the knight, “that bothers me! It’s not a wise thing for you to do; and J won’t escort you any farther, I'm telling you!” “If you wish, you will,” said the young man, “and if you don’t, you won't. It’s all the same to me.” Then the young man dismounted and, with his sword in one bare hand and his helmet in the other, left the knight and his squires at the block of stone and walked up to the tent. He was going to draw aside the entrance flap, but the tall knight, sitting in front of the entrance in an imposing chair, said to him, “That’s dangerous, good sir! You have no business inside!” “I have indeed!” said the young man. “I want to see a certain young lady who is in there.” “She is not there for just anyone at all to see.” ‘I don’t know,” said the youth, “whom she’s for, but I will see her!” With that, he made a move to force his way in, but “Stay, good sir!” said the knight. “Don’t go in! [290] The young lady is sleeping, and I won’t have her wakened against her will. But since you're so eager to see her,” he went on, “J won’t fight with you: there would be no honor for me in killing you. When she wakes up, though, I'll let you see her.” “Why,” said the young man, “would you find no honor in killing me?” “Because,” he answered, “you’re too young, and because I’m a good bit taller and stronger than you are.” “I don’t care,” said the youth, “why you refuse to fight, as long as you promise to let me see the lady when she’s awake.” “I promise you,” said the knight. The young man turned away from the tent and went toward a forest shelter that stood less than a bowshot away. He saw sitting in front of the shelter two beautifully dressed damsels and, with his sword in his right hand and helmet in 2Literally, “a Welsh shelter.” 69 left, he went up to them. At his approach, they did not move, but one of them said, “God! what a beautiful knight this is, coming along!” “Indeed,” said the other, “he is truly the handsomest in the world. It’s dreadful that he is such a coward!” “So help me God,” said the first, “that’s the truth! He’s no knight if he lets that tall fellow scare him away from seeing our lady, who is the most beautiful creature in the world.” He heard quite well what they said. He stopped; then he said to them, “So help me God, that’s the truth!” With that, he turned back toward the tent, which was at the edge of the forest, but when he reached it, he did not find [291] the tall knight guarding the entry. He drew back the flap, but he saw no living being inside. He was very puzzled and wondered where the two of them could be. He looked all around but detected nothing. He went running back to the two young women he had left in front of the shelter, but they too were gone. He was so upset that he almost went mad. He came back to the block of stone where he had left the knight and his equipment. The knight asked him what he had done. “I haven’t done a thing,” he said. “The young lady got away from me, I am very sorry to say.” Then he told him how it had happened, “but you can be sure,” he said, “that I’l] never pause until I’ve seen her.” Then he mounted his horse and gave his sword and “helmet back to his squire. “What are you doing, good sir?” said the knight. “Do you mean to ride after the young lady?” “Yes,” he said, “I won’t stop looking until I’ve found her.” “What do you mean?” said the knight. “You were on your way to rescue my lady!” “And I will,” said the young man. “I’ll be there in good time. I’ll be there before the day of the battle.” “What do you know about the terms?” said the knight. “I know,” said the young man, “that you told my lord the king that it was not yet settled when the battle would take place or with how many knights. But go ahead to your lady; greet her for me and tell her that I am coming to her aid and that I’ll be there soon.” “Goodbye, then!” said the knight. “I am leaving. [292] I'll expect you at Nohaut as soon as you have seen the young lady.” “T’'ll be there,” he answered. Then the knight went off in one direction and the young man and his squires in another. A little after the hour of vespers, the youth met a fully armed knight, who asked him where he was going. “Iam going,” said the young man, “where my business calls me.” “Tell me about it,” said the knight. “No, I won't,” said the young man. “I know quite well,” said the knight, “where you’re going.” “Where, then?” he answered. “You are looking,” said the knight, “for a certain young lady guarded by a knight.” “That’s right,” said the young man. “Who told you so?” “I just know,” said the knight. 70 “I know quite well who told you,” said the youth. “Who, then?” said the knight. “You were told by the knight who left me a while ago and is on his way to the lady of Nohaut.” “Whoever told me,” said the knight, “the point is that I know. And I could show you the way if I cared to.” “Show me, then,” said the young man. “Not tonight,” said the knight, “because we wouldn't be there by daylight, but we’ll go in the morning, and I'll take you to see one of the most beautiful damsels that you could ever see. She is not even very far from here; she ison the way to the person that you’re seeking.” “I want to see her,” said the young man. “Lead me.” “By my faith,” said the knight, “you’ll have to make me a promise first!” “What [293] promise?” said the youth. ‘T’ll tell you. The girl is being held prisoner on an island in a lake; she is under a very beautiful sycamore, which stands in the middle of a meadow.® There she lies all through the day on a quilt, all alone. At nightfall two knights, fully armed and helmeted, come to take her away with them and every morning they bring her back to the lake. But if she had two knights willing to be her champions against those two and able to defeat them in combat, she would be free. I would be one of them, if you were the other.” The young man answered that he would gladly fight, “with the understanding,” he said, “that in the morning you will lead me to the place where I can find the tall knight who guards the young lady in the tent.” “Now that you have stated your terms,” said the knight, ‘I can state mine: if we win the girl who is held prisoner in the lake, I want her to be mine.” “T agree,” said the young man. “And I agree to your terms,” said the knight. Thereupon they both set out for the lake. They arrived as night was falling and they could see, on the other side, the two knights who had come for the damsel. The knight said to the young man, “There are the two knights who have come to take her away! Fast now! Take up your shield and lance, fasten your helmet, and make sure your sword is in place.” . The young man was so eager for battle that he forgot all about his shield, but [294] one of the squires helped him with his helmet. Then he seized a lance and the two of them galloped off to attack the two knights. They moved fast and their horses were good, and heavy blows came down on the shields that were there. One of the two knights guarding the girl struck the young man on the left shoulder so forcefully that he ripped through the hauberk and sank the whole lancehead into his shoulder. The young man struck him right back, toppling him onto the ground and breaking his lance in the fall. Meanwhile, the other two knights had unhorsed each other. At that point, the young man dismounted, and when the knight who had brought him there saw that he had no lance or sword or shield, he wondered what the fellow 31 iterally, “in prison in a lake in a meadow under a very beautiful sycamore which is in the middle of the meadow.” Lancelot, Part I would do. The young man came up to him and said, “Let me have your sword! My squires are too far away.” “Of course,” he answered, giving it to him. The young man said, “Now move back and let me face them both!” When the knight who had wounded him heard him utter those words, he began to laugh. He came up to him and said, “In fact, good sir, I'll let you have my own sword if you like. I’m not fighting you anymore today!” “Nor am I!” said the other knight. “By the Holy Cross!” said the young man, “then you will give up the girl!” “We leave her to you,” they both answered. “And do you know why? It’s clear to us that you’re a man of great courage and can yet amount to something big. Besides, you're [295] so wounded that you might well die if you were hurt even a little more. That’s why we are being kind to you.” “I don’t care why,” said the young man, “as long as the girl is freed. Now let me have her! I want her.” “Gladly,” said the knights. One of them pulled out a key, threw it into the meadow, and said, “My lady, unlock the boat and come out! This knight here has won you.” The young lady unlocked the boat, which was drawn up onto the meadow and attached to a chain, and she came out.* The two knights who had been guarding her took their leave and went their separate ways. At once, four young men appeared with a packhorse bearing a tent. They set up the tent in a shady spot nearby and then set about preparing a great meal. (All four served the knight who had led the young man to this place.) When the meal was ready, they ate; and when they had eaten, the damsel ordered that three beds be made ready. The young man who had won her looked at her and asked why she wanted three beds. “For you,” she said, “for the knight, and for me.” “For me?” he said. “T’ll sleep with you.” “No, you won’t,” she said. “Yes, I will,” he said. “All right,” she said, “if you like.” “No; I give up my claim on you,” he said. Then they went to bed and slept until morning. In the morning, when they had risen, the young man said to the knight, “Good sir, take me where you agreed to take me.” “Of course,” said the knight, “with the understanding that, if you win her, she is mine.” “I promise,” said the youth. Together with the girl, they mounted their horses [296] and rode all the way to the block of stone. “There’s the tent,” said the knight to the young man; “but you need to do something that this young lady requests, and I do, too.” “What is it?” he said. “Take up your sword,” said the knight, “and hang your shield around your neck; you already have a good lance that this young lady has given to one of your squires for ” you. ‘Literally, “The girl unlocked the boat, which was in the meadow attached to a chain, then came out.” Lancelot, Part I “T will gladly take up the shield and the lance,” said the young man, “but I cannot and must not be girded with the sword until I receive another order to that effect.” “Then allow me at least to hang it from your saddlebow,” said the knight, “and you can draw it from there if need be. The fact is, you’re facing a very cruel fighter.” The knight and the young lady insisted so much that he agreed, and they hung his sword from the saddlebow. He took up his shield and his lance and went up to the tent, where he found the same tall knight that he had seen the first time. “I have come,” said the young man, “to claim what you promised me yesterday: that you would let me see the young lady.” The knight answered that he could not see her without a fight. “If I have to fight,” said the youth, “T will. Better that than not to see her! But arm yourself quickly; I have to be on my way!” At that, the tall knight stood up and started to laugh that the young man should have told him to put on his armor. “Hal” he said, “put on armor to face you ?” He jumped onto a horse that was standing nearby and took up a shield and a lance. The young man did likewise. They clashed as fast as their horses could run, striking great and heavy blows upon each other’s shield. The tall knight shattered his lance, splintering it [297] all around. The young man struck him with such force that the leather of the shield ripped open and the wooden backing tore apart as the spearhead went right through. It crashed into his left side and broke one of his ribs, and the shock was so painful that he lost control of the reins. The rear saddlebow split, and he was knocked to the ground with a stunning thud, and it was in the fall that his lance was shattered. The knight was so wounded that he fainted, and the young man thought he was dead. But then he sat up, and the youth said to him, “Now I’ll see the lady!” “Yes, indeed, good sir,” he answered; “she is yours now. And damn whatever gave me my first glimpse of her, for it has killed me!” So saying, he yielded the woman, but before the young man would let him go, he made him promise never again to do battle with a knight, save in self-defense. Then the knight came up who had brought the youth to this place, and with him the girl from the boat, and they were all dazzled by the young man’s remarkable feat. He then went into the tent and took the young lady, just risen, by the hand and gave her to the knight. “Here, sir knight,” he said, “now you have two of them.” “Sir,” said the knight, “I can’t keep them. They are too beautiful and, besides, J didn’t win them; you did! They belong to you.” “They can’t ever be mine,” said the young man; “it was agreed that you would have them both.” “My lord,” said the knight, “if you don’t want them, tell me what to do with them. I’ll do whatever you like.” “Really?” said the young man. 71 “Yes,” said the knight, “I [298] give you my word in good faith.” “Then take them,” said the youth, “to the court of my lord King Arthur, and tell my lady the queen that the young man who is going to rescue the lady of Nohaut sends them to her. Tell her this as well: if she wishes to win me forever, I ask that she make me a knight and send me a sword as befits a man who is to be her knight. Explain that my lord the king did not gird me with a sword when he knighted me.” When the knight heard that the young man was newly knighted, he was astonished. “My lord,” he said, “where will I find you when I come back?” “At Nohaut,” said the youth. “Go straight there.” Thereupon the knight left for the court, where he delivered his message and told the queen about the remarkable things that he had seen the young man do. She was delighted and picked out for him a very fine sword, fitted out with a splendid scabbard and belt. The knight took the sword and went straight back to Nohaut; he knew the way quite well. Just outside the town, he found the young man, who had not yet gone in, and he gave him the sword sent by the queen. “And she says,” he added, “that you should gird yourself with it.” He put it on very gladly and gave the knight the sword that had been hanging on his saddlebow. Then he said that now he was indeed a knight, thanks to God and his lady; and that is why until now the story has called him a young man. [299] The knight who had gone to court to seek help for his lady had now been back in Nohaut for three days, and he had been praising the New Knight so much that the lady was yearning to meet him and determined that no one else would fight her battle. When he arrived, he was warmly welcomed by many, as the knight guiding him had come ahead to say he was on his way. The lady and many of her people rode forth to greet him and gave him as warm a welcome as a knight who was a stranger could receive. At the sight of the lady, he was neither dazzled by her great beauty nor even very much aware of it, and yet she was extremely beautiful, but not all beauty could touch his heart. He said, “My lady, I am sent to you by my lord King Arthur to do battle for you. I am ready right now or whenever you wish.” “Sir,” she said, “bless my lord the king, and welcome to you! I am grateful to you for coming.” Then she noticed that his hauberk was torn at the shoulder, where he had been wounded while fighting for the girl from the island in the lake;? and the gash was festering, since he had ignored it. “My lord,” she said, “you are wounded!” “My lady,” he said, “no wound can stop me from doing my service whenever you wish, and I offer it to you right now or tomorrow.” The lady had his armor removed and, finding that the gash was wide and deep, said to him, “My God! It’s no good 5 Literally, “the damsel in the lake.” fe for you to fight until you have healed, and I can easily put off the battle.” “My lady,” he said, “I have much more to do elsewhere than here, so both for your sake and mine there should be no delay.” [300] She answered that she could never allow him to fight in such a state; in fact, she sent for a doctor. Then she sent him to bed and kept him there for two weeks, until his wound was healed. During those two weeks, the news came to King Arthur’s court that the lady of Nohaut was not yet delivered of her foe. Kay the Seneschal said to the king, “Do you believe that a man so young as he is can carry out such a task? Send me there! It takes a grown man to handle such a matter.” The king agreed. Sir Kay made his way quickly toward Nohaut and when almost there sent a messenger ahead. The lady and her people then rode forth to meet him and welcome him very warmly. The New Knight, now healed, was there as well. “My lady,” said the seneschal, “I am sent to you by my lord the king to do batttle for you. He would have sent me or some other man of valor a while ago, but a certain New Knight asked for the favor and he granted it to him. But when he heard that your case was not yet settled, he sent me to take care of it.” “Sir,” said the lady, “all my thanks to my lord the king and to the knight he sent and to you, but it was not the knight that put the matter off. He would have undertaken it on the very first day, but I stopped him because he was wounded. Now he is healed and he will fight.” “My lady,” said Kay, “that cannot be. Now that I have come, I will do battle! Otherwise, I would be put to shame and my lord the king would hardly be honored.” When the lady heard this, she was sorely troubled and did not know what to do, for she would have wanted the New Knight to fight the battle, but then what of the seneschal? He was very close to the king, whose liegewoman she [301] was, and could well harm her or help her. At that moment the New Knight stepped forward and said to the seneschal, “It is true, Sir Kay. I would have fought on the very first day, had my lady been willing. And I am still ready, and I ask that no one else take my place, for I came first and the battle should be mine.” “My good fellow,” said Kay, “that cannot be, now that I have arrived.” “It would really be a great pity,” said the New Knight, “if my lady were tricked out of letting the better man fight for her.” “You're quite right,” said Kay. “Then we'll join battle with each other,” said the New Knight, “and the winner will undertake the combat!” Kay agreed. “So help me God,” said the lady, “it won’t be like that! But I will settle this to the honor of my lord the king, who sent you here, and to the honor of both of you. Since I have the right to be championed by one knight or two or as many as I want, I will simply have the king of Northumberland agree to a battle with two.” With such tact, the lady appeased them both. Lancelot, Part I Next morning, from the castle where he was staying, the king came with his men to a plain below Nohaut where the battle was to take place, and meeting him came the lady with her two knights and other men. The terms were read out in everyone’s hearing, and they all stepped [302] back. The two pairs of armed knights took their stand at some distance from each other, then charged. Sir Kay and his opponent ran each other’s shield right through so that their lances shattered into pieces; but neither fell and, drawing their swords, they turned and attacked again. Meanwhile, the New Knight and his opponent rushed together. The man of Northumberland struck in such a way that the other’s shield hit his temple and his lance shattered into pieces. But the New Knight struck him just below the center of his shield so that the shield slammed against the arm and the arm against the body and he was thrust back so hard that he lost control of the reins and his spine was knocked back against the rear saddlebow and the movement carried him over the horse’s rump down onto the ground, and his spear broke in the fall. But he had barely hit the ground when he jumped back up on his feet. The New Knight shouted to the seneschal, “Sir Kay, you look after this one and leave the other to me!” Kay did not answer, though, but kept up the hard fight with his foe. Then the New Knight drew back; he dismounted and ran toward his foe; he raised his shield above his head and gripped his sword. The other did likewise, and they rained blows down upon each other, on shield and helmet, on arms and shoulders, whatever they could reach. Their fight went on and on, until the opponent could take no more [303] but backed off more and more. The New Knight gained ground on him as the man dodged as much as he could, but it was of no help to him, for the other was pressing him hard and he could see that he was getting the worst of it and was dropping fast. Meanwhile, Kay and his opponent had killed each other’s horse and were on foot. The New Knight shouted to him again, “Come here, Sir Kay! You see how this one’s doing. Now leave the other one to mel I don’t have time to spend all day here!” Kay was embarrassed and answered angrily, “Take care of your own man there, my friend, and leave mine to me!” At that, the New Knight fell upon his opponent once again, and the man would gladly have defended himself if he could, but it was useless. When the New Knight saw that he had him down for good, he was not unkind to him, for he had no wish to put Sir Kay to shame and he would have liked, besides, to see a peaceful end to the matter. Kay, meanwhile, fought his man into submission at last, and the king of Northumberland realized that there was no more holding out against the lady’s two defenders. So he sent an offer of peace to the lady, saying that he and his troops would go away and he would leave all her land in peace, nor would he ever again harm either her or her land, which he warranted by oath and with hostages. And in that way, peace was made. The lady came to her two champions [304] and said that she had the settlement she wanted, and she thanked them. The king of Northumberland went away together with his troops, and the lady remained in peace. The next Lancelot, Part I day, Sir Kay went back to court and told the king how the matter had gone and thanked him on the lady’s behalf. As for the New Knight, he stayed on at Nohaut as long as the lady could keep him there, and she was very sorry when she could no longer. He left one Monday morning, escorted by the lady herself along with a great number of knights; and she offered him herself and her land, as he might wish. After a long while, the knight insisted she turn back. When she and her men went back, the knight who had brought the sword from the queen did not go with them but continued on awhile, for he had great esteem and fondness in his heart for the New Knight. He said to him, “My lord, I am at your disposal, and I hope you are not annoyed by anything I have done.” “What might that be?” said the knight. “The fight I led you into with those two knights who were guarding the girl on the island in the lake, which I did only for the sake of your honor. I’ll tell you how it happened. My lady wanted to test the knight that the king was sending her to be her champion before she would let him defend her; so she sent me and those two to do battle with you. That’s why they didn’t dare go on fighting when I gave you my sword and you said that I should leave the two of them to you; they were sure [305] that you were more badly wounded than you really were.” “And the tall knight,” he said, “who was he?” “My lord,” he said, “that was Autragais, a knight of great bravery. He had offered to undertake my lady’s battle in return for her love; and she said that if he turned out to be a better knight that the one the king was sending, she would give him her love and let him defend her. Well, he wanted her love more than anything else, and that’s why he did not deign to put on his armor to fight you. You can be sure that if he had defeated you, he would have been her champion. Now I’ve told you why these challenges were planned, and I ask you, please, to forgive me.” “Really,” he answered, “I see nothing to forgive. But if you did do something wrong, yes, I forgive you.” “Thank you, my lord,” he said, “thank you. You can count on me as your knight from now on.” The other thanked him very much; then they bade each other goodbye and went their separate ways. As he rode off with his squires, the New Knight came to the decision that he would go about in secret, so that he should not be recognized as a man bent on winning fame and honor. He came into a great forest and rode through it all day long without finding any adventure worth reporting. That night, still in the forest, he stayed at a religious house, where he was shown great honor. In the morning he left his squires there, ordering them to wait for him and not move for a whole month unless they saw him in person. Then he left [306] the house. The house was a good thirty English leagues away from Nohaut. It contained a tomb called the tomb of Leucan. This Leucan was a nephew of Joseph of Arimathea, who gave rise to the great clan that later brought luster to Great Britain, carrying the Grail to that land of the heathen and 73 winning it for Our Lord.® This was the man whose body lay in the religious house that you have just heard of. When the New Knight left the house, he rode along as chance led him, one hour this way, the next hour that way, until he was outside the land of Nohaut. One day it happened that he rode until noon and became extremely thirsty; he headed toward a stream and, reaching it, dismounted and drank. Once he had drunk, he sat down on the bank and fell into deep thought. Suddenly a fully armed knight appeared on the other side and splashed through the water toward him so furiously that he startled him out of his thoughts with a thorough soaking. The wet man stood up and said, “Sir knight! You have made me all wet; and you have done me another wrong, besides. You have startled me out of my thoughts.” “What do I care about you or what you’re thinking!” said the knight. Then the New Knight mounted his horse, because he wanted to move away without a fight, to recover, if he could, his quiet train of thought. He started into the stream to cross over, when the knight [307] said to him, “That’s a dangerous thing to do, young sir! I have orders from my lady the queen to guard this ford and let nobody cross.” The other asked him what queen. “The wife of King Arthur,” he said. At these words, the New Knight started to head upstream. The other came after him and seized the horse’s reins. “Stop!” he said. “You have to leave this horse behind!” “Why?” he asked. “Because one step into the ford is one too many,” he said. He slid one foot out of its stirrup. The knight said no more, and the other glared at him. “Whose order is that?” he asked, and the man said the queen’s. “Is that your word as a knight?” And the man said it was his own order. “Your own?” he answered. “Well, by no means are you making off with my horse!” But the other was still holding the reins. “Let go of the reins,” said the New Knight. “T will not!” he answered, and the other put his hand to his sword and pulled it halfway out of the scabbard. The man let go of the reins and said, “You'll be sorry to have drawn your sword!” With that, he moved off and, taking his shield by its straps and holding his lance firmly between arm and side, he charged. The other, covering himself with his shield, turned to face him. The knight of the ford struck so hard that his lance shattered into pieces, and the New Knight struck back and threw him to the ground. Then he went up to the horse and led it over to the man. “Here is [308] your mount,” he said. “This is to make up for unhorsing you; but I did it in self-defense.” 6For the tale of Joseph, see the Estotre del saint Graal (Sommer I), translated in our volume I. Jas The other was very angry to have been unhorsed by someone he did not even know. He climbed back into the saddle and then said, “Knight, tell me who you are.” “I won’t tell you,” he answered, as he started upstream along the bank. The man took hold again of his horse’s reins, saying, “You are going to tell me who you are before I let you go!” “Not anytime today!” he said. “Then you'll do battle with me!” he said. ‘I am not about to do battle with you,” said the New Knight, “not with someone warranted by my lady. But a worthy man does not gain fame by harassing and belittling knights in search of adventure just because he is protected by a noble lady.” The other answered that he was not seeking a fight just because he was protected by the queen, “because I am not in her service,” he said, “and so you will do battle or tell me your name!” “If you swear to me,” said the New Knight, “that you are not in her service, I will do one of the two.” He swore. “Now you'll have your battle, if you wish,” said the New Knight, “for you’re surely not going to know who I am!” And the knight of the ford said that he was not asking for anything better. Then they went at each other furiously with their swords, on horseback. Alibon, for that was his name, was a very brave man, the son of the vavasor of the Queen’s Ford. The ford was so named because the queen came upon it before anyone else at a certain time during the first two years of her marriage to King Arthur. It happened when the seven kings made an attack on Arthur’s tents on the day he had made his camp alongside the Humber. When the troops had been routed and everyone had fled wherever he could, it was there that the king and [309] Sir Gawain and King Urien rallied, together with his brother King Lot and Sir Yvain, who was still young and barely known and not yet a knight, and Sir Kay as well, who that day accomplished the great feat that won him great fame and led people to call him seneschal even before he became seneschal. That is the place of the wonderful thing that happened to them when they came to the ford and the queen had already fled across and Kay said he would not take another step without knowing why. At that point they saw the seven kings come spurring toward them, two bowshots ahead of their troops because the men were busy poring over the booty in the tents. King Urien said that they should take shelter on the other side of the stream, but Kay said that anyone should be damned—anyone!—who crossed the stream before taking on one of the approaching kings. “They don’t outnumber us!” he said. But King Urien said, “Kay, there are seven of them and only six of us.” “That doesn’t matter to me,” said Kay. “Vl kill two of them all by myself! Think, each of you, what you’re going to do!” And he was right. He killed one with his spear and a second with his sword, and each of the others killed a man. That was the most honored adventure that ever befell King Lancelot, Part I Arthur. Now you have heard the Adventure of the Ford.” [310] But now let us turn to the two knights who were fighting. The battle was so harsh that they were both badly wounded, but in the end it was Alibon who could not go on. When he saw that it was hopeless, he said that he would stop fighting, but the other man said that that was not good enough. “Why?” he asked. “We’re ‘not fighting because of any real dispute. And if there is one, I yield!” “There are good grounds for it,” said the New Knight. “You made me all wet and put me to shame.” “I am sorry, and I’ll make it up to you however you like,” said the other. “I accept your apology,” he answered. “I thank you very much,” said Alibon, “but now please tell me your name.” But he said that he would not tell him. “Then I hope you won’t be offended,” he said, “if I go someplace where I can find it out.” And the other said that he was free to go wherever he liked. Thereupon the two separated. The knight of the ford went straight to King Arthur’s court, where he was well known, and straight to the queen. He said, “My lady, I have come from far away to ask you about a certain knight armed in white and riding a white horse. I ask you to tell me, if you know, who he is.” “Tell me, by God or by the creature you most love,” said the queen, “why you are asking.” “My lady,” he said, “because I want to thank you for him.” “Thank me for what?” said the queen. And he recounted just what had happened, together with all the words, “and I think, my lady,” he said, “that if I had told him it was your order, he would have handed his horse over to me.” “That would have been foolish of him,” she said, “since [311] he would have been handing over his horse for a lie. I never put you in charge of the ford.” “My lady,” he said, “he did something else. He gave me back my horse once he had thrown me to the ground, and I thank you for that. Afterwards, we fought together for a long time.” “Which of you was overcome?” said the queen. “I, my lady,” he said; “I have no wish to lie. But now tell me who he is.” “So help me God,” she said, “I don’t know his name or who he is, but my lord the king made him a knight on Saint John’s Day, and he has since done battle in many a place, where people from here and elsewhere have seen him. But please tell me whether he is healthy and well.” “Yes, my lady, he is,” he said. The word soon spread throughout the court, and the king was very pleased and so were almost all who heard it. "This adventure is not found in any earlier Arthurian work. As pointed out in Kennedy II:147, this incident explaining the name of the ford is one of several allusions in the text to Arthur’s wars at the beginning of his reign; they serve to give him an existence outside the Lancelot story. Lancelot, Part I At this point, though, the story stops speaking of the king and queen, and turns back to the knight in white armor, who was moving on. 24. Lancelot, as the White Knight, Captures the Dolorous Guard and Learns His Identity.’ Once the White Knight had left Alibon, the vavasor’s son, he rode through the whole day without finding any adventure worth reporting. That night he stayed with a woodsman, who lodged him very well. The next day, he rose early and rode all morning [312] until about the hour of tierce, when he came upon a young lady on horseback, weeping and sobbing. He asked her what was wrong, and she said that she had never been so unhappy in her life. He asked her why. “My lover,” she said, “was one of the handsomest knights in the world. Now he lies dead in a castle back there.” “Why, my lady?” he said. “Because, sir,” she answered, “of the evil customs they follow there. Curse the soul of its founder, for no knight in search of adventure has ever gone into that place and come out alive!” “And will any knight ever go in,” he said, “and remain alive?” “Yes,” she said, “one who can meet the challenge. But he would have to be better than any knight you could find now.” “My lady,” he said, “what does this adventure involve? Tell me.” “If you want to know what is involved,” she said, “go there. This is the way.” With that, she rode off quickly, continuing to sob and weep. And he galloped on until he saw the castle, then rode straight toward the gate. What he saw was a fortress sitting proudly and splendidly atop a high natural rock; and far from small, it measured more than a crossbowshot on every side. At the foot of the rock, on one side, flowed the Humber, and on the other flowed a broad stream that came from more than forty springs all arising less than a [313] bowshot away from the foot of the stronghold. The knight rode straight up to the castle gate, but when he drew near he found it closed and barred, for this gate was never open. — The castle was called Dolorous Guard, the Woeful Fortress, because no knight errant ever went in who did not die there or was not at least imprisoned as soon as he had been overcome. Thai is what happened to all the knights who came there, for none could endure the test of arms that was imposed. There were two sets of walls, and in each wall a gate; and at each gate the newcomer had to fight ten knights, but in a very odd way, for as soon as the first of the knights was tired and wanted to stop fighting, another was all ready to come take his place; and when this one was 'Corresponds to Micha VII:XX1IVa; Sommer III:143-153; Kennedy 182-195. 1G) tired, another would come along, so that a single knight could hardly defeat them unless he were of such skill at arms and such strength that he could kill ten men one after the other. At the top of the second wall, above the doorway, there was a copper statue of a knight, tall and sturdy, astride his horse; he was fully armed and in his two hands held a large axe. He had been put there by magic, and as long as he stood there, the castle had no need to fear being captured by anyone. But as soon [314] as the first gate had been passed by the man who was to win the castle and he could see the statue, the copper knight would fall to the ground and all the spells that gripped the castle would be revealed and would be broken. But they would not come wholly to an end until the winner of the castle had stayed there for forty days without spending a single night outside the walls. Such was the power of the spells. Below the castle lay a bustling town, where you could find everything that a knight errant might need. The town was called Chaneviere, and it was set high above the Humber. When the knight in white armor came to the gate and found it barred, he was deeply troubled. Just then, a damsel of great beauty came up to him and greeted him. He greeted her in return and said, “My lady, could you tell me anything about the practices of this place?” The young woman was veiled; if she had not been, he would have recognized her. She explained the practices of the place and how he would have to fight, and against what odds, if he wanted to go in. “But if you heed what I say,” she went on, “you will not even think of going in.” “My lady,” he said, “I can’t let the matter rest like that. I will either meet the challenge of the castle or share the fate of the worthy men who have been killed in there. Otherwise, I would be giving up a chance to win honor.” [315] Thereupon the young lady went away. It was quite late; evening was in fact coming on. Suddenly the knight heard a man calling down to him from above the gate, “Sir knight, what are you seeking?” ‘T would like to come inside,” he said. “I can tell you,” said the watchman, “that if you come in, you'll be very sorry.” “I don’t know about that,” he answered, “but, by God, my good fellow, don’t make me wait: it’s almost night!” The watchman then sounded a little horn, and a moment later a knight in full armor walked out through the wicket gate, and his horse was led after him. He said, “Sir knight, you need to go down there. Here there is no open space for us to fight freely.” The newcomer answered that that was fine with him. Then they went down to the foot of the castle rock? and clashed as swiftly as their horses could run and dealt each other’s shield the greatest blows they could strike. The castle knight broke his lance, and the knight with the white shield, hitting his foe’s above the bossed center, tore into the leather and broke apart the wooden panels. The blow 2“castle rock” as in Micha variants and Kennedy 184. Micha and Sommer 144 have “tower.” 76 was forceful and the point sharp, and the hauberk could not withstand so powerful a thrust; the chain-mail ripped apart, and the lance went right through the knight’s body, flinging him down [316] dead from his saddle. When the White Knight saw him on the ground, he dismounted, as he did not think he was dead, and ran at him with his sword drawn. But when he saw that he was not rising, he pulled the helmet off the man’s head; and when he saw that he was dead, he was very upset. At that moment the horn was sounded, and another man came rushing forward. As he came into sight, the other withdrew his lance from the dead body and leapt back onto his horse, and the two made for each other as fast as their horses could go. The castle defender missed, and the White Knight so struck him that his shield could not withstand the thrust, but his hauberk remained untouched. With great strength and even more bravery, he thrust at him again and knocked him off the horse, carrying him over the horse’s rump onto the ground; and in the fall he broke his right arm and fainted. The man who had just unhorsed him dismounted and went to strip the helmet from his foe’s head. As soon as he regained his senses, he threatened to behead him unless he acknowledged himself his prisoner. Once again the horn was sounded, and a third knight in full armor came galloping down the hill. The White Knight hurried to finish with the second, pressing him so hard that, for fear of dying, the man acknowledged himself his prisoner. Without a pause, [317] he pulled his lance back out of the other’s shield and leapt back onto his horse. He headed straight toward the next defender, tossed him roughly onto the ground and then broke his lance. The knight had barely hit the ground, though, when he was back on his feet. The other dismounted once again and, with his shield held before him, drew out his sword. The two men aimed great blows wherever they thought they could make a hit, but the castle knight could not hold out long and began to give ground. When he saw that it was hopeless, he waved his sword to the watchman, and the watchman sounded the horn once more. Right away a fourth knight came galloping down who was tall and robust and looked very forbidding. That did not stop the White Knight, though, who kept going after the third until he had badly wounded him. Then the man covered himself with his shield as best he could and put up no further defense. The man coming in to replace him shouted, “My lord, let him be! I am now here in his stead!” “I don’t care,” he answered, “how many of you there are, as long as I can defeat you all.” “You have no right to touch that knight again, as lam here to protect him.” “How can you protect him,” said the White Knight, “if you cannot even protect yourself” Then he seized the lance of the knight with whom he had just been fighting and jumped back onto his horse. He let go at full speed and struck the new defender so powerfully that he hurled both horse and rider into the waters of a brook. After that, he came back to the knight whom [318] the other had come to replace and who was now trying to remount his horse. He came back to him and with the chest of his horse struck him down to the ground, Lancelot, Part I then stamped on him so much that his body was all shattered and he had no way of standing up again. Then he turned and saw that the man in the brook was starting to get up. So he went for him, sword in hand, and struck him so swiftly as he moved forward that he stunned him and sent him sprawling on the ground. Just as he had done in the other case, he rode his horse over the man’s body, so that he was badly wounded and fainted from the painful crushing. Then he went back to the other, dismounted, and undid the man’s helmet and ventail; and with the threat of beheading him, he forced him to acknowledge himself a prisoner. Right away the horn was sounded, and out came the fifth defender. When the knight saw him coming, he ran back to the man at the stream. He pulled the helmet off his head and, before the new man arrived, struck him such a blow with the flat of his sword that he acknowledged himself a prisoner. Seeing that he had already overcome four men, the young knight felt undaunted by the rest. He came back to his horse, mounted, and made for his man with sword drawn, since he had no lance. The other, rushing forward, broke his lance against his armor, while the White Knight came close and, with all his fury and strength, gave him such a cut with the sword that he sliced right through his helmet and ventail along his left temple and the steel came down on his ear and sliced right through it and through his cheek down to his neck; [319] and the man’s neck was so badly hurt that it could barely carry the weight of his helmet. He was so stunned that he could not remain in his saddle, but went sprawling out onto the ground and in the fall struck the point of his helmet into the ground in such a way that his neck almost broke. He was so crushed that blood poured out of his mouth and nose and ears, and he fainted. By that time it was getting very dark, so that the men atop the walls could barely see any longer how the combat was going down below. Thereupon they shut the wicket gate, and the townspeople who had also been watching from the walls said that they had never before seen a knight so quick and confident. Meanwhile, he overcame the fifth knight, who agreed to imprisonment wherever he might like. Then the damsel appeared who had spoken to him at the gate, and she said, “Come away, sir knight. There won’t be any further fighting tonight.” “My lady,” he said, “there are still quite a few to defeat.” “That’s true,” she said, “but there won’t be any more this evening, since the gate is closed; you can come back in good time tomorrow morning.” “Iam sorry there are no more now, my lady,” he said, “for the more I overcame now, the fewer I’d have to face later. You surely know whether what they are doing is right: do tell me.” “Yes,” she said, “I assure you that the battle cannot go on once night has come, but in the morning you’lI start all over again. In fact, if it were not because a knight who has come here for battle is not supposed [320] to linger, you would not yet have met any defender this evening, for it was Lancelot, Part I already late when it all began. Besides, you ought to wish for this rest, since you're quite tired.” “Tired, my lady?” he said. “If it were daylight, you would soon see how tired I am!” Then he felt angry and ashamed, and feared that she had just seen him behave badly. “Come along now,” she said. “Where are you taking me, my lady” he asked. “To a place where I’ll lodge you very well,” she said. With that, he told the men he had defeated that they were to follow him, and they did so, taking the horses that they had fallen from. The young lady led the knight down to fine quarters in the town, which he sorely needed, for he was very tired. Once there, she took him into a room where he could remove his armor; she herself remained veiled. He looked around the room and saw three shields, all covered, hanging from up high. He asked the young woman whose shields they were, and she said that they all belonged to the same knight. “My lady,” he said, “I would be glad to see them without their covers, if you don’t mind.” She had the covers taken off, and he saw that the three shields were of silver, the first with one band of red crossing it diagonally, the second with two, and the third with three;? and he gazed at them for a long while. As he was gazing at the shields, the young woman came back out of another room, splendidly dressed and with her face now uncovered; and there was an intense glow of light in the place. “Sir knight,” she said, “what do you think of the shields?” “My lady,” he said, “they are very handsome.” Then he looked at her and, seeing her unveiled, he recognized her at once and rushed toward her with open arms. He said, “Ah, my dear sweet lady, [321] I am so happy to see you! Tell me, please, how our good Lady is.” “Very well,” she said. Then she drew him aside and said in secret that the Lady of the Lake had sent her to him, “and tomorrow,” she said, “you will find out your name and the names of your father and mother. It will happen up in the castle, of which you will become lord, before the hour of vespers. I know it for certain, from the lips of my Lady herself. As for the three shields that you have seen, they are yours and they work wonders, for as soon as you take up the single-banded one, you will add the strength and prowess of one knight to your own. And if you use the shield with two bands, you will have the prowess of two more knights; and the triplebanded shield will give you the strength of three more. I will have them carried to the battleground tomorrow. Take care not to trust too much in your youth and, as soon as you feel your strength ebbing, to make use of the single-banded shield, and then of the next, if there is any need; and when you want to finish everything off and make the whole world marvel at you, take up the shield with three bands, and you will witness the greatest wonders that you will have ever seen or could have ever imagined. But take care not to settle down at King Arthur’s court or anywhere else until 3In heraldic terms, the shields are of “argent,” crossed by “bends” of “vermeil.” te you have become known for your deeds of valor in many lands; that is the will of my Lady, who wants you to improve yourself and raise yourself to greater heights.” [322] The young lady spoke to him for a long time, and then they sat down to eat when the meal was ready. Through the night, the people of the town and those of the castle were impatient to see the knight, and they all prayed to Our Lord to give him the strength and power to overcome all the defenders just as he had defeated the other five, because they were very eager that the castle’s spells and evil customs come to an end forever. In that way they passed the night, and the next morning the damsel took the knight to hear Mass. Then he put on his armor and, when he was ready, she led him toward the gate and said, “Do you know what you need to do if you wish to defeat the lord of this castle and put an end to the spells? Before nightfall, you will have to defeat ten knights at this outer gate and ten at the inner gate.” “What do you mean*?” he said. “Didn’t I overcome five knights at the outer door yesterday?” “No,” she said, “nothing you did then is of any more use to you than if you had not struck a single blow. Even if you had defeated nine knights by the time you had to stop, everything would have to start all over, because all ten have to be defeated in a single day. But I assure you that you will overcome them all. Moreover, you may be sure of this as well: [323] that you will never die in battle as long as you have your helmet on your head and your hauberk on your back. That should make you feel very confident.” “Indeed,” he said, “that assures me that I cannot die in shame.” As they were speaking, the horn sounded and a knight came out, fully armed except that his head was bare. He said to the White Knight, “Sir knight, what are you here for?” “For the Adventure of the Castle,” he answered. “You are not going to find anyone to meet your challenge,” said the knight, “as long as you keep our defenders, but as soon as you have given them back to us, you will have what you have come for.” “The knights,” he said, “will not get in the way of your letting me undertake the Adventure. But take care not to set them against me once again; it would be a breach of faith.” “Sir knight,” the other said, “it is true that you must give them back, but they cannot and may not bear arms against you. If you like, you can have their oaths on it, and I advise it. The truth is, I wish you had the valor to have already captured the castle, because our woes have lasted all too long. But I am bound to remain loyal and do what my fealty entails.” He handed over the four knights with no delay, and they went into the castle. Right away a fully armed knight came out and, once through the wicket gate, he jumped onto the horse that was led out to him. Then the two foes went down to the foot of the castle rock and began their joust as close to the gate as they could. The castle knight 4«what do you mean?” for Comment? as in Micha variants, Sommer 148, Kennedy 188, and Lecoy 379. Micha has “Where?” (Ou?). 78 put all his strength into [324] knocking the other’s shield against his temple, but his lance did not break, as it was very solid. The young knight struck him back, going right through his shield and the sleeve of his hauberk to pierce him in the arm, and he sent the shield thudding against his flank so roughly that his back arched over the rear saddlebow and the man went flying over the horse’s ramp and down onto the ground, and he fell with a crash that left him badly injured. The White Knight dismounted and, as he was going to hurl himself against the man, he saw as many as nine knights come through the outer gate and head down the hill. One knight moved apart from the others and came down to the battlefield and remained standing’ not far away. Seeing him, the White Knight feared some treacherous move. He mounted his horse and, lance in hand, rode against the man, who was now coming toward him. He struck him hard and the other did likewise, so that both weapons shattered into bits, but neither of the men fell. When the White Knight saw that his opponent had not fallen and that both weapons were in pieces, he was infuriated and he cursed lancemakers for not making lances that could not shatter. Then he put his hand to his sword. Meanwhile the first knight had risen; he had lost his horse, and he had thrown down his shield because his arm could no longer bear it. He was moving toward the wall of rock as fast as he could. The challenger headed for him at his horse’s top speed, and when the knight heard him coming, he glanced up and was about to draw his sword, but he had no time, for his attacker [325] was already upon him and from above gave him such a blow on the helmet that he staggered and almost fell. The young knight dashed past, then turned and came back and with his sword, before the man could counter, gave him a crippling cut on the right arm that made him drop his sword on the field. “What’s this, sir knight?” said the other defender, who came galloping up. “Do you want to fight both of us at once?” “Yes,” he answered, “even a third, if he came, as gladly as two!” “Truth is,” he said, “we would never dare attack you together without your leave to do so.” “Since you’re here to spell each other, go ahead and give each other as much help as you like! It doesn’t matter one bit to me if there are two of you rather than just one or even three rather than two, because I’ll overcome three as easily as one!” The knight was dismayed to hear that, and he knew that he was facing a brave, stouthearted man.® Then they went at each other with swords drawn and aimed great blows at each other’s helmet. But when the White Knight “remained standing” as in Micha variants and Kennedy 190. Micha and Sommer 149 have “leapt [onto his horse].” 6The original reads et bien seit que par est de trop grant cuer, which could readily be interpreted as “and [yet] he knew that he [himself] was a brave ... .” We opt for the interpretation above not only because it seems more in keeping with the context but also because it is supported by Kennedy 190: et bien set qu’il par est de grant cuer, whose pronoun il makes it clear that the reference is to Lancelot. Lancelot, Part I noticed that his other opponent, the one with both arms injured, was getting up, he suddenly returned to his attack on him and pulled the helmet off his head, and the man wanted nothing better than to flee up the castle mound. But the other would not have it and struck him on his hood of mail with all the rage he had in him, splitting it right down to the shoulders, and the man fell. Now the second caught up with him and dealt him a mighty blow on the helmet that knocked his head forward; but as he was galloping past, the White Knight struck a random backhanded blow with his sword that hit the man’s noseguard and cut right into his cheek. The shock and pain sent him arching backward over the rear saddlebow, and he [326] fainted. The other came up to him and, pulling the helmet off his head, shouted that he should acknowledge himself a prisoner, but he was unable to speak. The young knight then struck his sword against the man’s teeth and slashed through them, exposed and covered with blood, right up to his ears. And he said that God forbid he should ever feel pity for killing these men since he had no other way of defeating them. At that moment the man fell to the ground. The others, who had come to the foot of the castle rock, saw that he was dead, so one of them rode forward and thrust his spear at the White Knight, but it broke against his armor; then, his spear useless, he drew his sword and wielded it as he could. At that, the young knight turned on him so fiercely that the onlookers were all dumbfounded, and in no time at all he pressed him so hard that he could take no more. Then the man called for relief and the next one came, while he, unable to bear any further combat, fled to the castle. Then a fresh knight came to take his place, and in that way they kept after the White Knight until the hour of prime had passed and the hour of tierce was close. At that point a squire came up, bearing a silver shield with one diagonal red band; and the shield of the White Knight had been so battered that very little of it remained, and he himself was out of breath and drained of strength, and had lost much blood, for he was wounded in many places. He had wounded and maimed his foes as well, of course, but they could all flee to the castle for safety and be relieved by others, fresh and ready. The White Knight saw that he could not succeed this way, and it irked him that the great honor he looked forward to was taking so long to win. So he threw down the bit of shield he had left and seized the one brought by the squire. [327] And then he felt his strength double, and he became so quick and agile that he was no longer aware of any hurt or injury. With no delay he attacked the remaining castle knights, striking to the right and to the left and accomplishing such extraordinary deeds that everyone watching was amazed. He battered their helmets and tore up their shields; he ripped open the shoulders and sleeves of their coats of mail. And they struck back and wounded him badly, for as soon as one could stand no more, another came to take his place, and this was very damaging to him. Yet he fought on like that until the hour of tierce had passed, and he was covered with wounds large and small. At that point the young lady who had led him up to the gate approached together with the squire, who was now Lancelot, Part I bearing the shield with two bands. The knight had just driven his opponents off and they were heading up the castle mound toward the gate, to reach their relief. And the people atop the castle wall had been watching as the young knight chased his foes all by himself, and they were all amazed and prayed that God let him carry through to the end. The defenders managed to turn aside from his blows enough to reach the gate, and then they would attack again and their relief would keep coming, which meant that he was unable to bring the battle to an end. Just then, the young woman stopped his horse and, removing his shield, replaced it with the two-banded one. The knights watching wondered why she did so and would have liked him not to come back to the fray, since they were ashamed to be so pressed and harried by a single opponent. [328] But he did come back and in no time so cowed them that not one dared stand up to his blows, but even the boldest turned aside, and there was soon no castle defender who had not had a taste of his strength. And they all said that they had never seen such a formidable fighter. But more dumbfounded than anyone else was the lord of the castle, who was watching the battle from atop the wall. He was grieved and furious not be in the battle himself, but according to the rules of the castle he had no right to be on the field unless all the other fighters had been overcome. He also trembled to think of the woeful defeat to which he had never believed a single knight could bring him. The White Knight hammered away at his foes, and they saw to their shame that they could not hold out against him, however they spelled one another. He pressed. them so hard that those in combat were too worn out to go back to the wicket gate and those inside too weary to come back out. In a short while he had so exerted himself” that five of them were down for good, two killed and three dying of their wounds, apart from the two who had been killed at the very start. When he saw that only three were left, he felt very confident. He attacked them fiercely, and they gave ground, zigzagging away as best they could. Then the tallest and most powerful of the three, the most robust, [329] came back and said that he would not let himself be killed, that more valorous men than he had already lost their lives. So he held out his sword and acknowledged himself a prisoner. Seeing that, the other two did likewise. At that point the White Knight heard a great grinding noise. He looked up and saw that the gate was opening; and he was overjoyed, as he had not been sure he would ever see that and it was already close to the hour of nones. He rode up the hill and saw through the gate ten more knights massed on the other side. Then he was stopped by the young lady who had brought him the shields. With her own hands she unlaced his helmet, as it was no longer in good shape and, handing it to her squire, took the handsome replacement he was holding and laced it on the knight’s head. Then she 7“exerted himself” for s’est vistoiés, as in Micha and Sommer 151. Kennedy 192, reading the ms. letters differently, has s’est justoiez, which gives “acquitted himself in battle” or “dealt out justice /punishment.” The context seems to warrant either reading. 79 removed his shield and gave him the three-banded shield instead. He said, “No, my lady, you are putting me to shame by making me win with outside help. Even the shield you have just taken away was too much.” “It doesn’t matter,” she said. “I want the second gate to be won more fiercely and brilliantly than the first.”® Then the squire handed him a lance whose shaft was wonderfully strong and whose point was as sharp as a razor, and the young lady said that she wanted to see his skill with a lance, for she already knew quite well how he [330] could wield a sword. The knight took the lance and went through the gate, and the young lady told him to look up over the inner gate. He looked up and saw the large enchanted copper knight; and as soon as he had seen it, it tumbled from its great height and in the fall hit one of the knights standing below; it broke his neck and knocked him down dead from his horse. But the White Knight was not to be taken aback by anything. He charged at the whole troop and struck the first man he could reach so forcefully that he threw him down dead. At the sight of the two dead bodies and the shattered copper statue, the others lost all their confidence; they jumped off their horses and crowded back toward the wicket gate as fast as they could. The White Knight jumped down and, with sword drawn, stabbed and slashed at whomever he could hit, and he forced the last three, who could not make it through the wicket in time, to acknowledge themselves his prisoners. Then he set off after the five who had gone through, but he did not catch any of them. Instead he came upon a crowd of ladies and maidens and townspeople who greeted him with great joy and said, “Sir knight, you have no need to do more than you have done, now that they have yielded the gate to you.” Thereupon a young lady brought up the keys, and the gate was at once unlocked for him. But she let out a great shriek that caught the knight by surprise. He asked those around him whether the Adventure of the Castle called for anything further, [331] and the townsmen, eager to be freed, answered that he still had to do battle with the lord of the castle before he took off his helmet or any part of his armor. “I am very glad to hear that,” he said. “Where can I find him?” “Sir,” said a squire of the castle lord who was standing there, “you have just missed my lord. He is riding away as fast as his horse can carry him, so overcome with grief that he nearly killed himself.” This news left the people of the castle sorely disappointed. They took the knight into an extraordinary graveyard? which lay between!® the walls, and he was 8The young lady’s reply, missing from a number of manuscripts, does not figure in Micha’s edited text or in Sommer 151, but does occur in Kennedy 193. °For the cemetery in Chrétien de Troyes, see Lancelot, Il. 1829-1954. 10“between” as in Micha variants, Kennedy 194, and Lecoy 379. Micha and Sommer 152 have “outside.” For our preference, see the way in which Gawain is introduced into the cemetery in 8&0 indeed surprised by what he saw. It was enclosed on all sides by closely batthemented walls, and on many of the crenels rested a helmeted knight’s head, and at each of these there was a gravestone with words on it that said, HERE LIES SO-AND-SO AND UP THERE IS HIS HEAD. But at the crenels where there was no head the stones spelled out, HERE WILL LIE SOAND-SO, And there followed the name of many a fine knight from King Arthur’s land and elsewhere, the finest knights known. In the middle of the graveyard lay a large slab of metal extraordinarily crafted in gold and stones and enamels, which bore words that said, THIS SLAB WILL NEVER BE RAISED BY HAND OR STRENGTH OF MAN, SAVE BY THE ONE WHO WILL WIN THIS WOEFUL CASTLE AND WHOSE NAME IS ENGRAVED UNDERNEATH. Many people, by force or with some machine, had tried to raise that slab [332] in order to learn the name of the good knight; but the lord of the castle had put the greatest effort into it, in order to learn the name and try to have the man killed. The knight, still fully armed, was led up to the slab, and he was shown the inscription, which thanks to his schooling he could easily read. When he had read it, he looked up and down the slab and saw that, even if it lay unencumbered in an open space, four of the strongest knights in the world would have more than enough trouble raising it from the shorter of the two ends. He then grasped the longer and swung the slab upward about a foot above his head.!! Then he saw the words that said, HERE WILL LIE LANCELOT OF THE LAKE, SON OF KING BAN OF BENOIC. He let the slab down again, knowing that it was his own name that he had just seen. He looked up at the damsel whom his Lady had sent, who had just seen the name as clearly as he had. “What did you see?” she said. “Nothing,” he said. “No, it was something,” she said. “Tell me what it was.” “Don’t, please!” he said. “Do, please!” she answered. “I saw just what you saw.” And she whispered it in his ear, which upset him and made him beg her to say nothing about it to anyone. “I won’t,” she said. “Have no fear.” \ With that, the people took him off to the great hall of the castle, one of the most beautiful in the world although it was small, and [333] they relieved him of his armor and rejoiced over him. The great hall was the seat of the lord of the castle and was splendid with all the things that belonged in the court of a powerful, highborn man, That is how the White Knight won the Dolorous Guard. The young lady stayed with him, making him remain there for a while so his many wounds and injuries could heal. But the people of the castle were very sorry that their previous lord had escaped. If he had been caught, he would have revealed all the secrets of the place; but now the people were afraid they would never be known, since they doubted that they could keep their new lord at home for chapter 25 and the reference to the “graveyard, just past the first gate” at the beginning of chapter 26. The meaning of these two sentences describing the slab is not entirely clear in the original. Lancelot, Part I forty days. If he stayed, then all the spells and all the strange happenings by day and night would come to an end; the fact was, no one ate or drank in safety, nor went to bed or rose. Thus the town was both glad and sorry, yet they welcomed their new lord with all the joy that was due. But here the story stops speaking of him and takes another path instead, as you will hear. 25. Gawain and Nine Other Knights Go to the Dolorous Guard.’ One of the people present when the White Knight captured the Dolorous Guard and raised the slab was a young man of noble family, very quick and skilled at arms, who was the brother of a knight at King Arthur’s court; the name of the knight was Aglin of the Vales. The young man realized that, if the news were brought to court, it would be greeted with delight, because no one thought that such things could be done. He saddled a good [334] fast horse and left the castle between the hour of nones and vespers; he would carry the news to court as one who had seen everything the White Knight had done that day and the evening before and could tell what arms he had borne. That night he went as far as he could before stopping and rose very early the next morning. He continued on his way like that until, on the third day, he reached Caerleon. But the day before getting there, he met Alibon, the son of the vavasor of the Queen’s Ford. Alibon asked him, “Young man, where are you going so fast? Is it something urgent?” “Yes,” he said. “I am going to King Arthur’s court, and I have startling news.” “What is it?” said the knight. “The Dolorous Guard has been captured,” he answered. “That’s a lie!” said Alibon. “It can’t be true!” “But it is,” said the young man. “With my own eyes I saw a knight make his way through both gates and overcome all the castle defenders.” “What were his arms like?” asked the knight. “He bore white arms,” said the young man, “and rode a white horse.” “Now go take your news to court, young man,” said Alibon. “You will find a lot of people very glad to hear it!” The youth came to court and, as soon as he saw King Arthur, said to him, “Greetings to you, King Arthur! I bring you the most startling news that has ever reached your house.” “Tell me, good sir,” said the king. “Startling news is good to hear.” “Well, then,” said the young man, “the Dolorous Guard has been captured. By force of arms a knight made his way through both gates.” “It can’t be true!” everyone cried. “It is!” said the youth. “With my own eyes I saw the knight go in and saw him defeat the castle defenders.” y 'Corresponds to Micha VII:XXVa; Sommer III:153-156; Kennedy 195-199. Lancelot, Part I “Young man,” said the king, “don’t say it if it isn’t true. “My lord,” he said, “hang me if I am lying to youl” [335] At that point his brother Aglin walked in, coming from his quarters. Seeing his brother on his knees before the king, he said, “Welcome, dear brother! What brings you to court?” The young man leapt up and told him the news. - “What’s this?” said the king. “Aglin, is this your brother?” “Yes, my lord,” he said, “indeed he is.” “Then we can believe him,” said the king. “He would never lie!” “I swear,” said Aglin, “he would never dare lie. But what happened is so extraordinary that, not having seen it, I too would normally have to doubt it.” Then they asked the youth what arms the knight bore, and he said white arms, and he rode a white horse. That made Sir Gawain say that it was surely the New Knight. Then a great many of the knights said that they would go see whether it was true, and they began to gather their arms; but Sir Gawain said that it was not good for so many to go and that there should not be more than ten. Everyone agreed to this, including the king, and the king decided which ten would go. It was Sir Gawain first of all, then Sir Yvain and Galegantin the Welshman; the fourth was Galesconde; the fifth, Tors the son of Ares; the sixth, Carados Shortarm; Yvain the Bastard was the seventh; Gosenain [336] of Estrangort, the eighth; the Gay Gallant, the ninth; and the tenth was Aglin of the Vales. Sir Gawain left Caerleon with his companions and spent the first night out with a hermit who had belonged to King Arthur’s household in his early days as king. The hermit treated them very well because they were from King Arthur’s court. After their meal, the hermit said to Sir Gawain, “My lord, where are you going?” And Sir Gawain said, “To the Dolorous Guard.” “My lord,” he answered, “what are you seeking there?” “We have been told,” said Sir Gawain, “that some knight has won it by force of arms.” “That can’t be true,” said the hermit. “But it is!” the young man broke in. “I saw it with my own eyes.” “T tell you,” he answered, “that no one in the world can enter that place until it has fallen to one particular man: the son of the king who died of sorrow. That’s what the elders say.” That night they stayed with the hermit and in the morning, after Mass, they set out again and rode for three days. On the fourth day, at about the hour of tierce, they came across a man who was wearing a blue cloak and riding a mule. Sir Gawain greeted him and said, “Good sir, what manner of man are you?” “My lord,” he answered, “I am now a monk.” “Can you read and write?” said Sir Gawain. “Thank God, sir, I can,” he said. “And do you know the way to the Dolorous Guard?” “Very well, my lord. Why do you ask?” “Because you must come with us,” he answered. &1 “Come with you, sir?” he said. “And who are you?” “Iam a knight,” he said. “And what is your [337] name?” “My lord,” he said, “my name is Gawain.” “Ah, my lord,” he said, “are you! With you I’ll go gladly, though I don’t know what you are seeking there.” “We have been told,” said Sir Gawain, “that some knight has captured the place.” “Well,” said the man who could read and write, “I’ve not heard about it, but it’s a hard thing to believe.” Thereupon they went on their way to the fortress and climbed up to the first gate, which they found open. They went in but found the next gate closed. Seeing a man standing above the gate, Sir Gawain said to him, “Good sir, may we come in?” He said no, but “tell me who you are.” “I am Gawain,” he answered, “the nephew of King Arthur, and these men are knights of the Round Table.” “My lord,” said the man, “go to the town down below to find shelter for the night, and come back here tomorrow morning.” They went down to find shelter in the town, while the news was carried to the White Knight that Sir Gawain had come to the gate along with nine other knights; he forbade that the gate be opened to anyone either that night or the next day. Meanwhile, the people of the castle, who would have very much liked to see King Arthur come with all his warriors in order to put an end to the evil customs, went to the graveyard and carved an inscription on each of the tombstones that had never had one, and at each adjoining crenel they set down a helmet. [338] In the morning, Sir Gawain came back with his company of knights and found the gate just as closed as it had been the evening before. He asked the man posted above the gate whether he might enter. “No, my lord,” he answered, “but if you have anyone with you who can read and write, tell me so.” The answer was yes. “Then I'll be right with you,” he said. The watchman came down from the ramparts, went into the graveyard by the side door, and opened the little gate for Sir Gawain, who went in. The hermit began to read the words on the gravestones and found on the first: HERE LIES SO-AND-SO AND UP THERE IS HIS HEAD; and that is what he found in a number of places, along with the names of many knights of the household and land of King Arthur. When Sir Gawain thus heard that they were dead, he broke into bitter tears, for he believed, and his companions did, too, that the words were true; and in some cases they were, but in others the words were lies that had been engraved only the night before. After they had wept at length, the man who could read came to yet another grave, at the end of the row. He looked at the words and began to weep bitter tears as soon as he had read them. Sir Gawain asked him what was wrong. “What, my lord?” he said. “A great sorrow.” “What sorrowe” he said. “Tell us.” “This is the grave,” he answered, “of the great wonder.” 8&2 “Whom do you mean?” the knights said.” “The best of the good,” he said; “the man who captured this fortress.” When the knights heard this, they clapped their palms together and grieved out loud and said [339] to one another, “Dear God, who can that be?” And they all said it could only be the new knight whom the king had dubbed on the Feast of Saint John, since “this young man,” they said, “saw him enter this place. And now, as you see, they have slain him.” They cried out their grief, and my lords Gawain and Wain* were more overcome with grief that the rest. They lamented him very softly and said that they had never seen a man start out with so much promise; and had he lived, his prowess would have been a thing of wonder. After they had stood there a long while, they went out of the graveyard and came back to the castle gate; it was still closed, but they found the door to the garden open. They went in and came to the porch of a splendid house and they saw a very beautiful young lady there, weeping and sobbing; she was really very beautiful, they thought. Sir Gawain asked her very gently what was wrong that she was weeping so much. “Wrong?” she said. “I have every right to cry, for they’ve slain the handsomest knight in the world, the bravest ever to live, and still a young man, with no beard.” “My lady,” said Sir Gawain, “what arms did he bear?” “White,” she said, “and he rode a white horse.” At that, they all began to mourn again and said that they would never leave the place until they had learned something about what made it so odd; so they stayed there to see how things would turn out. But at this point the story leaves off speaking of them [340] and the castle and the people in it until it is time to do so once again. 26. King Arthur Goes to the Dolorous Guard but Is Denied Entry.’ When, at Sir Gawain’s behest, the words announcing the death of the White Knight were read out loud, Aglin of the Vales decided to send his brother to the king with the news. The young man wasted no time in reaching the king and speaking to him. “King Arthur,” he said, “I led your nephew and his companions to the Dolorous Guard, and there they found a graveyard, just past the first gate, where many fine knights from your land lie buried. The New Knight himself, the one who saved Nohaut and then captured the fortress, lies buried there.” At these words, the king was overcome with grief and wept bitterly, both for the New Knight and all the others. Literally, ““Who?’ they say” (Qui? font il.) as in Kennedy 199. Micha and Sommer 155 have “Who are they?” (Qui sont il?) ; Micha variants show an occurrence of “Who is he?” (Qui est il2). 3“Gawain and Wain” as in Micha variants and Kennedy 199. Micha and Sommer 155-156 have only “Yvain.” 'Corresponds to Micha VII:XXVIa; Sommer III:156~158; Kennedy 199-202. Lancelot, Part I The whole court was upset, and the king decided to go to the graveyard. He said to the queen, “My lady, gather the ladies and maidens whose company you like best, and come with me.” In the morning they set out, then traveled two days and on the third the king and his party pitched their tents and pavilions beside a stream. It was extremely hot, so in the evening he sat down on the bank with his legs in the water while four knights held a sheet of silk over his head; and he fell into brooding. At once, [341] a heavily armed knight appeared on the other side of the stream and waded into the water; and when he stood facing the king, he asked the others, “Who is this knight?” The king himself answered, “I am King Arthur.” “You are in fact the one I was seeking,” said the man. He spurred his horse and couched his lance to strike, but the water was deep and the horse had to swim. When he drew near to the king, the knights reached out and seized the lance. One wrested it from him and struck him with it so that he almost tumbled into the water, while another rushed in and seized the horse’s reins. “Watch out!” said the king. “You'll drown him like that!” So the man let go of the reins, and the knight, having heard the warning, turned around and said, “It’s true; yes, indeed!” With that, he made his way out of the stream and rode off just as he had come. This knight was the lord of the Dolorous Guard, and he was so grieved by the loss of his castle that he did not care what became of him. He had thought of killing King Arthur, believing that he had lost his castle because of him: the man known for such harsh rule over his whole land would now have to submit to the power of others. When he had boasted the day before that he would kill the king, someone answered that King Arthur had amassed so many honors and done so many good deeds [342] in his life that no man could ever overthrow him or slay him through treachery. And that is why he said “It’s true; yes, indeed!” and now thought himself a fool for having tried to kill him. That night the king slept by the stream, and the next morning he rose early, so that he had only one more day’s traveling to reach the Dolorous Guard. He rode up the hill to the outer gate but found it locked. The king was very disappointed and said to the queen and his men that he had thought to find it open. “Now I don’t know,” he said, “what has become of my nephew or his companions.” Then he asked the youth who had brought the news, “Young man, didn’t you tell me that this gate was open?” “Yes, my lord,” he said, “and it was, when I left here. Just ask that man up there.” The king glanced up above the gate and saw a man who looked like a watchman. He asked him, “Good sir, was this gate open?” “Yes, my lord,” he said. “Well, good sir, could you help us to come in?” “Who are you?” he said. “I am,” he answered, “King Arthur.” Lancelot, Part I “My lord,” he said, “you are the most valorous man in the world, and I would give you all the help I could. And who is that lady over there?” “The queen,” he said. “My lord, for you and for the queen I’ll do whatever I possibly can.” Then he went away but soon returned with a whitehaired old man, to whom the king said, “Worthy man, please allow us to come in.” “My lord,” he said, “I cannot now; but find lodgings [343] and stay there for the rest of the day, and tomorrow at the hour of prime send me a knight. If I can open the gate for him, I will do so; and if I cannot, send me another knight toward the hour of tierce; and if the gate is not open at that time, send me another around midday and then another toward the hour of nones and still another at vespers, and so on until the man comes for whom I can open the door.” “All right,” said the king, “but, in God’s name, tell me at least whether you have any news of my nephew Gawain.” “My lord,” he said, “it won’t be long before you have news of him.” Then the king rode downhill and found a place to stay in the plain below, alongside the springs that cut through the flat ground. In the morning, at the hour of prime, the king sent a knight to the gate, and he was sent back to him, but not before the worthy old man had asked him whom he served and what his name was. He came back to the king and said, “My lord, you will not enter with my help: they refuse to open the gate for me.” At the hour of tierce the king sent another man, and he was sent back; and at midday another, who was also sent back; and likewise at the hour of nones and at vespers. He went on like that for three days, sending men up only to have them sent back to him. But now the story stops speaking of the king and queen and their whole party, and goes back to Sir Gawain and his companions and the adventures that befell them once they had come to the castle. [344] 27. Gawain and His Companions Are Betrayed and Captured.’ At this point the story says that, when Sir Gawain and his companions had learned about the death of the White Knight and the king’s other knights, both from the words on the gravestones and from the young woman in the arbor, they were deeply grieved, as has been recounted. They remained where they were until evening and then rode down from the castle to find lodgings. They met a white-haired vavasor who very much seemed to be an honorable man. He asked Sir Gawain who he was. “Why do you ask?” said Sir Gawain. “My lord, I am asking only for your good; take my word for it.” 'Corresponds to Micha VII:XXVIla; Sommer III:158-160; Kennedy 202-204. 8&3 “Then I'll tell you,” he said, “since you seem to be an honorable man. I am Gawain.” Then, seeing the tears still streaming from his eyes, the vavasor asked him why he was crying; and Sir Gawain said that he was crying for the king’s knights whose graves he had seen up at the castle. “My lord,” said the other, “you mustn’t mourn so without knowing what it is all about; a worthy man like you should not be so quickly dismayed. But I would like you to know that I have come here from home for your sake, since there is no safety in this land now outside a stronghold as long as the lord of the castle remains enraged. And so I advise you to come take shelter for the night with me—in fact, for as long as you stay in these parts. Do you know where I mean? It’s a fine, strong castle, where you will have whatever a knight needs; and every morning, as long as you care to be in this place, you can come here after Mass or before or after the morning meal. I want you to know, too, that most of [345] what you’ve seen up on the hill is nothing but a lie, the effect of a spell. J will show you the truth. Pll let you see those of the king’s knights who are alive and well although the gravestones up there claim they are dead.” At these words, Sir Gawain was very happy, and he said that he would go along, as there was no place where he would not go to see all those worthy men. The vavasor went ahead, and the ten fellow-knights followed. When he was a good crossbowshot away from the Dolorous Guard, he whispered something to a son of his who was riding with him. The son raced forward, and the rest of them continued at a gentler pace, until they came within sight of a little castle that stood on an island in the Humber; it rose above a high rock, the strongest of its size that anyone knew of. When they reached the water’s edge, they were led onto a boat and they sailed to the island. There the ten knights were taken into a room for disarming, and when they were disarmed, they went climbing up and down the rocky stronghold, which was very beautiful. When they came to the middle story, they found themselves beset by over forty well-armed knights and menat-arms. They tried to back out, but the door had been shut behind their backs. They saw that [346] it was useless to resist; in fact, Sir Gawain forbade it and no one did, save Galegantin the Welshman, who threw himself upon one of the men, brought him to the floor and pulled his sword out of his hand, then fought until he was wounded and almost killed. Then Sir Gawain himself ran up to shield him, and he had his hands tied behind his back, as did all the others. Gosenain of Estrangort, who was very brave and outspoken, said that, so help him God, Galegantin wasn’t wrong if he was readier to die than be taken prisoner, for “I’ve never seen such outrageous treachery,” he said; “we were being offered a place to stay, and here we are, trapped and bound before we’ve even had anything to eat or drink!” Thereupon they were taken downstairs. Yvain the Bastard saw the vavasor who had brought them here, who was hurrying the cooking along in the kitchen, and he said to him, “You son of a whore! You traitor! You promised us a place to stay!” “Sir knight,” he answered, “I gave you no word that I am not keeping. You will be staying in one of the best 84 strongholds in all of Britain, and you will soon be put with those companions of yours whom I promised to show you.” “Damn anyone who seeks other lodgings,” said Gosenain, “for these men are as good as brought back to life!” That was the end of that, except that Galegantin could not forget that he had been wounded and how angry it had made him, and now he hardly cared what they might do to him. He was afraid of dying in prison, but as long as he was alive he would gladly try to avenge himself. Then he turned toward the vavasor, whom Yvain had just accused of betrayal, and as the man stood there in front of [347] the others, right near the fireplace, he rushed at him and gave him a kick that sent him sprawling into the burning coals; and if Galegantin’s hands had not been bound, the vavasor would have been burned to a crisp before he could ever get up again. In the din that followed, they came at Galegantin with axes and swords, and if not for their lord, they would have killed him. Then the knights were all taken down to an underground strongroom fitted with iron doors and thickly walled with stone blocks that were held together by iron and lead. In that prison were King Yder and Guivret of Lambale and Yvain of Lionel, Cadowain of Carmurain and Kehedin the Small and Kay of Estral, Girflet the son of Doon and Dodinel the Wildman, Duke Taullas and Mador of the Gate and Loholt, the son whom King Arthur had begot with the beautiful damsel Lisanor before marrying the queen and who became sick to death in this place; and together with them was Gaheris of Carahew; they were all captives together. At the sight of them, Sir Gawain and his companions were overjoyed, because they had been lost for a long time. For their part, the prisoners were both happy and sad to see the others brought in, happy because they had lost hope of ever seeing them again and sad because they too were now in this wretched prison. But at this point [348] the story stops speaking of them and goes back to the Captor of the castle. 28. Lancelot, Entranced by Guenevere, Neglects to Admit Her to the Dolorous Guard and Then Leaves the Castle Himself.’ After Sir Gawain and his companions had been seized, it took a while for the new master of the Dolorous Guard to hear about it; and when he did, he was overcome with grief as never before. One day, he was at table in a high turret in the middle of the palace and was eating so splendidly that anyone seeing the servers and the vessels would have been struck with wonder. As he was thus eating, a youth came in who was weeping softly. The damsel from the Lake, who was eating with the White Knight, asked him what was wrong. “My lady,” he said, “I was deeply moved, more than ever before, by a young lady on the road below the Corresponds to Micha VH:XXVIIla; Sommer III:160-163; Kennedy 204-209. Lancelot, Part I stronghold; she was mourning so bitterly that nothing could be worse.” “Did she say why?” said the knight. “She was grieving,” he answered, “for Sir Gawain and Sir Yvain and I don’t know how many other knights.” “Which way was she going?” said the knight. “She was heading toward Wales, my lord,” he said. “Ah, Sir Yvain!” exclaimed the knight. “You were such a good tutor for me and such a good companion, and did whatever I wanted! And to Sir Gawain I owe the first favor I asked of my lord the king: he said that he believed I would carry out the task very well. You were both there for me; now, so help me God, I will never rest until I know where you are!” With that, he jumped up from the table and ordered his arms brought. They were brought in, and he [349] armed himself from head to foot. The young lady asked him where he was going. “I am going after that young woman,” he said, “to find out where Sir Gawain and his party are.” “Tl come with you, to hear what’s going on.” “No,” he said, “you mustn’t come; just stay right here until I come back. In fact, I beg you, by the faith you owe my Lady, not to leave this place until you see me back, which will be very soon.” She agreed, and he went off in search of the young woman who was weeping for Sir Gawain. He rode until he caught up with her at the edge of the woods. He asked her to please give him news of Sir Gawain. “I can tell you that the news could hardly be worse, for he and his nine fellow-knights are being held by the man who used to be lord of the Dolorous Guard.” “My lady,” he said, “since you’ve told me that much, tell me too where their prison is.” She looked at him and said, “Take off your helmet, so that I can see you.” He took it off, and she ran up to him with open arms. He recognized her as a messenger from the Lady of the Lake, and he greeted her very warmly. She told him that her lady had sent her to him because of something that she had forgotten to tell the young lady who had been sent to him earlier, “but I was told,” she said, “in that place where Sir Gawain is locked up, that you lay dead at the Dolorous Guard. And that’s why I didn’t want to go in: I couldn’t bear to see the place.” “What was the message,” he asked, “that my Lady had forgotten to send me?” “It was,” she said, “that you should give your heart to a love that will turn you not into an idle knight but a finer one, for [350] a heart that becomes idle through love loses its daring and therefore cannot attain high things. But he who always strives to better himself and dares to be challenged can attain all high things.” He answered, “But Sir Gawain, my dear—where is he being held?” “T’ll take you there,” she said. Then they both turned back and went to a thicket which looked out toward the island where Sir Gawain was. The young woman spoke to him. “Here,” she said, “you can lie in ambush, and no one will ever come out of there without our seeing him, but we can’t be seen.” Lancelot, Part I He listened to her; and when they had waited quite some time, they saw some fifteen knights, all armed, ride out and take a boat across the river and then start down the road to the Dolorous Guard. The knight let them come quite close, then rushed out toward them as fast as his horse could go; and he was protecting himself with his three-banded shield, for the young lady waiting in the castle had made him carry no other. But when they saw him, there was no one bold enough to face him, the lord of the Dolorous Guard least of all! He and the others, who all served him, ran back to the shore but they did not have time to get into the boat before their pursuer was upon them. The first man he could reach he killed with his spear; then he drew his sword and attacked the others. He struck down four of them, either killing or maiming them, and the rest managed to cross the river to safety on the island. [351] And so escaped the lord of the Dolorous Guard, Brandin of the Isles, as he was known. As for the knight, he came back to the castle bitterly disappointed and went in through a hidden gate. The next day was the fourth since the king had reached the Dolorous Guard, and at the hour of prime, as had been agreed, he sent a knight up to the castle; but there was no one who would dare open the door to him without an order from the White Knight. The man came back to the king and told him what had happened, and the king was very upset. He sat down at the edge of a brook and fell into a deep brooding that went on even as the hour of tierce was passing. His knights said to the queen, “My lady, the hour of tierce is passing, and the king has not yet sent anyone up to the castle gate. What shall we do?” “Really,” she said, “I don’t know. I would not dare to send anyone up there without his orders, and he is too caught up in his own thoughts.” Meanwhile, the Captor of the castle had gone back out through the hidden gate in order to have a view of the king’s army, and he had ordered the gatekeeper to let in anyone the king might send at tierce, but to let no one out. But there were many castle-dwellers looking out from the walls who would very much have liked the woeful ways of the place to come to an end. The gatekeeper, who did not dare utter a word or let anyone out, signaled to the old man? that he should call King Arthur. He called out, “King Arthur, it’s time! It’s time!” And everyone else picked up the cry, [352] so that the whole valley echoed with it. When the queen and the knights heard the shout, they rode up to the gate, and they were very worried about the king, who was still caught up in his brooding. At that point the new master of the castle appeared before them, bearing the silver shield with the red band. He had come up to the door in a great hurry and, at the sight of the queen, he said, “God bless you, my lady!” And she sounded overwhelmed as she returned the greeting. “My lady,” he answered, “would you like to come in?” “Yes, of course,” she said, “very gladly.” *This is no doubt the old man last mentioned in chapter 26. 85 “By God, then,” he said, “for you the gate will be opened!” “Thank you very much, my lord,” she said. The knight called out to the watchman right away and said, “Open the door!” “Gladly, my lord!” he answered. He opened the gate, and the knight went in. But the knight was so overcome by the presence of the queen that he utterly forgot himself and could think of nothing but seeing her, and so he ran up to a spot above the gate and from there gazed down at her. The gate itself was slammed shut again as soon as he had gone in, and the thud was so loud that it startled the king out of his brooding. He asked what had been going on, and there was no dearth of people to tell him. Then he told Kay the Seneschal to go find out whether he could enter the castle. He went and got as far as the queen, who was more than ready to turn back as she believed the knight had made a fool of her; and she told Kay what had just happened. Then Kay glanced up and saw the knight standing above the gate; he said, “Well, sir knight! That was a nasty thing to do, to make a fool of my lady!” But [353] the knight did not hear him. At that moment, he was joined by the young woman who had led him to the Dolorous Prison, which was the name of the castle where Sir Gawain was held captive. When she heard Kay’s rebuke, she nudged him and said, “Don’t you hear how this knight is rebuking you?” “Which knight?” he answered. And she pointed him out. “My lord,” he shouted, “what are you saying?” “I am saying,” answered Kay, “that you must take my lady and me for idiots, since you don’t deign to open the gate for her even though you said you would, and you don’t deign to speak to me!” “Who are you?” said the knight. “I am Kay the Seneschal,” he answered. Then the knight took a good look and saw that the queen was hurt and was starting away. He was so pained that he almost went out of his mind, because it was clear to him that she was upset. He went over to the watchman and said, “Didn’t I order you to let my lady the queen come in?” “You didn’t say anything about her,” he answered. And the knight put his hand to his sword and swore mightily. “You can be sure,” he said, “that if you were not so old, I would cut your head right off for such folly; and I’d cut off my own for being deaf, if there were nothing to stop me! Now open up fast and take care that the gate not be closed again!” Thereupon his horse was brought to him and sadly, pensively, he mounted it. He rode back to the hidden gate and went out; and the young woman, asking him where he was going, could not get him to say more than that he would be back. “And be sure,” he said, “not to follow even one step after me.” [354] She left him at that point, and the watchman opened the gate. Meanwhile, the news had reached the king, who hurried to the castle and rode in with the queen and all the others behind them; but there was no order, and everyone 86 pushed through the gate as well as he could. When they were inside, they found the second gate shut. So they went into the graveyard, and the king ordered his readers to read the inscriptions. They began to read, naming many knights of the king’s household and many from elsewhere, and they went on until they came to a gravestone which bore the name of Sir Gawain and said, HERE LIES SiR GAWAIN AND UP THERE IS HIS HEAD. And other stones said the same of all the knights that Gawain had brought with him. When the king heard their names read out, he almost went out of his mind with grief, as did the queen and all the others. After mourning a long while, the king asked the watchman atop the wall if that first gate would ever be closed to them again, and he said no. “And what of the inner gate?” asked the king. “How can we get through it?” “My lord,” he said, “send someone up just as you have done these past four days.” In the evening the king and his party went back to their tents, and that night they were all so overcome with sorrow [355] that no one ate or drank. But now the story speaks again about the White Knight, just as he left the castle when the door had been barred to the queen. 29. The White Knight Triumphs over the Captor of Gawain and His Companions, Then Admits Arthur and Guenevere to the Dolorous Guard but Once Again Leaves the Castle Himself.’ At this point the story says that the White Knight rode along downcast and brooding because he had upset the queen, for since the day of his knighting he had loved her with a love greater than he had for anyone else, even himself. Because he now feared her lasting dislike, he made up his mind that he would fight whatever battle was needed to free Sir Gawain, or would die in the attempt; in this way, if he could do it, he hoped to win the love of his lady. Downcast and brooding, then, he rode straight toward the Dolorous Prison, and it must have been after midday when he took up his post again in the thicket. He stayed there until it grew dark. Then he noticed a hermit riding along on a large mule. The hermit came into the woods, quite close to where he was waiting, and he was chanting from his psalter as he rode toward his hermitage, which was nearby. The hermit was very old and had been a knight, one of the handsomest in the world. He had turned to religion in his prime, when he had lost within one year all twelve of his sons. When he came into the woods, the White Knight came up to him and asked him where he was coming from. The hermit stopped chanting and answered very softly that he was coming from the small castle over there. “My lord,” said the knight, “what were you doing there?” 'Corresponds to Micha VII:XXIXa; Sommer III:163-169; Kennedy 209-218. Lancelot, Part I And the good man began to speak. “The fact is, my lord,” he said, [356] “I had hurried over there to see about two very sick knights.” Then he showed him the chalice that he was carrying under his cloak. The knight asked him who the two men were, and he said that they were from the house of King Arthur, one named Galegantin the Welshman, who was suffering because of what had been done to him in prison, and the other named Loholt, the son of King Arthur, who was sick with an illness he had caught there. The White Knight began to weep and sigh, and he asked about Sir Gawain and Sir Yvain, his cousin. The hermit said that he had seen them and they were sound and healthy. “But you, my lord,” he went on, “who are you?” “My lord,” he said, “I am a knight in search of adventure.” “Ah!” said the hermit, “I think I know who you are: you are the Captor of the Dolorous Guard. What are you waiting for here?” The knight answered that he would very gladly make an effort to free the king’s knights, if he could. “If you are willing to trust me,” said the hermit, “I’ll give you useful help.” The knight said that he would trust him. “Well, then,” said the hermit, “when I was on my way up just now, I overheard two squires so engrossed in speaking about their riding gear that they paid me no heed. One was telling the other that he’d be starting up early in the night to go attack King Arthur while it was still dark. I know, besides, that the man who used to own the Dolorous Guard [357] hates the king more than anyone else save you, for he is afraid he will use force to put an end to the perilous ways of the castle; and he believes that’s why the king has come here. And so I would advise you to warn my lord the king about this plan, as they might all be captured that way. And if you don’t warn him, then I will.” The knight said that he would warn him, “but first,” he said, “I want to see your hermitage.” “Gladly,” said the good man. The old man went ahead and the knight followed. When they reached the hermitage, the knight saw that it was well placed, set atop a high mound and closed all around with high paling and ringed by a deep ditch of the Welsh kind; and the outside hedge was tall and thick. The knight then took leave of the hermit, saying that he would warn the king about his enemies. “Good sir,” said the hermit, “if you need us, don’t hesitate to come here,” and the other answered that he would come. With that, he left and went back to the spot where he had met the hermit, and he waited there a long while. Night came on, and he decided that, no, he would not warn the king, because he was sure that he could deal with the situation all by himself; and so he stayed where he was until quite some time into the night. Then the moon began to rise, and the men in the castle rose and made ready, then rode out and crossed the river. [358] He let them all ride past and then followed them from afar until they were near the Dolorous Guard. They took cover in the shadow of the castle hill and rode very carefully so as not to be noticed; Lancelot, Part I and the men of the army would have remained unaware of them until they had struck. When they were within spurring distance, they dismounted and tightened their horses’ girth, then mounted again and started forward to attack the army. But the knight was close behind them, and he had a strong, swift horse and held a short, thick-shafted lance with a sharp head; moreover, he was brave, for his plan was to rout the men in front of him; and there were one hundred fifty of them! He galloped toward them, shouting fiercely, and they, thinking they were betrayed, were so shocked that not one of them could see to defending himself. The knight hit his first man with such force that he fell down dead. He left the lance in the body and drew his sword, and he struck right and left, hacking at those he could reach and who dared to come near him; but they did not tarry, because the army had been alerted by his shouting. The watchmen, who had seen the fighting, began to shout “To arms!” and the would-be attackers dashed back to the road below the castle. But the White Knight was on their heels, dealing them heavy blows, ripping apart their shields and their helmets, tearing the mail from their arms and their shoulders. He crashed into them, he and his horse as one, and flung them to the ground, and he caught them by the rims of their shields and by their collars and their helmets. [359] So he had his way with them, and they were so overwhelmed by his exploits that they thought King Arthur’s whole army was after them. Soon they came up to the gate of the castle, and the watchman on the wall began to shout “To arms! To arms!” Their pursuer then picked out the man who seemed the most important of them all and was wearing the most dashing armor; it seemed to him that he was the master of all the others, and so he was. The knight came up to him and gave him such a blow on the helmet with his sword that he was utterly stunned and could only hang onto his horse’s neck with both arms. At that moment, King Arthur’s troops came crowding along; at the sound of them, the others spurred their mounts and fled as fast as the horses could carry them. But the man whom the White Knight had struck was still dazed, and his horse was racing away with him toward the Humber, which flowed on the other side of the castle. The White Knight, who did not want to give him up, went after him; reaching him, he found that he was too dazed to see anything. The White Knight seized him by the collar and flung him down to the ground, then trampled on him until his whole body was broken. Then he dismounted, pulled his helmet off, and threatened to cut off his head, but the man had fainted and could not answer. The knight thought that he was dead; and [360] he was deeply pained, for now he was quite sure that Sir Gawain and the others were lost forever. The man lay senseless a long while, and the White Knight was sorely pained; he shed bitter tears and said that he would never again trample on a knight unless he wanted to kill him, for he was quite sure that this one was crushed to death. After a long while, he came to and started moaning loudly. The White Knight pretended not to care and even said that he would cut off his head; he flipped open his 87 ventail and raised his sword. The man was badly wounded and cried for mercy; he recognized the knight by the shield he was carrying, which was the one with a single band. “Noble knight,” he said, “don’t kill me if you have any love at all for King Arthur! You would be mad to do it!” “Then swear to accept imprisonment wherever I say.” “Gladly,” he said; “anywhere at all, except in the castle within these walls! Nothing could make me go in there!” “But you willl” he said. “I am going to take you in by force.” “To do that,” said the other, “you'll have to kill me first, for I am never going in there alive! And don’t you know what you'll be losing? You'll be losing Sir Gawain and twenty-two other knights of King Arthur’s. But if you put me into some other prison, I’ll hand them all over to you tomorrow before nightfall, because it is clear to me that you are the finest knight in the world and destined for the greatest adventures.” At these words, the White Knight felt a greater joy than he had ever felt. He said that if the other were really to do as he said, he would not force him into the castle. The man then gave him his word and surrendered his sword. “My lord,” he said, “where will you hold me [361] prisoner?” “At a hermitage,” he said, “which is near these woods. And you yourself will point the way.” The man said he would gladly and it would be the right way. The White Knight had him mount behind him, which took a great effort, as he was badly wounded. Then the two of them set out along the way to the hermitage. At this point King Arthur’s men were coming back from their pursuit, which had turned out fruitless, as those they had been pursuing had all vanished into the forest. The king had gone to meet them, and they were riding back together. Now, the White Knight had just come into the field where the fight had taken place, and had picked up a lance that one of the fleeing knights had dropped. He noticed the king and his companions, and the king saw him and the other man as well. “Ah, my lord,” said the captive knight, “those are the king’s men over there! No way do I want to fall into his prison! Make sure that I remain in your hands, for I made my promise to you.” “Don’t be afraid,” said the other. “If the king carries you off, he’ll have to carry me off, too, or else I’ll be in such a state that I won’t even be able to help myself.” And he kept going straight ahead. But Kay rode up behind him, shouting, “Stop, sir knight! My lord the king wants to know who you arel” He did not answer, but kept riding. Kay came alongside and said, “Sir knight, you are arrogant, [362] not deigning to speak to me!” “What do you want?” he answered. “I want to know who you are.” “Tam a knight,” he said. 2“And you yourself will point the way” as in Kennedy 212. Micha and Sommer 166 have “and you shall take me there with you. 88 “And the man behind you is a prisoner?” “Yes,” he said. “What is it to you?” Then Kay realized that he was speaking to the man who had ordered the castle gate opened. “Well!” said Kay; “you’re the one who kept my lady waiting at the gate, and this knight you have here tried to kill my lord the king the other day. I recognize him by his arms.” The knight did not answer, but kept riding ahead. Kay became angry and said, “Sir knight, this man is an enemy of the king, and I am bound to the king by an oath. I would be forsworn if I allowed you to take him away like this. Give him to me, and I will hand him over to the king!” “No one has come along,” he said, “who can force me to give him up.” “Tcant” said Kay. At that, he made a move to seize the captive knight, but the other said that if he laid a hand on him, he would hack it right off. “All right,” said Kay; “then put him down, and whoever can win him by force will carry him off.” “So help me God,” he answered, “I am not setting him down for you!” Thereupon Kay rode off, then came galloping back. In the moonlight, the White Knight took aim and, when Kay broke his lance, struck him from below the front saddlebow and ran head and shaft right through his left thigh, and thus threw him forward in the saddle. He rushed at him and hurled him to the ground, and his lance broke in the fall. The White Knight said, [363] “Sir Kay, now you can understand that the lady of Nohaut would not have been cheated, had I undertaken her battle all by myself. e With that, he left; and the king and his men came to where Kay lay senseless and carried him to the tents on his shield. The White Knight, meanwhile, started into the woods and rode until he reached the hermitage. The captive knight called out, and the hermit opened the gate. When they had dismounted, the White Knight asked to have the chapel opened, and there he told the hermit about their agreement and made the captive knight swear that he would be true to his word. . “And I swear to you,” he then said, “that if I see you make a move to trick me, I will cut off your head.” After that, the captive knight sent the hermit within the hour to the Dolorous Prison to bring back his seneschal; but first the White Knight made him swear on the Gospels that he would behave in good faith. Then the hermit mounted his mule and went to the stronghold; and with the tokens of good faith that he had brought along, he persuaded the seneschal to return all alone with him. The seneschal came, then, and his lord told him, with the White Knight as witness, to bring back Sir Gawain and all the other companions of the king and to see that they all came armed. After that, he had the seneschal swear to obey. The seneschal left at that point (it was already broad daylight) and did as he had been ordered; and it was past the hour of prime when the knights arrived. The 3For Lancelot’s readiness to be the lady’s sole champion, see chapter 23. Lancelot, Part I seneschal’s lord [364] said to him, “How did you get these knights to follow you here?” “They promised me,” he said, “that they would not go their own way except by your leave.” “My lords,” the captive knight said to them, “I order you, in accord with your promise, to do whatever this knight here orders you to do. You are now in his hands and no. longer my prisoners.” Meanwhile, the White Knight had been standing there with his head bowed, lest they recognize him. (Yet he was fully armed, even wearing his helmet!) Then all the knights agreed to be his prisoners, and the other released them from their promise and departed. The hermit said to the White Knight, “What does this mean, my lord? Are you letting Brandin just go away? In that case, you have lost everything, since the magic spells of the Dolorous Guard can never be undone by anyone but him!” “There is nothing I can do about it,” he said. “That is what I agreed to.” And the hermit wept bitterly. Then the knight called together all the king’s companions and said, “My lords, I ask you, for both your sake and my honor, not to leave this place before you see me again, which will be either tonight or tomorrow morning.” They agreed. Thereupon he left and went to the Dolorous Guard; it was then close to the hour of tierce. At prime, the king had sent a knight to the gate, who was sent back to him. The White Knight went into the castle by the hidden gate and came to the great hall, where the two young ladies had been waiting for him. The one who had brought him the shields said to him, “Good sir, have I now been held prisoner long enough?” “Not yet, my dear. I still need to bring the matter of Sir Gawain to an end and let the king into the castle; and then you and I can go away [365] together.” Then he removed his shield from around his neck and put on the one with two bands. That done, he went to the gatekeeper and asked him whether the king had sent anyone to the gate that day. “Yes,” he said, “as early as the hour of prime.” “Now,” he said, “when he next sends someone, be sure to say that you will open to no one but Kay the Seneschal.” Then he rode out of the castle and came all around the hill to face the king’s camp. The hour of tierce was then passing, and from the castle came the shout, “It’s time! It’s time!” The king had been musing beside a brook, and when he heard the cry, he sent up a knight. But the watchman told him that he would open the gate to no one but Kay the Seneschal. The knight went down to report this to the king, and the king said that in that case he would have him carried up, as he was sick in bed because of his wound of the night before. So the king ordered that Kay be carried up to the gate, and the queen and many of the knights came to stand before the castle. The knight bearing the silver shield with two red bands stepped up to the queen; he greeted her, and she him. “My lady,” he said, “where are you going?” Lancelot, Part I “Sir knight,” she said, “I am going to the gate there, to see whether the king will be admitted.” “And you, my lady,” he said, “would you wish to come in?” “Yes, indeed,” she said. “Then you will come in,” he said. Then he went up to the gate and called to the gatekeeper, who came forward to open. The knight had eyes only for the queen as she made her way on horseback up the slope, and he thought about her so much that he fell into a daze. The gatekeeper urged him to come in, but the knight kept looking down the slope, until the gatekeeper again slammed the door shut. [366] It made a great thud, and the king, who had been deep in his thoughts beside the brook, asked what that noise could be. Meanwhile, Kay, carried on his shield by four squires, reached the gate. The watchman, looking down from above, asked him who he was, and Kay gave his name. “You may come in,” said the watchman. Thereupon he unbarred the gate, and as the king and his party came forward, the man? atop the wall said, “My lord, do you want to come in here?” The king said yes. “Then you must give your true word as king,” he went on, “that neither you nor your companions will try to force any man or woman of the castle to speak.” He gave his word. Then the gates were opened, and everyone went in; and inside they saw a very fine castle town. All the houses had balconies, either upstairs or down, and they were all crowded with ladies and maidens and knights and other people. Throughout the castle everyone was weeping, and no one was uttering a word. They were behaving like that because they wanted the king to become so puzzled and worried that he would welcome what they would at last break their silence to say, for they expected no one but the king to find a way of dealing with their anguish; and that is why he had been made to promise that neither he nor his companions would force them to speak. The king proceeded to a very large and beautiful hall, but no man or woman was there to greet him; and this, too, the people of the castle had planned. [367] It shocked the king, who said to the queen and the knights, “Now I am inside, and I still know nothing more about this place than I did outside!” “My lord,” said the queen, “we can only be patient. The knight who has shown us this much will perhaps show us more.” “My lord,” said the others, “the queen is right.” Meanwhile, the White Knight had come into the palace. He removed the two-banded shield from around his neck, picked up the three-banded shield instead, and then went out to rejoin Sir Gawain. As he rode through the streets, a cry went up all over and people shouted, “Seize him! Seize him!” The king and queen and all the others rushed out and saw that the gates were barred. 4All sources show plural “men,” but only the singular is consistent with the preceding and, especially, the following context. 89 When the White Knight saw the gates barred, he looked over to the building where the king’s party was and saw the queen standing at the front door. It seemed to him that he could not go out without speaking to her. He headed, then, toward where she was and, drawing near, he dismounted and greeted her. With that, everyone began to shout, “King, don’t let him go! Don’t let him go!” The king came up and greeted him; he returned the greeting. “These people,” said the king, “are shouting that I should not let you go.” “Send to ask them why, my lord, for I am sure I have done nothing wrong.” The king sent to find out, but the people had all moved into the other ward of the castle. [368] He said to the queen and to his companions, “I am bewildered! I don’t understand at all what’s going on here!” “My lord,” said the knight, “would you like to know?” “Yes, indeed,” he said, “very much.” And the queen said, “Sir knight, he would very much like to know.” But the knight was sorely troubled, as he was not free to reveal anything. Tears came to his eyes, and he said to the king, “My lord, please let me go away.” The king was courteous and gave him leave; and once he was in his saddle, the knight said to the queen, “And you, my lady, would you like to know what is going on here?” “Indeed, I would,” she said. But he was already beginning to move away. “Ah, sir knight,” she said, “I would very much like to know!” He answered through his tears, “I am very sorry, my lady. It hurts me to keep it all a secret, but this is not the time to say anything.” Thereupon he rode back out through the hidden gate and, spurring his horse to go as fast as it could, he reached the woods and hurried in. Meanwhile, the king’s messengers came back from asking the people why they had shouted that the king should not let the knight go. They said to him, “My lord, the people want you to know that only from that knight can you learn what is going on here:” “We've been cheated, then!” said the king. “I have let him leave.” While they were [369] speaking,° the castle gate opened and knights rode in with ladies and maidens and people bearing dinner prepared for the king. They were the people of the town, who had shouted that the king should not let the knight go, since they themselves had no right to stop him. They thought that the king had indeed detained him; and when they found out otherwise, they were greatly distressed. The king said that he was no less sorry than they were, “put I was caught unawares,” he said. That night the king and all his entourage were very well lodged. Behind the building in which he slept there was a high turret, but the wall of the castle ran between 5Micha, like Sommer 169, adds “at the gate of the castle,” but the context makes this a suspect reading. Micha variants and Kennedy 217 add simply “thus” instead. 90 them. It was in that turret that a watchman’s horn sounded the break of day, and the king and queen and all the others rose right away and went outside into the courtyard. But now the story tells about the White Knight once the king, having stopped him for a moment, allowed him to leave the castle. 30. The White Knight Frees Gawain and His Companions but Does Not Reveal His Identity.’ Once the White Knight had left the king and queen, he went straight to Sir Gawain and the other knights and said to them, “My lords, I am releasing you from my custody with the understanding that you will stay here tonight and go tomorrow morning to the Dolorous Guard, where you will find the king and my lady. Greet them both for me and [370] thank them for being freed from prison, for you may be sure that it was their doing.” “Please, my lord,” said Sir Gawain, “tell us who you are.” “My lord,” he answered, “I am a knight, but more than that you may not know now; please take no offense.” With that, he bade them goodbye. He rode as far through the night as he could toward the religious house where he had left his squires.* He spent the rest of the night at a vavasor’s manor and the next day started out very early along the road that the vavasor showed him. But there will be no more words about him right now. Instead, the story goes back to Sir Gawain and his uncle, the king. 31. The First Tournament Is Arranged, and Gawain Leaves Arthur’s Court in Search of His Unknown Liberator. Once the king had risen that morning and come into the courtyard in front of his quarters, he did not know what to do. Meanwhile, in the turret where the watchman had sounded the coming of day, there were two young ladies in a room below the watchman’s level; these were the messengers that the Lady of the Lake had sent to the knight. The one who had brought the shields went over to her window and, seeing the queen, called out to her, “My lady, you were well lodged last night, and I wasn’t at all!” The queen looked up at her. “In fact, young lady,” she said, “I didn’t know you were there. Could I be of some help?” “Yes, my lady, you could.” “How?” said the queen. “I won’t tell you now,” [371] she answered. 1Corresponds to Micha VII:XXXa; Sommer III:169-170; Kennedy 218. 2See chapter 23, p. [305]. Corresponds to Micha VII:XXXIa; Sommer III;:170-171; Kennedy 218-220. Lancelot, Part I She spoke like that because she suspected that the White Knight loved the queen and was fairly sure that the queen loved him as well; that was why he had not wanted to leave the castle before seeing her. Besides, the other young woman had told her how she had seen him dazzled by the sight of the queen on the day the king came through the outer gate. While the queen and the damsel were speaking, suddenly a great column of horsemen came in through the castle gate: it was Sir Gawain and all his knights! The king was overjoyed; he kissed his nephews and the others and asked where they had been. “I swear,” said Sir Gawain, “we don’t know where, except that we were taken to a small castle where we expected to be guests but turned out to be captives instead. Later we were set free by some knight, who told us that we should thank you and my lady for our freedom.” “Do you know who he is?” said the king. Sir Gawain said no, but “he was carrying a silver shield with three bands of red.” “Oh!” said the queen; “that’s your knight, the one who took leave of you last night, the one the people were shouting about!” “Did you see him with his armor off?” said the king to Sir Gawain. “No,” he answered; “he refused to take off his helmet, and that makes me suspect that someone here would recognize him if he were not wearing his armor.” “Well!” said the king. “We can leave now.” Hearing that, the young woman in the turret called out to the king, “What do you mean, King Arthur?” she said. “Are you going away and leaving me in prison? and going away not knowing anything about this place?” “Not knowing anything, young lady,” said the king; “and it bothers me.” Then Sir Gawain asked what this was all about, but the king’s [372] answer left him wondering. “My lady,” said the king, “could you be released by me?” “Yes, my lord,” she said, “but it would take a great effort.” “An effort?” he said. “I’ll gladly make it, if I know what to do.” “My lady,” said Sir Gawain, “if my lord the king has said that he will make an effort, he will. Just say what must be done and how you can be freed.” “I can be released only by the knight whom the king allowed to leave.” “How can we recognize him?” said Sir Gawain. “You will have news of him at the First Tournament to be held in the kingdom of Logres, and again at the Second and the Third.” “My lady,” said Sir Gawain, “if he sent you word that you should leave here, would you do so?” “Oh no,” she said, “not if I didn’t see him in person.” “My lord,” Sir Gawain went on, “you may be sure that, unless I am taken ill or taken prisoner, I will never stay more than one night in any town until I have found out who this knight is!” The king was troubled by these words, but Sir Gawain said to him, “My lord, the king of the Land Beyond the Lancelot, Part I Borders of Galone has attacked and is at war with you. Send him word that you will be in his land one month from today, which will be the third day after the Feast of Our Lady in September, and that he should see about defending himself, for he will need to do so. At that battle, God willing, you will have news of this matter.” The king said, “As you wish, but stay with us until then.” “That can’t be,” said Sir Gawain. Then the king sent his messenger to the king of the Land Beyond Galone [373] with word of the day of the battle, as they had decided. Then he left the town, and Sir Gawain, taking leaving of him, started out on his quest. But now the story stops speaking of him and King Arthur and goes back to the Captor of the Dolorous Guard. 32. Lancelot Is Injured and Requires a Litter.’ When the Captor of the Dolorous Guard left the vavasor’s house where he had spent the night after leaving Sir Gawain and his companions with the hermit in the forest, he traveled back in a few days to the religious house where his squires were staying.” But he stopped there for only one night. The people there had heard much about the knight who had captured the Dolorous Guard, but none of them knew that he was the one. In the morning he took his leave and rode all day without finding any adventure worth reporting. The next day he rose early and rode until the hour of tierce, when he came upon a young lady riding a horse that was drenched in sweat. The knight’s face and hands were exposed; and his squires were carrying his lance and helmet as well as his shield, which was wrapped in a cover. He greeted the damsel, and she him. “My lady,” he said, “what cares bring you out so early?” “My lord,” she said, “I have news that is bound to please all knights who want to win praise and renown.” “What news?” he said. “My lady the queen sends word to all knights that, on the third day after the [374] Feast of Our Lady in September,® King Arthur and the king of the Lands Beyond Galone will come together for a great tournament between their two lands, on the battleground that lies between Godorson and the Maine.” “Which queen,” he said, “sends word of this? 3 “The wife of King Arthur,” she said, then added, “If you have any news of the knight who captured the Dolorous Guard, please say so, because my lady wants him to know that, if he expects to have her friendship and her company, he should be at the gathering; she would be very glad to see him.” At that, the knight was dumbfounded, and he remained speechless for a long while. She, meanwhile, begged him, if he had any news of the knight, to let her 1Corresponds to Micha VII:XXXIla; Sommer III:171-175; Kennedy 220-226. 2See chapter 23, p. [305]. 3September 8, the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin. gl know; but he, very fearful of being recognized, kept his head bowed and said, “My lady, tell me, by whatever you love most, have you ever met the knight?” She said no. “Well, I'll tell you,” he said, “I stayed last night in the same place he did. You can let my lady know that he will be at the tournament unless he dies beforehand, for nothing else could keep him away.” “God!” she said; “I feel so much better!” With that, she left, and the knight went on his way, traveling through the whole week until Saturday after the hour of prime. At that point, in a great, dense forest, he came across a long line of people, many making their way on foot and many on horseback. Among them stood out a tall knight on horseback who was pulling along a man tied by the neck to the tail of his horse with a long strip of fine cloth. The man was barefoot and wearing only shirt and underdrawers; he was blindfolded, and his hands were tied behind his back. He was one of the handsomest men one could [375] find. Thus the tall knight was pulling him along, and around the man’s neck, hanging by its hair, was a woman’s head. The White Knight, struck by his great beauty, stopped and asked him who he was. “My lord,” he said, “I am a knight in the service of the queen. These people hate me and are leading me to my death—shamefully, as you see, since the only way they dare kill me is in secret.” The White Knight asked him which queen he meant, and he said the queen of Britain. Then the White Knight exclaimed, “No knight should be led as shamefully as you are leading this one!” “Not so!” said the tall knight who was pulling him along. “A knight who is treacherous and disloyal is one who has renounced knighthood.” “But what of this man?” said the White Knight. “Why are you pulling him along like this? What wrong has he done you?” “Just this: I caught him betraying me; and I will deal with him as his crime deserves.” The White Knight answered, “Good sir, it is not right for one knight to pass judgment on another all by himself. If this man has betrayed you, prove it in a court of justice, and then you can have your honor avenged.” “I will do nothing of the sort,” said the other, “in any court but my own! And I am satisfied he is guilty.” “Of what?” said the White Knight. “Of dishonoring me with my wife. That’s her head hanging from his neck.” But the bound knight earnestly swore that he had never had any thought of shaming him. “My lord,” said the White [376] Knight, “since he so earnestly denies the crime, you have no right to put him to death; and I urge you, for the sake of God and your honor, to let him go. Do it for me as well, who have never asked you for anything before. And if he has wronged you somehow, then seek justice in the way I have said.” But the other swore that he would have nothing to do with seeking justice, since he had his man. “T tell you,” said the White Knight, “it will be a great wrong for you to put him to death, since he is a knight of my lady the queen.” 92 But the other said that the thought of the queen would never stop him from killing the man. “No?” said the White Knight. “I’ll have you know that he is not about to die by your hand, for I undertake to protect and defend him against everyone I see here.” Thereupon he tore the blindfold from the man’s eyes and broke the cord that was tied around his neck. The tall knight’s troops seized their bows and arrows and seemed about to kill him, but he said to the tall knight, “Good sir, pull your troops back! If they hit either me or my horse, I'll kill you first and them next!” Most of them were not wearing armor. The White Knight tied on his helmet, covered his hands, and took up his shield and lance. Meanwhile, some men started to shoot at him, not to kill him, but because their lord ordered them to; but they would have been sorry to see him die and so missed him on purpose. The White Knight realized that they had no wish to kill him; nor did he want to do them any harm. He galloped toward their lord, who was ordering them to shoot, and struck the butt of his lance [377] so hard against the man’s middle that he sent him sprawling onto the ground and almost broke his bones. At that point all the others fled. He took the horse of the fallen man, led it over to the knight whom he had unbound, and said, “Mount, sir knight, and come away with me.” The knight mounted and, coming close, said, “My lord, fam not far from a safe place. There is a stronghold nearby where I wouldn’t be in any danger, and if you didn’t mind, I would go there.” “I don’t mind at all,” said the White Knight. The other said, “My lord, I want to thank my lady the queen for being rescued by you, but I don’t know your name.” “Describe my shield,” he answered, “because you can’t know my name; and do tell her that you’re free thanks to her.” The knight went off to the queen and thanked her for his defender, whose shield he described. She understood right away that it was the Captor of the Dolorous Guard, and she was very happy. Meanwhile, the knight went on his way far into the evening, which was a Saturday evening, according to the story; and riding by a tower, he heard the loud, clear song of a young lady. Once he was past, he became lost in thought, and his horse carried him along at will. The area was a marshland that was now dried up, since the summer had been very hot and dry, and now, in the middle of August, it still was. There were wide, deep cracks in the ground, and the horse was hardly fresh, as the day’s ride had been long; and so it stumbled with its front hooves and fell into a gaping crevice. The knight lay there for a long while before his squires could lift him out. And then he felt badly wounded [378] and in great pain, and he found it very hard to mount again. The rear of the saddle, morever, was shattered, and his shield was broken into three pieces. Then he rode as far as a graveyard, where he saw a friar on his knees in front of the cross. They greeted each other. “My lord,” said one of the squires to the good man, “this knight is badly wounded. Please, for charity’s sake, Lancelot, Part I show me where he could have shelter for the night. It’s very hard for him to go on riding.” ‘ll show you, with God’s help,” said the good man. “Follow me.” Then he went ahead, and the others followed. After a while, he asked the knight how he had been injured, and the knight told him. “My lord,” said the good man, “do you mind if I give you a good piece of advice?” No, he didn’t mind at all, he said. “I advise you,” he went on, “in fact, I urge you, not to ride any longer on Saturdays after the hour of nones, unless you have some special purpose. Listen to me, and fewer troubles and more good things will come your way.” The knight assured him that he would never again let that happen, if he could help it. “And you, sir, what were you doing in the place where we found you just now?” “My lord,” he said, “my father and mother are buried in that graveyard, and I go there every day to say the Lord’s Prayer and acknowledge the good that God has shown me and pray for their souls.” Thereupon they came to the house of religion that the good man belonged to. They [379] were welcomed very warmly and, at the insistence of the brothers, the knight spent ten whole days there, being bathed and treated, for he was very badly injured. On the eleventh day he departed, leaving the threebanded shield behind, because he did not want to be recognized. Instead, he took one that his squires had ordered from a town near the hermitage where he had lain disabled; this shield was red,* with one diagonal white band. Thus the knight traveled quite far, until one day he happened to meet an armed knight, who asked him who he was. “Iam a knight,” he said, “one of King Arthur’s.” “King Arthur’s?” said the other. “In other words, you serve the most wicked king in the world.” “Why do you say that?” said the Injured Knight. “Because,” he answered, “his court is full of mad arrogance.” “Whye” said the other. “It once happened, not too long ago,” he answered, “that a wounded knight went there, and a certain knight swore to him that he would avenge him on all men who said they had greater love for his assailant than they had for him.° Well, even if he had the prowess of Sir Gawain and four others like him, he’d surely fail.” “Why?” said the other. “You’re not one of those who prefer the wounded man to his foe?” “Not at alll” he answered. “Really!” said the other. “You should be sorry about that.” “Why? Are you the knight who [380] swore the oath?” “And I'll do my utmost to honor it,” he said. “But still, before I can rightly give you battle, I must ask you to say that you have greater love for the wounded man than for the man who wounded him.” 4The heraldic color term used in the text is “sinople.” 5See chapter 22. Lancelot, Part I “If I said that, I would be lying,” he answered, “and God forbid that I should lie about this matter!” “By God,” said the other, “in that case I must give you battle!” “I ask for nothing better,” he answered. At that, they both moved back and then galloped toward each other as fast as their horses could go, and each struck the other’s shield so hard that each spine bent back over the saddlebow. The Injured Knight struck so hard that neither shield nor hauberk could protect his foe, and he thrust his lance, shaft as well as tip, into the other, who then struck him back and pushed his weapon through the man’s shield. They were both strong and brave and fought so hard that they knocked each other to the ground; and in the fall both lances were broken. The Injured Knight was not wounded fatally; he jumped up—for he admired the prowess of the man who had just dealt him the best blow that he had ever received and was eager to show his own great skill—and rushed at him with sword drawn. But it was in vain, for the man was dead, his insides run right through. When he saw that he was dead, he wept with grief, because he considered him a worthy knight. [381] Then he wanted to see whether he could ride; he could barely endure it but mounted nevertheless and rode in great pain up to a nearby forest. His squires made him a litter and fitted it out handsomely with everything needed; they curtained it with a splendid silken cloth that the Lady of the Lake had given him along with other silks; and it was the most splendid bed that a knight could ask for. When the litter was ready, they laid their master in it and rode along very carefully. The litter, carried by two of the best horses you could ask for, moved along at a very gentle pace. That is how the knight went on his way in the litter. But at this point the story stops speaking of him for a bit and goes back to Sir Gawain, who was looking for him. 33. Gawain Encounters the Knight in the Litter but Does Not Know It Is Lancelot.’ Here the story says that, once Sir Gawain had set out on his search for the Captor of the Dolorous Guard, he traveled on for two whole weeks without hearing any news of him. Then, one day, he happened to come upon a young lady on a riding horse. He greeted her; and she, him. “My lady,” he said, “do you have any news of the Captor of the Dolorous Guard?” “Oh!” she said, “I know who you are: Gawain, King Arthur’s nephew, who left a certain young lady in prison.” “That bothers me, I admit,” he said. “But please, my lady, [382] tell me whether you know anything about the object of my search.” “I don’t,” she said, “but they would surely help you at the Dolorous Guard.” “Is that all you have to say?” he asked. ICorresponds to Micha VII:XXXIMa; Sommer III:175-177; Kennedy 226-229. 2See chapter 31, pp. [371-372]. 93 “Yes,” she said. He rode off, as she did, and he made his way to the other side of a forest. The young woman who had spoken to him was the one who had lately been sent by the Lady of the Lake to the knight that Sir Gawain was seeking, and she herself was now seeking him, at the behest of the other damsel.? When he came out of the woods, he saw, set up before him in a meadow, enough beautiful pavilions to shelter two hundred knights. He looked to his right and saw, emerging from the woods, the two horses that were carrying the White Knight in his litter; they were coming down the path that met his. Sir Gawain stopped to wait for the litter; and he found it very attractive, as he had never yet seen one so splendid. He asked the squires who it was. “My lord,” they answered, “it is a wounded knight.” With that, the wounded knight ordered his curtain lifted and asked Sir Gawain who he was. He answered that he was a knight of King Arthur’s court. Hearing that, he was suddenly afraid of being recognized, and he covered himself again. Sir Gawain asked him who he was, and he answered that he was a knight on his way to look after some business of his. The knight then went past, while Sir Gawain remained at the edge of the forest in order to find out whom the tents belonged to. Then two knights stepped out [383] of one of them and came toward the woods for a walk. Sir Gawain greeted them and asked whom the tents belonged to, and they said, “To the king of the Hundred Knights, who is on his way to the Tournament.” “Which side will he be on?” asked Sir Gawain. “The side of the king of the Land Beyond the Borders,” they said. “But now, who are you?” “Tam a knight going about my business.” This king of the Hundred Knights was so called because he never went riding outside his own land without a following of one hundred knights; and whenever he wished, he had many more, for he was rich and powerful and a cousin of Galehaut, the son of the Fair Giantess, and he was lord of the land of Estrangort, which bordered on the kingdom of North Wales and the duchy of Cambenic. Sir Gawain said goodbye to the two knights and rode away. Then he looked around and saw squires carrying a dead knight out of the woods. He turned off in that direction and asked them who had killed the man. They said that he had been killed that day by a knight bearing a red shield with a single white band, and it was because he had refused to say that he had greater love for a certain wounded knight than for the man who had wounded him; and “his killer is badly wounded himself,” they added. Sir Gawain understood that this must be the knight in the litter and thought that he was the one who had freed the wounded knight at Camelot. Then he headed toward the camp of the king of the Hundred Knights. The men in the tents thought that he was coming in search of battle, so they sent an armed knight out toward him. But he said that he was not there for that reason and had something else to do. [384] 3See chapter 24, p. [321]. O4 With that, he went on his way. When he had gone some distance, he saw a very lovely pavilion standing by itself and noticed a number of lances propped up around it. He came near and found a number of young men outside, with their feet resting on some five shields leaning against the side. He asked them whose tent it was. “My lord,” they said, “it belongs to a knight who is lying down inside.” He dismounted, walked into the tent, and saw four knights stretched out in two beds and, in a third, larger than the others, a man lying by himself on top of a goldthreaded quilt and covered with a blanket of ermine. He asked, “Who are you, sir knight, lying there?” The man sat up, and “Who are you,” he said, “who want to know?” Thereupon Sir Gawain recognized Helis the Blond, so he gave his name; and Helis jumped up and said, “Welcome to my tent!” And they made a great fuss over each other, like the loving companions that they were. “And where are you going like this?” said Helis. “T was following a litter,” said the other, “that passed by here just now.” “It’s too late to go on now. You’ve got to stop for the night,” said Helis, and the other agreed. As they were speaking, Helis’s squires came in. “You are missing an extraordinary thing, sir,” they said. “Everyone is traveling along this road, and no one’s ever seen such crowds before!” Then they took off Sir Gawain’s armor. “My lord,” said Helis, “let’s go see the knights who are passing by, but without letting them see us.” “How can we do that?” said Sir Gawain. “Our squires,” said Helis, “will make us a [385] little screen of leaves and branches, and we’ll stay behind it.” Sir Gawain said that was fine. The squires made the screen, and they hid behind it and watched all the people coming along the road. As they were watching, they saw two parties of knights appear, in full armor. There were ten knights in each group, and between them rode four young men holding up a four-posted silk canopy over a lady who was riding a palfrey with elegant trappings. She was dressed in red silk, with tunic and cloak trimmed in ermine; her hair was unbound, and she was extraordinarily beautiful. Helis said to Sir Gawain, “That is one of the most beautiful women I have ever seen. I don’t know if she is married or not, but, my God, she’s beautiful!” The next thing they saw was that twenty knights belonging to the king of the Hundred Knights rode up to the lady’s escort and said, “Lords, the king summons you to bring your lady to him.” But her men said they would not do so. “Yes, you will,” they answered, “or face a battle with us!” The lady’s knights understood that they had no choice. The two groups of twenty moved against each other. Some men were knocked down from their horses; others had their lances broken but were not unhorsed. They drew their swords; they fell into combat on foot and in the saddle. Sir Gawain and Helis came out of their hiding place the better to watch them, and Sir Gawain said, “Helis, let’s Lancelot, Part I make them stop! The king has his best knights in this fight, and the lady’s knights, I think, are much less well trained.” Then they came forward and parted the fighters. They told them to give up the battle and said that they would conduct the lady to the king; it was so agreed. Sir Gawain and Helis mounted their horses and led [386] the lady to the king. He came out of his tent to meet them and saw that she was very beautiful and surely a very highborn lady. “My lord,” said Sir Gawain, “we have brought this lady for you to see and we will then take her back.” “My lady,” said the king, “tell me first of all who you are.” And she said that she was the lady of Nohaut. “Yes, indeed,” he said, “so may you well be; and had I known, I would have gone after you myself.” Then Helis and Sir Gawain conducted her back from the tent, and she took leave of them. They remained where they were, and she went on her way to the Tournament, for at that time ladies of mark went to such events. But at this point, the story stops speaking of her and Sir Gawain for a moment and turns back to the White Knight, who was being carried along in his litter. 34. Lancelot, as the Red Knight, Takes Part in the First Tournament.’ Once the Knight in the Litter had left Sir Gawain, he traveled up to a very lovely stretch of open country which was no more than three leagues away. There, under one of the tallest sycamores he had ever seen, he found a beautiful spring. The knight left his litter, lay down to nap for a while, and from there sent two squires to a town to find him lodgings. It was getting on toward evening when he awoke and mounted once again. Just then, a squire came galloping by on a packhorse. The knight heard the noise and lifted the curtain of the litter. He asked the squire where he was going at such speed. “IT am looking for help,” he said, [387] “because the king of the Hundred Knights has just detained the lady of Nohaut.” The knight said at once that he would help her and ordered his litter turned around. Once he had gone some distance, he came upon her, and she asked his squires who was in the litter. “My lady,” they said, “it is an injured knight who heard that you had been detained; and he has come to offer his help.” Then she herself parted the curtain, while he covered his face lest she recognize him. “My lord,” she said, “have you come to help me?” “Yes, my lady,” he said. “Thank you for coming,” she said. “You'll stay with me now, of course.” “I cannot, my lady,” he said, “I am not well and cannot move as fast as you.” ‘Corresponds to Micha VII:XXXIVa; Sommer III:177-180; Kennedy 229-233. Lancelot, Part I With that, the lady left, not having recognized the knight, and the litter moved along very gently until, late in the evening, it reached the city of Orkney. In that town, the knight replaced his shield with a red one,? as he did not want to be recognized at the Tournament, which was to take place only a short day’s ride away. That night his wounds were carefully tended by an old knight who knew all about such things. Since he still had five days until the Tournament, he stayed where he was, on the advice of the knight, and his wounds started healing. On the fifth day, he set out, but again in his litter, and reached Godorson in the late evening. The area was already so full of visitors that there was no room to be had, but below the town there was a monastery that took him in, because he was unwell, and he was given a fine, comfortable room. In the morning, the knight heard Mass and put on his armor right away. Meanwhile, King Arthur had arrived in full force [388] but could not be put up at the castle and was instead camped outside the walls; now, in the morning, he gave the word that no one in his quarters and none of the men who had come with him should bear arms that day. That disappointed many fine knights in his camp. But there were others present who had not come for his sake or in his army, but rather to win renown or else for gain; and these men armed themselves early in the morning and gathered on the battleground. Now, the king of the Land Beyond the Borders had come away from his encampment ready for an attack, but, seeing that King Arthur was unarmed, he withdrew, while many of the lively young knights in his army went to joust with those awaiting them on the battleground. And so they started a good tournament, for on Arthur’s side there were many worthy knights who had not made an appearance in order to be free to take part: Sir Gawain, for example, and Helis the Blond, as well as his brother, the good and handsome Gale the Gay, and Tors the son of Ares and many another fine knight. And the other side had Malaguin the king of the Hundred Knights and Helain the Dragon, as well as Duke Galot of Yberge and many others who were men of prowess. The jousts started on both sides, while the queen went into the castle and climbed up to the battlements to see the fighting. With her were a number of ladies and maidens as well as knights, and they watched many combatants who were doing quite well. Then the Knight of the Litter came along, with the red shield at his neck. He passed in front of the queen, then entered the lists and began to joust with another knight. They so struck each other that their lances splintered apart and their bodies and faces smashed into each other. The Knight of the Litter remained in his saddle, but the other man went flying back over [389] his horse’s rump onto the ground. People all around said, “Now I’ve seen a new knight in a beautiful move!” He himself then withdrew, took another lance from his squires, and returned to the lists. He brought one knight down to the ground. Then he began to unhorse riders and knock down shields and shatter lances; and he did it all so 2The heraldic color term used in the text is “vermeil.” oD well that everyone was astounded and asked Sir Gawain, “Do you know that knight?” “I don’t,” he said, “but he fights so well that I am staying off the field just to be able to watch him. He looks like a knight after my own heart!” The people atop the castle walls said that the Red Knight was defeating everyone, and the king of the Hundred Knights asked who he was; and the answer was that he was a knight who was defeating everyone and bore red arms. At that, the king picked up his shield, asked for a lance, and galloped through the lists to face the redshielded knight himself. They clashed so mightily that both lances broke into pieces, but neither man fell down. It bothered the king that he had not brought down his man, but the knight was even more bothered not to have brought down the king. They took up new lances and charged each other again; their horses were fast, and they clashed mightily. The Red Knight pierced the king’s flank right through his shield and all the folds of his hauberk, but he did not hurt him badly. The king struck back at an unshielded spot, jabbing his lance into hauberk and flesh between the man’s nipple and shoulder. Both lances broke; bodies and horses collided; and the two men fell to the ground. The king jumped back to his feet and, holding his shield in front of him, drew his sword. [390] The knight, in falling face down, was pierced right through the shoulder by the lancehead; blood gushed from the wound, and his old one began bleeding again as well. But he was aware that the king was ready with shield and sword, so he jumped up in a rage, held up his shield, drew his sword, and went toward the king. They dealt each other rough blows. The Red Knight was bleeding very badly, and the king’s men were galloping up. Sir Gawain and those who were on the knight’s side galloped after the king, chasing him for a long moment, then turned back to the knight to return him his horse. He was about to mount, when he fainted and fell. They saw all the blood around him, and everyone said, “He’s dead!” Dismounting, they pulled the lance out of his body, and they saw that he had two very great wounds. The news reached the king of the Hundred Knights that he had slain the brave knight. He was distressed to hear that and, throwing down his shield and his lance, said that he would no longer bear arms that day, or perhaps ever again, for it was a terrible, unlucky thing for him to have slain such a knight. The knight lay senseless; they disarmed him and bound his wounds. The queen and all the people with her saw that everything had come to a halt because of the injured knight. She wanted to see him; she mounted her horse and, as she came through the castle gate, the crowd started clamoring, “Look! Here comes the queen!” The knight regained his senses and heard what they were saying. He opened his eyes and, seeing the queen, he struggled to sit [391] up. “How are you, good sir?” said the queen. “Very well, my lady,” he said; “there is nothing wrong.” But as he said that, his bandages tore and he began to bleed again; he fell once more into a faint. “He’s dead!” they all cried, and the queen withdrew to her camp. The knights asked where the Injured Knight was staying, and his 96 squires answered, “in a religious house.” They found him a very good doctor and carried the knight back to his quarters. The doctor examined his wounds and said that he would not die of them; but he forbade anyone to come see him, as there was no need for any excitement. The knights then all left. Sir Gawain, though, reflected that he had heard no news about the object of his quest, yet at the Tournament there should certainly have been some, but “all I've heard about or seen is this knight who has outshone everyone else. I should go to him and find out if he knows anything about the man I am looking for.” He came to the knight’s quarters and asked the doctor what he foresaw. “I believe,” he answered, “that he will recover, though his wounds have bled a lot.” “His wounds?” said Sir Gawain. “How many has he?” “Two, and very sizable,” said the doctor; “one from today and one from before.” Hearing about [392] the earlier wound, Sir Gawain thought for a moment and then said to the doctor, “Are you really telling me that he has two wounds?” “Yes,” he said; “no doubt of it.” “Doctor,” he answered, “please find out how he came here!” The doctor asked the squires, and they did not try to hide it but said that he came in a litter, and he told Sir Gawain. Sir Gawain begged to be allowed to speak with the knight and was taken to his bedside. “My lord,” said the doctor, “Sir Gawain is here to see you.” Sir Gawain sat down and asked whether he had any news of the knight who had let King Arthur into the Dolorous Guard. He gave him the briefest answer, saying only, “Good sir, I am not well. I can’t think about what you’re asking.” Realizing that he could not now learn anything more, Sir Gawain rose and went away. He saw that the knight was so unwell that he could not talk, but he would come back tomorrow and ask him again. He went back to his lodgings. But that night, the Injured Knight called his doctor and said, “Ah, doctor, I can’t stay here any longer, for I can’t risk being recognized. Please, in God’s name, come away with me! But if you are unwilling, tell me at least what to do, for I am leaving tonight.” “Couldn’t anything make you stay?” said the doctor. “No,” he said. “Well, how will you travel?” “In a litter,” he said. “I have a good, handsome one.” ‘T’ll go with you,” said the doctor. “If I didn’t, you might die soon; and it would be a very great [393] loss.” The knight was very happy with this answer. Then they made ready for the road and slipped away in secret. But now the story stops speaking about them for a moment and turns to King Arthur and Sir Gawain. Lancelot, Part I 35, Gawain Resumes His Search for the Unknown Captor of the Dolorous Guard and His Own Liberator.’ The next morning, Sir Gawain came back to speak to the knight and was told that he had left in the middle of the night. He was sorely disappointed. He went back and found the king armed, along with his companions; and he went off to arm himself, too, but with no identifying signs. Once outside the castle, they joined battle with the knights on the other side, but the combat did not last long, since the others could not stand up against the king’s forces. Once he himself was on the field, the only defense that they could find was flight, and the king chased them back to the castle in a forced stampede. As he was returning to his camp, he met Sir Gawain, who was holding his sword in his bare hand; the king recognized the sword and said, “Gawain, good nephew, what’s been the outcome of your search?” “My lord,” he answered, “nothing yet.” As they were speaking, along came a very dashing knight, who said to the king, “My lord, the king of the Land Beyond the Borders and the king of the Hundred Knights send this word to you. They know that no one can withstand your attack. But if you agreed to stage a tournament with them on another day and if you came with knights all ready to bear arms, they [394] would meet you seven weeks from today.” “T will not undertake it,” said the king. “Good sir,” said Sir Gawain, “my lord’s knights will accept the engagement with the two kings if they agree to a later date: Monday before Advent.” He answered that they were in favor, and Sir Gawain sent Lucan the Wine Steward to the two kings to find out whether they would indeed agree, and they did. King Arthur went back to his land together with the queen; the troops disbanded, and the knights awaited the new date. Sir Gawain returned to his quest. Hardly had he left the king when he came upon a young lady riding very quickly on a fast mule. He greeted her, and she him; and he asked her if she needed any help. “Yes,” she said, “very badly. But what about you? Where are you going?” “My lady,” he said, “I am busy with a matter that has not yet had the outcome I would like. My dear young lady,” he went on, “could you perhaps give me news of the knight who let King Arthur into the Dolorous Guard?” “Yes, indeed,” she said, “if you tell me what I want to know.” “Of course,” he said; “T’ll tell you if I can.” “Is it true that the Red Knight is dead—I mean, the Winner of the last Tournament?” “Not at all,” he said. “In fact, his doctor told me that he would recover quite well.” When she heard that, her heart started and she fell in a faint onto the neck of her mule. Sir Gawain darted ‘Corresponds to Micha VII:XXXVa; Sommer III;180-182; Kennedy 233-236. Lancelot, Part I forward to help her. As she regained her senses, [395] he asked her what had made her faint. ‘Joy, my lord,” she said. “My lady,” he said, “do you know the knight?” “I do, my lord,” she said. “Then tell me now what I want to know.” “It’s the same man,” she said. “Now, what is your nmamepe” “Gawain, my lady.” “Ah, my lord, how good to meet you here! Would you like me to travel with you?” “I'd be delighted,” he said. And so they rode together. He said to her, “My lady, do you love the knight?” “Yes, my lord,” she said, “more than any other man, but not with the kind of love you think. I wouldn’t want him to marry me, though the man who’ll have me will hardly have made a bad match! I am a quite rich woman, you see, but, God willing, he will find someone better. My lord,” she said, “do you recall a young lady whom you met the other day?” “Yes,” he said. “Was that your You rebuked me for leaving another young lady in the Dolorous Guard, and then I saw the knight we're looking for.” “That’s right,” she said, “and I almost died because of him, for when I was told that he was fatally wounded, I became sick myself. But then I was told that he would be at the Tournament, and today a squire told me he’d been killed.” “My lady,” he said, “since you know him, you can no doubt tell me what his name is; and that will bring my quest to an end.” “But I swear I don’t know,” she said. “I’ll fiad out, though, as soon as I reach him, and I will let you know right away.” He thanked her. “Now tell me,” he said, “did you hear any news back where you began your journey?” “No,” she said. “Nor did I in the place I’m coming from. So [396] I suggest we take a road that goes elsewhere.” “Yes, of course,” she said. It was not long before they came upon an old road through the woods, with an abandoned church and graveyard nearby. They started down the road and, reaching the church, they dismounted and went in to pray. To one side, there was a pious woman reading psalms by a window near the altar. When they saw her, they asked whether she had any news. “I have nothing to say that can be of any help to you,” she said to Sir Gawain, “except that, if you are traveling with this girl, you should not take this road.” “Why?” he said. “Because,” she answered, “there is a knight nearby who will take her from you and could put a quick end to you, too.” “Who is he?” said Sir Gawain. “Brun the Ruthless,” she said. “My lord,” said the young lady, “let’s take a different road.” “Well!” he said. “Fine road I'd be on now, if I let every idle word change my route!” o7 But now the story stops speaking of them for a bit and turns back to the Knight in the Litter. 36. The Knight in the Litter Goes to Nohaut to Recover from His Wounds.' When the Knight in the Litter, together with his doctor and escort, left the Tournament during the night, they followed the most out-of-the-way route they could, in order not to be recognized. The next day was fiercely hot, and after the hour of tierce they dismounted at a crossroads to sleep awhile in the shade of a large elm. Just then a lady came along, [397] escorted by a great number of knights. She asked the doctor, “Who is this knight?” “My lady,” he said, “he is a knight who is not well.” The lady dismounted, uncovered his face, and fell into bitter weeping. “My good man,” she said to the doctor, “will he ever be well again?” “Yes, I assure you,” he said. Then, as the knight awoke, she kissed him on the eyes and mouth, and he, looking up, recognized her as the lady of Nohaut and made a move to cover his face. “There is no point in that,” she said. “Come home with me, and you will be safer and more comfortable than anywhere else in the world.” Turning to the doctor, “Please, my lord,” she said, “urge him to come.” Seeing that there was no way out, the knight agreed, and she was very happy. He was put back into his litter, and they rode on together. And the lady recounted how she had gone looking for him and would never have given up the search before finding him. Thus they rode ahead in brief stages and spent most nights in the lady’s two beautiful tents. When they came within sight of the Dolorous Guard, the lady thought that they should stay in the town below, but the knight said that nothing could make him enter that place. “Why?” she said. And he gave no answer but gazed at the castle gate, began to weep, and said, “Ah, gate! Gate! Why were you not opened in time?” This was the gate where he had kept the queen waiting while he stood dazed atop the walls,2 and he was sure that the queen was as aware of the truth as he was and that she would hate him for it forever. “Have you ever been here before?” said the lady; and he was so shaken that he could not answer. Right away it occurred to her that he must be the Captor of the Dolorous Guard; [398] yet she dared say no more about it, because he was clearly upset. They continued all the way to the lady’s castle, which was ten leagues away, near Nohaut.? In that castle the lady remained by the knight’s side as long as it took him to recover; and he had everything he needed. Corresponds to Micha VII:XXXVIla; Sommer III:182-183; Kennedy 236-237. *See chapter 28. 3The original reads a dis liewes pres de Nohaut, which could also be interpreted as “ten leagues from Nohaut.” 98 The story now stops speaking about him for a while and goes back to Sir Gawain and the young woman. 37. Gawain, Helped and Hindered by Brun the Merciless, Pursues His Attempt to Locate and Identify Lancelot.’ Sir Gawain and his traveling companion left the pious woman and rode until they came out of the woods and noticed, in an open stretch of country, a very handsome pavilion. They did not stop but rode by; but it was not long before a squire came galloping up to them, paused, and said to Sir Gawain, “Sir knight, my lord sends you word that you should send this young lady to him or bring her to him yourself.” “Who is your lord?” he answered. “Brun the Ruthless,” said the squire. “I will neither send her nor take her to him,” he said, “unless she wishes to go.” “I would rather go,” she said, “than have you do battle with him.” “You’re not going,” said Gawain. The squire went back, and when Sir Gawain and the girl had gone a bit farther, Brun came after them, fully armed and shouting, “You’ll hand over the lady or pay dearly!” “I am not handing her over to you!” said Sir Gawain. They turned onto the open ground, and Brun struck Sir Gawain so hard that his lance splintered apart; [399] but Sir Gawain struck back so hard that he hurled Brun to the ground and took his horse. Then he led it back to him and said, “Here is your horse. I have other things to do and am leaving.” “You knocked me down, and now you’re giving me back my horse! Who are you?” he said. “I am Gawain,” he answered. “And what are you looking for?” said Brun. “We are looking,” he answered, “for the Red Knight who was the winner of the Tournament.” “I won’t tell you now everything I know,” said Brun, “because there is something I need to attend to, but if, you come back here two weeks from today, Ill have reliable news for you.” “We will be here,” he answered, “unless we’ve had news in the meantime.” With that, they left and roamed about for two weeks without hearing any news. Sir Gawain and the young woman then came back to Brun. “What can you tell me?” said Sir Gawain. “I can give you news,” said Brun, “on condition that you give me what I ask.” “I agree,” said Sir Gawain, “provided it’s something I am able and have the right to give.” “In that case,” he answered, “your man is in a castle that the lady of Nohaut holds from the two brothers who own it; they are nephews of hers. I have been there three Corresponds to Micha VII:XXXVIla; Sommer III:183-185; Kennedy 237-241. Lancelot, Part I times since his arrival. The first time I saw him fencing, and his doctor said, after he had been at it a bit, ‘That’s enough now, my lord.’ The next day I saw the doctor let him exercise for a longer time. Three days ago, when I was back again, I saw him outside the castle, with a shield hanging from his neck and a lance in his hand, and he was trying to see if he could yet bear arms again. Now all we have to do,” he said, “is go there; [400] and if it is as I say, you will let me have my reward, and if not, you have no commitment.” Thereupon they all rode off, and they reached the castle in a few days. Brun stayed outside, while the other two went in, right into the lady’s quarters. The Injured Knight heard that Sir Gawain was on his way, and he said to his doctor, “Doctor, Sir Gawain is coming here. Please tell him that I am too unwell to see him.” “Of course, my lord,” he answered. Then he put him into a bed in a dark room and came back out. Sir Gawain and the young woman entered the castle, and the lady gave them a proper welcome. Then Sir Gawain asked the doctor in private to kindly let him see the knight. “My lord,” he said, “that cannot be; he is too unwell.” “If I can’t see him,” said Sir Gawain, “then let this young lady see him.” “All right,” he answered, carelessly. He led her into the room, and she opened a window.2 At the sight of her, the knight covered his face. She ran over to pull away the cover, but he reached up and seized her by the arm. She recognized his hand, though, and kissed it with such excitement that she fainted. When she came to, “there is no point,” she said, “in hiding your face.” Then she took out a letter and, breaking the seal, [401] read aloud that the damsel still at the Dolorous Guard sent her greetings to Lancelot of the Lake, son of King Ban of Benoic, and wanted him to know that she would remain in prison as long as he liked; he should realize, however, that he had behaved basely toward her, while she had been true to him. When he heard these words, he was deeply pained; he said, “My dear young lady, go right back to her and tell her that I beg her pardon for the great wrong J have done her. She is free to leave now, and I want her to do so.” “That cannot be,” she answered. “She will not leave unless she sees you or that ring on your finger.”$ “She’s right,” he said, “for wherever that ring is, there I am. Here it is. Take it to her.” The young lady went toward the door smiling, and he asked her to tell no one his name. She came out, and Sir Gawain said to her, “What can you tell me, my dear?” “All’s well,” she said. “Will you tell me the name of the knight?” “T’ll take you to a place where you can learn it,” she said, adding, “He is the Winner of the Tournament.” 2That is, she let in light, either by opening shutters or by pulling back curtains. 3This is the ring given to Lancelot by the Lady of the Lake at their parting; see chapter 22. Lancelot, Part I With that, they went out and found Brun waiting for them at the castle gate. “Sir Gawain,” he said, “do you owe me a reward?” “Yes,” he said. “Now I will follow you until you give me satisfaction.” Then all three left and in three days reached the Dolorous Guard. Sir Gawain recognized the castle. “I know where you’ve brought me,” he said to the girl. “Tt is all for your good,” she answered. They came to the main gate, but found it barred. Then they went [402] to the tower gate, and the young lady called to the gatekeeper, but he answered that she could not come in. “Then take this token,” she said, “and give it to the lady in the tower.” He opened the wicket, and she handed him the ring that belonged to the Knight in the Litter. He then closed the wicket and went up to the damsel in the tower. “My lady,” he said, “there is a young lady outside, with a knight. They send you this token in order to be allowed in. She looked at the ring and said, “Go right back and let them in.” He went to the gate and opened it, and they came in. The young woman in the tower came to meet them and said, “Welcome! I’ll leave here with you, whenever you're ready to go.” Brun had remained outside the gate. “My lady,” said Sir Gawain, “I don’t yet know the name of the knight who opened the castle to King Arthur.” The young woman who had brought him there whispered something to the other, who then said to Sir Gawain, “I will tell you the name of the knight, but you must follow me first.” Then she led him to the graveyard and showed him the tombs. “You have been here before,” she said.4 “Yes,” he answered. Leading him to a grave, she said, “This stone was once inscribed, HERE LIES GAWAIN, THE NEPHEW OF KING ARTHUR, AND UP THERE IS HIS HEAD, and the same was true of all your fellow knights; but you didn’t see any of that the first time you were here.” “How do you explain that?” he said. “As part of the spell cast over this place.” “Now tell me,” he said, “the name [403] of the knight.” “You will find it,” she said, “on the underside of that metal grave cover.” He went over to the slab and tried to raise it but could not move it in the slightest, and he was greatly disappointed. “My lady,” he said, “is there some other way to learn the knight’s name?” “Yes,” she said; “if you stay with me until I find him, I’ll see that you learn it.” “How can I be sure?” “I give you my word,” she said, “truly.” “Then I'll go with you,” he said. At that, they went out of the graveyard, and the young lady mounted on a riding horse that had been brought to her. Once beyond the gate, they found Brun. 4See chapter 25. yo “Lord Gawain,” he said, “it is time for me to ask for my reward.” “What is it?” he answered. “The girl that you’ve found in the tower.” “I can’t give her to you, since she is not mine; and I promised you only something that I was able and had the right to give.” “There was no such condition,” said Brun. “There was,” said Sir Gawain: “the one I’ve just said. But if you wish, I am willing to put it to the judgment of my uncle’s knights. Let the outcome be whatever they say: combat or something else.” Brun said that he would allow nothing of the sort but would only do battle right away. Nevertheless, the two young ladies prevailed on him to the point where he agreed to leave the matter up to the knights at the next tournament, but with the understanding that if he found their judgment unsuitable, he would have his battle. Sir Gawain consented. But now the story will not speak anymore about them until it has spoken about the Knight in the Litter. [404] 38. The Knight in the Litter Leaves Nohaut.' The Injured Knight had been in the care of the lady of Nohaut long enough to feel much better, and he was eager for the feats of arms that he had long had to give up. He came to the lady to take his leave and then went off with his doctor, whom the lady had handsomely paid for his services. The knight asked him, “Doctor, am I not healed enough to bear arms?” “Not at all,” he answered; “you couldn’t take on such a burden without undoing your recovery.” “Such a burden? Doctor, it is hardly too heavy if you have a real need for it!” “Be careful. Don’t be hasty,” said the doctor. “Look,” he answered, “if I can use all my limbs, it seems to me I’m healed.” “Don’t you want to attend the Tournament?” said the doctor. “Yes,” he said. “And which would you prefer,” he went on, “to be disabled now and in good health then, or well now but unable to fight at that time?” “I wouldn’t want for anything in the world,” he answered, “not to take part in the Tournament.” “In that case, I advise you,” said the doctor, “to rest until then, so that you’ll be healthy and well and have all your strength.” “If that’s what you advise,” said the knight, “that is what I'll do, but I won’t go back to where I have just been. I'll go instead to a certain hermit I know, a very good man.” [405] They went on their way together, as the doctor did not want to leave him before the Tournament. They came at last to the house of the Hermit of the Hedged Manor, as he was Called, who was the man to whom the knight had sent Brandin of the Isles, the former lord of the Dolorous Corresponds to Micha VII:XXXVIIIa; Sommer IHI:185-186; Kennedy 241-242. 100 Guard, as a prisoner. The Hermit was delighted to see the knight and welcomed him with great honor, but he was distressed by his wounds. The knight stayed at the hermitage until the doctor determined that his whole body was in sounder health than it had ever been, which still left two whole weeks before the Tournament. Now the story turns back for a while from him and his escort to Sir Gawain. 39. Gawain Is Harassed by Brun the Merciless.’ Once he had left the Dolorous Guard, Sir Gawain traveled on with his two young ladies and Brun the Merciless until they reached the castle where the Injured Knight had been lodged. Not finding him there, they were deeply disappointed, and Sir Gawain said that he doubted there would be any further news of him before the Tournament. “What are you saying?” said the young woman who had been confined. “Is there going to be a tournament soon?” “Yes,” he said, “less than a month from now.” “He will be there,” she said, “unless his body stops him.” Then they rode on, led by Brun, who said that he knew the roads better than anyone else. “There is one thing I would like you to know,” he said to Sir Gawain: [406] “it would be very hard for anyone to steal your two companions from you, if I were of a mind to help you.” “That’s true,” said Sir Gawain, “but it would be disloyal of you not to help me.” Thus they rode on until evening, when they noticed a tent and, not far from it, a river. A stag had been fleeing toward the river, but hunting dogs had caught up with it on the bank. A knight was now coming along, together with a huntsman, and they were both sounding their horns for the kill. Sir Gawain and his party came up, and the knight, seeing them, greeted them. “My lords,” he said, “if you care for part of this stag, you may certainly have some; and if you care to spend the night, this pavilion is mine, and I will lodge you if you like.” “My lord,” said Sir Gawain, “thank you very much. We will accept lodgings.” They all dismounted, and their weapons were removed. When they were disarmed, Brun spoke in private for a moment with the knight, who then came over to Sir Gawain. “My lord,” he said, “I have offered you shelter, and you have nothing to fear tonight. But tomorrow, once you have left, [ cannot assure you of anything.” “Good sir,” said Sir Gawain, “I would be sorry to see you harm me.” The knight proved to be a very good host. The next morning, Sir Gawain, Brun, and the two young ladies left. They had been riding for much of the day when they met 'Corresponds to Micha VII:XXXIXa; Sommer III:186-189; Kennedy 242-246. Lancelot, Part I two knights, fully armed. The knights did not speak to them but, taking hold of their shields, charged toward Sir Gawain. Sir Gawain charged in turn, thinking that Brun would do the same, but Brun [407] did not move. One of the knights hit Sir Gawain’s shield so hard that his lance was shattered, and Sir Gawain struck back and sent him down onto the ground. The second knight then struck Sir Gawain’s horse and killed it, leaving the rider on foot. When the man who had just killed the horse saw Sir Gawain standing, he dismounted, so that there were now three men on foot. The two strangers rushed at Sir Gawain, but he fought back very well and did them more harm than they did him. For a long time they fought that way, with the two unable to make Sir Gawain give ground, whereas he forced them back again and again. When the young woman who had led Sir Gawain to the Dolorous Guard saw what a situation he was in, she was frightened for him and started shouting wildly. Then she leapt down from her horse and dashed into their midst, shouting like a madwoman, “Bastards! Cowards! You’re trying to kill the greatest knight in the world! And you’re doing it treacherously!” “Who is he, my lady?” said one of them. “Who?!” she said. “Sir Gawain, the nephew of King Arthur!” The man looked at his companion. “Good God!” he said to him, “I’m giving up right now! And damn the man who sent us here!” “My lord,” said the other, “by whatever you love best, are you Sir Gawain?” The answer was yes. “Ah, my lord, please,” they said, “forgive us for what we have done to you, for just as we now see you as the most worthy man in the world, [408] so we thought of you earlier as the most disloyal. We’ll leave you now.” “It’s an odd way to leave me,” said Sir Gawain, “with my horse killed!” “My lord,” said the one who had killed it, “I’ll trade my horse for yours,” and Sir Gawain accepted. The man was the one who had sheltered Sir Gawain and the two young ladies for the night; but Brun had told him all sorts of perfidious things about him. The two knights mounted a single horse, and Brun escorted them for a bit, came back to Sir Gawain, and made as if to resume his journey with him. Sir Gawain looked at him. “Brun,” he said, “you won't travel with me anymore. You have behaved disloyally to me, and I have no wish for your company. I am ready right now to show that you are guilty of a breach of faith, so you will have the battle you have been so eager for!” “Iam not going to fight now,” said Brun. “But you were really frightened, weren’t you!” Thereupon he rode away, and Sir Gawain and his two companions traveled along until they came to a river. The river was crossed by a rather narrow bridge, and on the far side there was a wooden battlemented tower whose gate was closed. In front of the door stood two soldiers armed with Danish axes. Sir Gawain told the young women to go on ahead, and he started over the bridge after them. *“Danish axes”: long-handled battle-axes. Lancelot, Part I The men-at-arms said, “It’s pointless for you to cross. You won’t get by!” “Can't I!” he said. Then he dismounted, went behind the horse, and walked across. Listening, he heard a noise and, looking around, he saw twenty knights following him, and it seemed to him that they were coming to do him some harm. He stood still at the end of the bridge, waiting for them, his shield at the ready and lance held tight in his hand. They came along very fast, [409] and those in front struck his shield. They attacked him on foot and on horseback, and he fought back so well that he wounded a number of them and killed quite a few of their horses with his lance; and as long as his lance lasted, no one could get close to him. When it gave way, he took sword in hand, rushed at them, and sent them flying off the bridge. When they saw how well he was fighting back and saw that he was hurting them more than they were him, they fell back and withdrew. At that, the gate of the tower behind him opened; a few knights appeared and, seizing the two women, prepared to carry them off. Seeing that, Sir Gawain was furious. “My lords,” he said, “that’s a vile, cowardly thing to do, to attack me twenty strong and at the same time let the two young women be kidnapped!” “It’s only right!” said one of the knights. “I made an agreement with you, and you betrayed me!” “Ah, Brun! You are a liar and a traitor, and I’ll prove it to you, if you like, right in front of all these men whom you’ve brought here.” “Yes, indeed,” broke in the young lady who had taken Sir Gawain to the Dolorous Guard, “he really is a traitor! And if you were not the most valiant knight in the world, he would have killed you twice today!” Then the men who were taking the women away asked, “Who is [410] that knight?” And one of the young ladies answered, “That is Sir Gawain.” At that, one of them stepped forward and said, “Sir Gawain, you may leave now. Take any path you like except this one, and, on behalf of everyone here, I guarantee your safety tonight. And don’t worry about the young ladies. By my soul, I pledge that they will be guarded as honorably as my own sisters; in fact, if I could return them to you without breaking my word, I would do so right here.” Sir Gawain thanked him, and he gave him a lance and ordered all the knights to withdraw. Then he ordered the girls taken away, and he followed them. Sir Gawain left the bridge and rode upstream along the riverbank. Coming to a ford, he crossed to the other side, where he found hoofmarks; he followed them quickly and soon reached a forest. There he came upon a damsel who was holding a wounded knight in her lap. Sir Gawain greeted her and asked whether she had seen a couple of knights carrying away two young women. “Yes,” she said, “to my misfortune, for they killed my lover.” “Which way did they go, my lady?” “My lord,” she said, “wait a moment and I’ll show you where they are.” 101 At that point, a squire rode up, with an axe in his hand. “What’s going on, my lady?” he said. “I am afraid your lord is dying,” she said. “Look after [411] him, and I’ll show this knight the way to the man who killed him.” She mounted her horse and rode with Sir Gawain as far as a wide river. There was no bridge, but they did find a boat and one oar. They put in their horses, went in afterward, and Sir Gawain steered them over to the other side. When they reached the other bank, they found an armed knight awaiting them, who said, “Don’t get out! I guard this landing, and you would have to do battle with me.” “I would be sorry to have to do battle,” said Sir Gawain, “because I have much to attend to.” “Who are you?” said the knight. “Tam a knight of King Arthur’s court.” “What is your name?” he asked. “My name is Gawain.” “Then I'll let you pass,” he said. “But where do you mean to gor” “I am following some knights,” he said, “who have kidnapped two young ladies.” “Well!” said the man. “They have just gone straight down to that landing over there,” and he pointed toward a fortress far away, at the top of a hill, then said that the castle had wicked people in it. “But if you want to go there,” he said, “T’ll go with you and help you as much as I can.” Sir Gawain thanked him. “Sir Gawain,” said the knight, “if you like, I’ll tell you about the custom of the castle: we will have to fight as many knights as there are of us, and if we defeat them, we’ll still not be free.” “That’s an evil custom,” said Sir Gawain. They rode away together, and the damsel was with them. Here the story stops telling about the three of them for a while and goes back to the Knight in the Litter. [412] 40. Lancelot Returns to the Dolorous Guard and Puts an End to Its Enchantments.’ The Knight in the Litter stayed with the hermit until he was again healthy and sound and eager to bear arms, and at that point the Tournament was only two weeks away. He took leave of the hermit and went away together with his doctor, who had taken very good care of him, and his four squires. When he had gone about six leagues from the hermitage, he turned to the doctor and said, “Doctor, I need to attend to a certain matter that can’t involve you. It would be too far away for you and, besides, I want to see to it by myself. I do hope you are not offended. I thank you 1Corresponds to Micha VII:XLa; Sommer III:189—192; Kennedy 246-250. 102 very much for the friendship that you have shown me and assure you that you may count on me in every way. # The doctor then went on his way, and the knight rode on through the day, trying to keep from being recognized. In fact, that was why he sent the doctor away: so that the doctor’s presence would not bring about his recognition in any place where he might want to remain unknown. That, too, was why he put a cover over his shield: so that no one would recognize it, for it was still the red one. Furthermore, to put the doctor off his track, he tooka road that did not go straight to where the Tournament would be. At about the hour of nones, after he had been riding a long while, a squire galloped up from behind ona horse covered with sweat. The knight asked him, “Where are you going so fast, young man?” “I have a very pressing task,” he said. {413] “What is it?” said the knight. “My lady the queen is in prison in the Dolorous Guard.” “Which queen?” said the knight. “The wife of King Arthur,” said the boy. “Why is she there?” said the knight. “Because,” he answered, “King Arthur let the Captor of the castle go away. My lady was taken to the Tournament and last night stayed at the castle. Now she has been captured, and they say that nothing King Arthur could possibly do will get her out until she has summoned back the knight whom the king allowed to go away. Now my lady is sending her messengers along all the roads to let the knight know that he should come save her from the dishonor she faces, for her captors will hand her over to the man who used to be lord of the castle if he is willing to come put an end to the magic spells; and he will be only too glad to do so in order to put King Arthur to shame.” “My good fellow,” said the knight, “would the queen be freed if the knight came to the Dolorous Guard?” “Yes, no doubt of it,” said the squire. “In that case,” he answered, “he will come right away. Go now and tell the queen that the knight will be there tomorrow morning or even earlier, and that she can count on it.” “My lord,” said the young man, “I don’t dare go back if I haven’t spoken to him in person.” ‘ “Go and don’t hesitate to tell her that you have spoken to him.” “Are you the knight?” said the boy. “If I don’t know it for a fact, I don’t dare say so.” “Go now,” he answered, “for I am. You have forced it out of me.” The squire then took off as fast as his horse could move. The knight hurried along behind him, and it was dark when he arrived. As soon as he was inside the walls, he saw all the streets lit up with long [414] tapers and torches, and the gate was swung shut. Then the squire who had been searching for him earlier came up to him, and as he did, the knight asked him, “Where is my lady the queen?” “T will take you to her, my lord,” he said. He went ahead and the knight followed, and they came into the great hall. The building stood atop a solid mass of rock whose outer face was hewn plumb, and the door by Lancelot, Part I which they entered, the only way in, was made of iron so thick that nothing could break it down. The knight had taken off his helmet, but his ventail was still in place. The young man gave him a handful of candles and said, “You go ahead and light the way, while I go back and close the door.” The knight thought that he was telling the truth, but he was not; indeed, he had betrayed him, for the queen was not there. The youth darted back and shut the door, and the knight, seeing himself entrapped, was thrown into sore distress, for he realized that he could not leave that place at will. He remained there through the night. In the morning, a lady no longer very young came and spoke to him through a window. “Sir knight,” she said, “you can see what the situation is: you cannot leave this place without agreeing to certain terms.” “What terms, my lady?” he said. “You are the man who won the right to this castle. It was up to you to bring peace to the castle, but you suddenly disappeared instead.” “My lady,” he said, “has my lady the queen been freed?” “Yes,” she said, “and you are here in her place. It is now time for you to release the castle from its magic spells.” “How can I do that?” he asked. “If you swear to do your {415] utmost in the Adventure of the Castle, you will be freed.” He agreed. Then relics were brought to the window, and the knight swore as the woman had stipulated; after that, the iron door was opened and he walked out. He was then brought a good meal, because he had had nothing to eat since the morning of the day before. Once he had eaten, they explained the Adventure to him, saying that he had either to stay in the castle for forty days or else go in search of the keys to the spells. He answered that he would rather go in search of the keys, if he knew where they were, but “let’s be quick about this task,” he said, “as I have much to do elsewhere.” They brought him his armor and, once he was armed, took him to the graveyard where the tombs were. From there they went into a chapel that stood on the side near the tower, and, when they were inside, they showed him the way down to an underground cellar and told him that the keys to the spells were down there.* He crossed himself and started down, holding his shield up to protect his face and carrying his naked sword. He saw nothing but the doorway below and, beyond it, a great brightness. He reached the doorway and, as he did so, he heard a great noise all around him, but he crossed the threshold. Then it seemed to him that the whole cellar was about to cave in and that the whole earth was spinning. Hugging the wall, he went on as far as a doorway leading into a second room. When he reached it, he saw two statues of knights cast in copper, each holding a steel sword so big and so heavy that [416] two men could barely have lifted it. They stood guard at the doorway and kept striking with their swords at such a pace that no one could pass through without being hit. 2Literally, “key ...was,” which as a singular is inconsistent with what follows. Lancelot, Part I The knight was not frightened by them, but raised his shield above his head and plunged on through. One struck him a blow that sliced right through the shield and came down onto the right shoulder, cutting so fiercely through the mail of his hauberk that red blood started flowing down the whole length of his body and he fell face down onto the ground. But he jumped right back up and, picking up his shield and the sword, which had fallen, he held the shield over his head and never looked anywhere but straight ahead. He came to another doorway and there saw a large well, which was giving off a terrible stench and was also the source of all the noise that he had been hearing; it was at least seven feet across. The knight saw the black, fearsome well and then, on the far side, a man, whose face was black as ink and from whose mouth darted bluish flames; his eyes glowed like burning coals, and his teeth matched the rest. The man was holding an axe and, as the knight came near, he gripped it with both hands and raised it to defend himself. The knight did not see how he could very well move forward, for even if there had only been the well, it was a treacherous leap across for a heavily armed knight. [417] He put his sword back into the scabbard and, removing the shield from around his neck, grasped it by the inside straps with his right hand. Then he moved back as far as he could in the room and, running at top speed toward the well, he flung his shield forward and struck so hard at the face of the man with the axe that the shield broke apart, but the man remained on his feet. The knight then rushed at him with all the strength he had and smashed into him so hard that he would have tumbled into the well if he had not grabbed his attacker. But the man let the axe drop as the knight seized him by the throat with his strong, unyielding hands and forced him down onto the ground with no strength to get up. The knight dragged him over to the well by the throat and threw him in. Then he pulled his sword back out of the scabbard and suddenly saw in front of him a splendidly cast copper statue of a maiden who was holding the keys to the spells in her right hand. He took them, then went over to the copper pillar that stood in the middle of the room and read the words that he saw there: THE BIG KEY IS FOR THIS PILLAR AND THE SMALL ONE FOR THE PERILOUS CHEST. The knight opened the pillar with the big key and, when he reached in for the chest, he listened for a moment and heard inside a din and cries so loud that the whole pillar shook. He crossed himself; then, as he went to unlock the chest, he noticed that thirty copper pipes rose out of it and from each pipe [418] came a horrible voice, each one louder than the next; it was from these voices that came the castle’s spells and wonders. He put the key into the chest and, as soon as he had opened it, a great whirlwind arose and such a great noise that it seemed to him that all the devils were part of it, as, in fact, they were. He fell down in a faint and, once he had regained his senses, he took the key to the chest as well as the key to the pillar and went over to the well, but he found it filled in and dry. And as he looked about, he saw the pillar crumble down to the ground and saw the copper maiden and the two knights guarding the door collapse and shatter. He went outside with the keys and saw all the people of the 103 castle coming toward him; and when he went into the graveyard, he saw none of the graves and none of the helmets that used to be on the crenels. Then the people showed him all the joy they felt, and he made an offering of the keys on the altar of the chapel. They all then led him to the great hall, and it would not be easy to describe the fuss that they made over him. They admitted, too, that they had sent a squire after him to report how the queen was being held [419] captive in the castle, “because we thought that your great valor would make you take her place in prison.” When he realized that the queen had not been there, he felt tricked; nevertheless, he was pleased with the outcome. That night he stayed at the Dolorous Guard and the next morning took his leave, for he could be delayed no longer. And from that time on the castle was called the Joyous Guard. Thus the knight took his leave and slowly made his way to the Tournament, and the story tells nothing about what happened on the way, except that in the city where he had acquired his red shield he now acquired a white one with one black band, and this is the one he bore at the Tournament. Now the story goes back to Sir Gawain. 41. Gawain and the White Knight Both Take Part in the Second Tournament, Where Gawain Learns That the Other Is in Fact Lancelot.’ Now Sir Gawain was with the knight of the landing and the damsel who had left her lover wounded to death; they made their way to the castle that the knight had pointed out. At the entry there was a very narrow, damaged bridge over a deep, dark stream. The knight dismounted and said to Sir Gawain, “My lord, I'll go ahead, and you stay here; and if I call to you, come help me.” Sir Gawain agreed. The knight, [420] fully armed, crossed the bridge on foot and on the other side was immediately met by two unarmed knights, who told him that he would have to fight. The gate was opened, and a fully armed knight came out and made straight for the stranger, who attacked in turn. They fought for a long time. At length, the castle knight had had enough and said, “I am not going to fight with you any longer.” “I am ready to stop, too,” said the other. But the castle knight had a horse brought for him and told him to mount. As he did so, a knight on horseback came out and galloped straight toward him. They struck each other so hard that both were knocked down to the ground; they jumped back to their feet and, swords drawn, ran toward each other. At that moment, a fully armed knight came out on foot to help the castle defender, and the stranger put up a hard fight against the two of them. 1Corresponds to Micha VII:XLla; Sommer IITI:192-196; Kennedy 250-256. 108 When he had fought with them for a while, he looked toward Sir Gawain and said, “Good brother, come help me!” Sir Gawain walked across the bridge to help him, and once he was there, the others did not last long but headed back through the gate, which closed behind them. Then the knight who had been helping Sir Gawain,” feeling hot, took off his helmet, and Sir Gawain realized that he was his brother, Gaheriet. He was very happy. The knight who had said to Gaheriet “I am not going to fight with you anymore” was on the battlefield. Sir Gawain said to him, “How shall we move our horses and the young lady’s over the bridge?” “Have her palfrey come first, [421] and then the others will follow,” said the knight. That is how they moved the horses across, and the young lady came next. Then Sir Gawain asked the knight if he had any news of the young women who had been kidnapped. “They are up there,” he said, “in the great hall.” Then Gaheriet gave him the horse that the other had earlier given him; he mounted, as did the lady on her horse, and all four rode up to the great hall. As they went in, they saw an elderly knight sitting on a chair covered with a beautiful counterpane, and in front of him were sitting the young ladies, who, at the sight of Sir Gawain, were overjoyed. Sir Gawain said to the knight sitting on the chair, “Good sir, these young ladies were wrongfully taken away from me, and I am here to take them back.” “My lord,” said the knight, “you would be overstepping your bounds.” “My lord,” said Sir Gawain, “there are three of us here, along with three ladies.? Do battle with us, you and two of your men, and if you win, you can have the women!” ‘T’ll do nothing of the sort,” said the knight, “but spend the night here, and I promise you fine hospitality.” “We will happily accept your hospitality,” said Sir Gawain. The knight treated them very well. The next morning, they left, taking the young women with them. “Good sir,” said the lord of the castle to Sir Gawain, “you are taking these ladies by force; and I will take my revenge whenever I can!” “The fact is,” said [422] Sir Gawain, “that I consider them mine and believe I am right to take them away. Besides, I made you a sufficient offer.” They rode away and went as far as the edge of a forest, where they noticed ten armed knights crossing an open stretch of country and coming toward them. The damsel who had had the wounded lover recognized them and said to Sir Gawain, “Those are the traitors who killed my lover and kidnapped your young ladies.” Meanwhile, the men drew near, and one of them said, “Gawain! Leave the women, Gawain! It’s treachery for you to make off with them. This is the second time I’ve caught *That is, the knight of the landing. 3“three” as in Sommer 193 and Kennedy 252. Micha has ” “two. Lancelot, Part I you behaving shamefully; the first was when you refused to honor your promise to me.” At that, Sir Gawain recognized Brun the Merciless. “Brun,” he said, “I am not like you, who treacherously tried to have me killed! And if you’re daring enough to defend yourself, I’ll prove it to your face right now!” Then he told Gaheriet how the two knights attacked him at Brun’s instigation. “What!” said Gaheriet. “Brun, you won’t be so bold as to defend yourself against a charge of treachery?” “I would defend myself,” he said, “against a better knight than you are!” “So help me God,” said Gaheriet, “you'll have to fight!” But Brun was starting away, together with his men. “No, you don’t!” said Gaheriet. “I challenge you! And if you don’t turn around, I’ll strike you from behind, and it will be to your shame!” Thereupon he charged. Brun heard him and turned around, and they pounded each other’s shield. Brun broke his lance, and Gaheriet struck him right through the shield and hauberk, jabbing him in the chest; he thrust sharply and flung him to the ground. The nine others then all attacked [423] Gaheriet’s person and shield and horse, killing the horse and sending both to the ground. Then Sir Gawain and the other knight* headed into the battle and struck two of them; Sir Gawain, moreover, killed his man and so did the other knight. Gaheriet leapt onto one of the horses, and all the remaining foes turned around and fled. Gaheriet then went back to Brun and rushed at him, but on foot. Brun said that he would not fight against the three of them, “but I will do battle with you if you dare,” he said to Gaheriet, “at King Arthur’s court. Then we’ll see who is the better knight!” Gaheriet agreed. “Pledge to keep your word,” he said, and the man so pledged. Then they gave him back his horse, and he went on his way. Meanwhile, they had caught the horse of the knight whom Sir Gawain had brought down, and put the man back into the saddle. The young lady whose lover had been wounded then took her leave, commending them all to God. Sir Gawain handed the knight over to her as a prisoner, making him pledge that he would behave toward her as such.” “Thank you very much, my lord,” she said. “You have now given me the revenge that I wanted, for the knight you slew was the one who gave my lover the deadly blow.” With that, she rode off, and Sir Gawain and his party headed toward the Tournament, which they reached on the very day it was supposed to start. There were already many knights gathered. The two young ladies found their way into the castle. Sir Gawain, Gaheriet, and the other knight did not bear arms that day; yet the tournament was exciting, as there were many knights in it on both sides. 4The “other knight”: presumably, the first castle defender, at the beginning of the chapter. >There is some confusion in this passage, which conflates the knight killed by Gawain a moment ago and acknowledged as dead by the girl in the next paragraph, and a knight presumably unhorsed by Gawain and now turned over to the girl as her prisoner. Lancelot, Part I Then there appeared the White Knight, [424] who was bearing the white shield with the black band, and he began to joust with such zeal that all the men who were unarmed watched him with wonder, and many armed men did, too. He had a large supply of sturdy lances, and he did so well in all contests that he kept winning. Gaheriet came to Sir Gawain and said, “My lord, here we have a knight who is jousting with great zeal, and two brothers of ours are fighting on the other side. If they clash a few times, one of them is bound to pay for it. Tell the knight that, for our sake, he should avoid our brothers, and Pll tell them the same.” Sir Gawain’s two brothers were not on the other side in order to fight against the companions of King Arthur. But it often happened that, just as tournaments were getting under way, lively young knights and landless men would be the first out onto the field, and only the next day or on the third day would everyone, barons as well as would-be knights, take part. Sir Gawain came up to the knight and said, “My lord, may I ask that you not engage those two knights over on the other side?” He pointed them out, and the knight said that he would not, save in self-defense, when he would have to. Gaheriet approached his brothers and said the same thing to them. “Why shouldn’t we take him on?” they asked. “Because he is part of our family,” said Gaheriet. “Well, my God!” said Agravain, “but because he fights well, we’ve got to match him!” They paid no heed [425] to Gaheriet’s plea; in fact, Agravain started off at once to go joust with the knight. He struck him so hard that his lance shattered, and the knight, striking back, knocked him down to the ground. He then took the horse and turned it over to Sir Gawain, saying, “Here, my lord, I couldn’t help it.” “T see that,” said Sir Gawain. When Guerrehet saw his brother unhorsed, he went to joust with the knight. He spurred his horse into a fast gallop, and the other responded likewise. The horses were running very fast, the lances were heavy and short, and the two knights were strong and unyielding. They struck each other’s shield in such a way that the lances broke into pieces, but neither man fell out of his saddle. They were excited and disappointed, both of them, eager as each one was to unhorse his fellow-fighter. Then they moved apart and, taking up new heavy lances, galloped back together. They pounded each other’s shield. Guerrehet broke his lance, and the knight struck back so roughly that he hurled both man and mount into a single heap. Gaheriet saw it and pointed it out to Sir Gawain. “Look, my lord!” he said. “It couldn’t be worse!” The knight won every contest that day. Sir Gawain, having seen him defeat his two brothers and win everything, thought to himself that this must be the knight he had been seeking. He went up to the castle and called out for the young lady who was supposed to tell him the knight’s name; she mounted a palfrey and rode to meet him outside the walls. “My lady,” he said, “what about the name that you were supposed to tell me?” 105 “I do believe,” [426] she said, “that he is the man who has won everything.” “Let’s be sure to see where he heads at the end of the tournament.” “That’s a good idea,” she said. It was not much later that the tournament stopped; it was then late evening. The knight who was the day’s winner took his leave and rode into the woods, where he thought that he could best avoid detection. He was staying in the woods in the house of a hard-pressed old knight. Sir Gawain and the damsel followed him and caught up with him in the woods. “God keep you, my lord,” said Sir Gawain. The knight gave him a long stare; he recognized him. He wished Gawain God’s blessing, yet was very sorry that he had caught up with him. “My lord,” said Sir Gawain, “tell me, please, who you are.” “My lord,” he said, “I am a knight, as you can see.” “A knight,” said Sir Gawain; “yes, of course, and one of the best in the world! But do tell me what your name is.” “I won’t tell you,” he answered. “Oh, my friend,” said the young woman, “tell him! And if you don’t, I will, for he has gone to such trouble that he has a right to know.” The knight did not say a word. “My lord,” said the young lady to Sir Gawain, “it is quite clear that he won’t tell you his name, but I will; in that way, I won’t have gone back on my word. Know, then, that this is Lancelot of the Lake, the son of King Ban of Benoic, the man who was winner of today’s tournament, just as he was of the earlier one, where he bore red arms. He is the one who let the king into the Dolorous Guard.” “I am very happy to know this,” said Sir Gawain. [427] “You really should love him,” she said, “as he is the man who freed you from prison; and that is why I stayed so long at the Dolorous Guard.” At that, Sir Gawain became very humble and said, “My lord, please tell me if what she has said is true.” But the knight turned red as if his whole face were on fire and, looking very angrily at the young woman, said to Sir Gawain, “My lord, she has told you what it pleased her to tell you, but she might just as well have kept quiet. As far as I am concerned, I am telling you nothing; I won’t say whether it’s the truth or a lie.” “The fact is, sir,” said Sir Gawain, “if you say nothing, I can only believe that it is true. I’ll leave you now, since I have found, thank God, what I was looking for.” Sir Gawain rode away and went back to the castle, where he made many people happy with the news that he had completed his quest. The knight, too, went away, looking very gloomy; he was followed by the damsel. Two of his squires, who had been with him at the tournament all day, went on ahead to his lodgings. That is how the knight came to be known to Sir Gawain and why he did not dare go back to the Tournament the next day, for he was afraid of being recognized? there. At this point, the story stops speaking of SInstead of “recognized” (conneus), Kennedy 256, like Micha variants, has “delayed” (delaiez). Lecoy 380 makes the point that 106 him and his traveling companions and goes back to Sir Gawain, who was very happy to have brought his search to a successful close. [428] 42. Gawain Reveals to the Royal Court That the Captor of the Dolorous, Now Joyous, Guard Is Lancelot of the Lake, Son of King Ban of Benoic.' The next day, Sir Gawain was armed and fought very well, but the story relates no more than that King Arthur’s knights had the upper hand, while the king of the Land Beyond the Borders lost many men and was himself badly wounded. So the Tournament came to an end, with nothing planned to make up for the defeat; and Guerrehet was held to be the best knight on either side. Afterwards, Sir Gawain went to the court of his uncle the king: he took the young lady who had remained and with her went to meet the king at Carduel.* When the king saw him, he gave him a great, warm welcome, and so did the queen and everyone else at court. The king asked him, “Dear nephew, have you brought your search to a close?” “Yes, my lord,” he said. “Who,” said the king, “was the knight who let us into the Dolorous Guard?” “It was,” he answered, “Lancelot of the Lake, the son of King Ban of Benoic; and it was he who outshone everyone else at the tournament with the king of the Land Beyond the Borders, when he bore red arms. He was the winner, too, at the one that we are now coming from. Let me tell you: I spoke to him; he is one of the most handsome knights in the world, one of the best built, and one of the finest now living; and if he lives long, he will be the very finest.” The news went around so fast that all the knights and ladies of the court soon learned it. That was the first time they had heard the name Lancelot of the Lake and heard that the son of King Ban of Benoic was alive and well. Many people were delighted by the news, [429] for they had long thought that he had died in early childhood. , And that is how Sir Gawain brought the name of Lancelot to court. But at this point the story speaks no more of Sir Gawain or the king, but goes back to the knight whose name it was. Lancelot is well aware that he will be recognized, since the Lady of the Lake’s damsel has revealed his name; what is important to him, on the contrary, is to avoid any delay in the pursuit of his exploits; however, the second sentence of chapter 43, in Kennedy no less than Micha, argues for “recognized.” 'Corresponds to Micha VII:XLIIa; Sommer III:196-197; Kennedy 256-257. 2Carduel is generally identified as Carlisle. Lancelot, Part I 43. Lancelot, Bound by Oath, Kills His Host.’ After being identified to Sir Gawain, the knight went back to sleep at the vavasor’s house in the woods. The next day, he and the young lady and his squires rose early and set out in the direction away from the Tournament, because he did not.-dare risk being recognized there. He rode along in full armor, except for his helmet and except for his shield, which, covered, was carried by a squire. His companion told him all about the great deeds of Sir Gawain such as she had seen them. They had been traveling that way for quite some time when, one day, they happened to draw near a broad, shallow stream. Coming closer, they saw no bridge, but there was a ford there, and standing high above the ford on the other bank was a wooden battlemented tower; and a moat and high fence surrounded it a good bowshot away. Once at the ford, the squires crossed first, the young lady next, and the knight last; that is how they crossed over. When they reached the tower, the man guarding it let the squires and the lady ride in, and once they were inside, he closed the gate. [430] The knight asked whether he could go in as the others had just done, but the guard said, “Who are you?” “I am a knight,” he said, “of King Arthur’s court.” “Then you can’t come in,” said the gatekeeper; “nor can any other knight of King Arthur’s court.” “If that’s your last word,” said the knight, “then let me have my squires and the lady back!” But the gatekeeper said that he would not. The knight, seeing that it was hopeless, turned around. Meanwhile, there was a lady watching from a window in the tower. She spoke to the young man who had been carrying the knight’s shield; she took it and uncovered it herself, and, at the sight of the shield, she called out to the gatekeeper. “Fast! Run after that knight!” she said. “He is the finest knight in the world!” The guard jumped onto a horse and dashed across the stream; he brought the knight back, and the lady came down to greet him. In front of the tower, she said, “Sir knight, in the name of whatever you love most, do me the favor of staying here for the night, unless you are so pressed that it would be a shame to stop so early.” “My lady,” he said, “you have persuaded me to stay.” He went into the tower, and she took him up to a very beautiful room at the top. His armor was then all removed, and he remained with nothing on but his tunic. He was extraordinarily handsome and pleasing to the eye, and the lady looked at him with delight. Their meal was prepared with busy care; and while they were waiting to eat, a knight came in, fully armed. He was the lord of the household. The lady leapt up to greet him and said, “My lord, you have a guest.” “Who is he?’ he said. “The good knight,” she said, “who was the Winner of the Tournament [431] the other day.” 'Corresponds to Micha VII:XLIIa; Sommer III:197-199; Kennedy 257-260. Lancelot, Part I “I won’t believe you,” he said, “unless I see his shield.” It was hanging from a hook on the wall; the lady hurried over to it and, pulling back the cover, showed it to him. The knight whose shield it was was greatly annoyed by this and said, “Good God, my lady! I am here as your guest, and you are bringing me trouble and shame!” “Oh no, my lord!” she said. “I thought I was showing you great honor.” “My lord,” said the master of the household, “don’t be offended. You are the knight I want most to know in the whole world.” At that, he had his armor taken off and then sat down beside the visitor and told him how, at the Tournament, he and his horse had been so badly thrown about by the visitor himself that he had almost lost his life. They spoke until the meal was ready and they ate. Afterwards, the visitor asked the lord of the household where he had just come from, armed as he had been. “From a bridge downstream from here, my lord,” he said; “I am always on the watch there for King Arthur’s knights.” “Why?” asked the other. “In order, my lord,” he said, “to spot a knight who once swore to a wounded knight that he would avenge him on anyone who said that he had greater love for the man who injured him.? Well, the wounded knight was my deadly enemy, and the man who injured him was the man I loved most in the world, my mother’s brother. I would very much like to see that knight come along, because I want so much to kill him that I would pay with my own life.” When the knight heard that, he was very upset and made no answer. As the beds were now ready, they all retired, but the knight was hardly at ease. Indeed, he was grieving and in tears, since the next day he would have to do battle with the man who had shown him greater [432] honor and good fellowship than anyone else; nor could he not fight, because he would then be breaking his oath. And so he was so upsei that he did not know what he could do: take up arms against his host or violate his oath. He tossed and turned in such anguish more than halfway through the night. The next day he rose very early and put on all his armor, except that he did not cover his head or hands. Then he went to his host, who was also preparing to arm himself. “My dear host,” he said, “you have shown me great honor and hospitality. Now that I am leaving your home, I ask you, please, for one favor; it can only work to your advantage and win you my affection forever.” At that, he fell to his knees, and the other, embarrassed, ran forward to raise him, saying that there was no favor he could ask that would not be granted, as long as it brought him no shame. The knight said that it was to his advantage to grant it, and the lord of the household said that he granted it, to win his affection forever. “Thank you very much,” he answered. “What I ask is that you say, as long as I am still your guest, that you have *See chapter 22. 107 greater love for the wounded knight than for the one who wounded him.” “Holy Mary!” he cried. “Are you the man who is supposed to avenge the wounded knight?” “Yes,” he said as he wept, “that’s just it.” The other fainted. When he had come to, he said, “Good sir, I have greater love for the wounded knight than for the dead man. There. Please go now.” And at once he fainted again, while the knight turned and left, together with his squires and his young lady. When he had ridden some distance, he looked around and saw his host galloping up from behind, armed with every weapon. Reaching him, he said, “Sir knight, don’t think of me as faithless, for my statement held only for as long as you were still my guest. [433] But nowI must tell you that I have greater love for the dead man, so you cannot go away without doing battle with me.” When the knight saw that there was no way out, he made ready to attack, and so did the other man. They clashed at top speed so roughly that they both fell to the ground, with their horses on top of them. They were soon up, though, and, removing their shields from around their necks and drawing their swords, they cut and sliced at each other so much that neither of them, whatever his skill and his strength, failed to lose blood from many parts of his body. But in the end the host could not stand up to the knight that no man could stand up to, and all unwillingly he began to give ground. The Good Knight pressed him hard and kept urging him to say that he preferred the wounded knight to the dead one, but the host would not even consider it. Then the other threatened him even more than at first, but he swore that he would never change his statement. Then the Good Knight flew into a rage and rushed at him. He pressed him so hard and overwhelmed him with so many blows that he brought him down onto his hands and knees. He leapt onto the man’s body and pulled the helmet from his head. Once again he urged him to speak the words that would save him, but he refused. Then the Good Knight, [434] deeply upset, said that he would not, God willing, die by any weapon of his, so he dragged him to the edge of the stream and threw him in. And when he saw him drowning, he began to weep bitter tears. Now, though, the story leaves off speaking of him and the adventures that befell him and goes back to King Arthur at the point where it last spoke of him. 44. King Arthur Has Strange Dreams Presaging His Fall from Power.’ King Arthur, according to the story, had been at Carduel for a long time that season, and nothing much had been happening there. With no adventures to speak of and seeing nothing of what they usually saw, the king’s 'Corresponds to Micha VII:XLIVa; Sommer III:199-200; Kennedy 260-262. 108 companions were more and more bored with so long a stay. Kay the Seneschal was particularly bored. He spoke about it often and would say, even within the king’s hearing, that this stay was exceedingly boring and was lasting too long. The king asked him, “Kay, what do you want us to do?” “We might, of course, go to Camelot,” he said. The king was all prepared to set out the next day, but during the night something extraordinary happened to him: he dreamt that all the hair on his head was falling out and his beard was dropping away. [435] He was greatly frightened and put off leaving the city. Three nights later, he dreamt again, this time that all his fingers were falling from his hands, leaving only the palms. That left him more dumbfounded than the first dream, and he spoke to his chaplain about it. “My lord,” he answered, “don’t be disturbed. Dreams don’t mean a thing.” The king then took it up with the queen, and her answer was the same. “By God,” he said, “I can’t just forget this!” He sent word to his bishops and archbishops that they should come to see him at Camelot twenty days from then and should bring with them all the wisest men of learning that they could find. Thereupon he left Carduel and rode from one castle or stronghold of his to the next until, two weeks later, he reached Camelot; and on the twentieth day his clerics arrived. He asked them to explain his dreams, and they chose ten of the very wisest men and said that, if anyone was to explain them, they were the ones. The king had them locked up, saying that they would never be freed from his prison until they had told him the meaning of his dreams. For nine days they pushed their mental powers to the limit, and then they came to the king and said that they had found no explanation. “That’s useless,” said the king. “You won’t get away with that!” They answered that he should give them three more days, and he did so. Then they came back to him and said that they still could find no explanation; again they asked for more time, and he agreed. After that, they said once again that they understood nothing, “but give us three more days once again,” they said, [436] “just as your dreams took place three days apart.” “All right,” said the king, “but you can be sure that this is the last delay.” On the third day, they said that they still found no explanation. “That’s a useless report,” said the king. “I am going to put an end to all of you, unless you tell me the truth!” “You will do what you like,” they said, “but we have nothing more to say.” Then the king thought to himself that he would give them a real fright, so he had a great fire readied and ordered five of the wise men thrown into it, while the other five would be hanged. That was the king’s public order, but in private he ordered his bailiffs just to frighten them by taking them to the brink of death. Five were led to the gallows and, when the ropes were put around their necks, they were so frightened that they said they would speak, if the other five were also willing to. The word reached the Lancelot, Part I men who were supposed to be burned alive, and they said that, since the others had offered to speak, they would do so as well. Thereupon they gathered before the king, and the wisest of all said, “My lord, we will tell you what we have found, but we would not want you to think of us as worthless or as liars if things turned out differently in the end. Indeed, we very much wish you to assure us that, whatever the outcome of your dreams, no harm will come to us.” The king assured them, and the man went on, “Know, then, my lord, that you are to lose all worldly honor, and those in whom you have the greatest trust will, all unwillingly, fail you; but that is how it must be.” The king was overwhelmed by these words. [437] After a moment he asked, “Now tell me: is there anything that could shield me from this?” “In fact, my lord,” said the spokesman, “we have seen one possibility, but it is such madness even to think about it that we do not dare to mention it.” “Go ahead,” said the king; “you have nothing to fear. You can’t tell me anything worse than what you have already said.” “Then I will speak,” he went on. “Nothing can save you from losing all worldly honor, unless you are saved by the water lion and the drugless doctor at the prompting of the flower. That is what struck us as such madness that we dared not voice it.” The king was sorely troubled. He said one day that he would go hunting in the woods, and he indeed set out early the next morning, asking Sir Gawain to go with him, as well as Kay the Seneschal and whomever else he wished. And so the story now grows quiet about the king and his companions and goes back to the knight whose name Sir Gawain had brought to court, at the moment when he left the field where he had just done battle with his host. 45. Lancelot Is Entranced by the Sight of Queen Guenevere at Camelot.’ When the Winner of the Tournament left the field where he had just done battle with his host, he traveled about through the whole day without finding any further adventure. He spent the night in the house of a widow at the edge of the woods, [438] barely five Welsh leagues away from Camelot. The knight rose early and took his leave and then rode, together with his young lady and squires, until he met a young man. “Where are you going, young man?” he said. “Do you have any news?” “Yes,” he answered. “My lady the queen is here at Camelot.” “Which queen?” said the knight. “The wife of King Arthur,” said the squire. The knight started off and rode as far as a battlemented house, where he saw at the window a lady ‘Corresponds to Micha VII:XLVa; Sommer III:201; Kennedy 262-263. Lancelot, Part I dressed in surcoat and shift; she was gazing out at the nearby fields and woods. The lady was veiled; with her was a maiden whose long hair fell below her shoulders. The knight began to gaze at the lady so intensely that he utterly forgot everything else. In a moment, a knight in full armor came along. “Sir knight,” he said, “what are you staring at?” But the other did not answer, since he had not heard him. The knight then gave him a push and again asked what he was staring at. “I am looking at what I wish to look at; and it is hardly courteous of you to break into my thoughts.” “In the name of whatever you love the most,” said the unknown knight, “do you know who the woman is whom youre staring at?” “T do believe,” he said, “that I know who she is.” “And who is she?” he answered. “My lady the queen.” “By God!” said the other, “you have an odd way of showing that you know her! Hell’s devils are behind your stare!” “Why do you say that?” “Because you would not be bold enough to follow me to the queen if I went to see her.” “Well,” said the Good Knight, “if you go anywhere where I am not [439] bold enough to follow you, you are the most daring man who ever was.” “We'll see,” said the stranger. With those words, he turned, and the Good Knight followed. When they had gone some distance, the man said. “Good sir, spend this night with me, and tomorrow morning I’ll take you where I’ve promised.” The other asked whether it had to be that way, and he was told it had to be; he answered that in that case he would be his guest. That night he stayed with him, then, and it was on the bank of Camelot’s river. He stayed until high noon. The knight was very well housed, as were his young lady and his squires. But the story says nothing more about him now and goes back to King Arthur instead. 46. King Arthur Receives a Challenge from Galehaut.’ Here the story tells that the king came out of the woods just before the hour of nones. That evening, when he was having supper, there came in an elderly knight of very honorable appearance. He was covered in armor except for his head and hands, and his sword was girded on. He walked straight up to the king, did not greet him, but said right in front of his table, “King, I am sent to you by the most honorable man of his generation, Galehaut, the son of the Fair Giantess, with this message: that you should surrender your land to him or hold it in fee from 1Corresponds to Micha VII:XLVlIa; Sommer III:201-202; Kennedy 263-265, 109 him. If you are willing to be his liegeman, he will hold you [440] dearer than all the kings that he has overcome.” “Good sir,” said the king, “I have never held land in fee from anyone but God, and I will never hold land from your lord.” “I am very sorry to hear that,” said the knight, “since you will now lose both your honor and your land.” “Nothing you say matters to me,” said the king, “for, God willing, he will not have the power to take anything away from me.” “King Arthur,” said the knight, “know, then, that my lord challenges you; and in his name I tell you that within a month he will be in your land. And once he has come here, he will not go away until he has conquered all of it; moreover, he will take away your wife, Guenevere, whom he has heard praised above all other earthly women for her beauty and her virtues.” The king answered, “Sir knight, I have heard your threats and will not be frightened. Let each man do the best he can! Should your lord take my land away, I would be distressed; but he will never have the power to do it!” Thereupon the knight turned to go; but when he reached the door of the great hall, he turned back toward the king and said, “Ah, God! what sorrow! what a misfortune!” Then he mounted his horse and rode off with two other knights who had been waiting for him outside the door. The king asked Sir Gawain, his nephew, if he had ever seen Galehaut, and he answered no, as did most of the knights present. But Galegantin the Welshman, who had wandered through many lands, stepped forward and said, “My lord, I have seen Galehaut. He is a good half-foot taller than any other knight known, is better loved by his people than any other lord in the world, and has conquered more than anyone else of his age. [441] He is young and unmarried, and those that have met him report that he is the noblest knight, the most gracious in the world and the most generous. But for all that,” he went on, “I am not claiming to believe that he, or anyone else, could overpower you. If I thought that, then, so help me God, I’d rather be dead than alive!” The king at that point put an end to all the talking and said that he wanted to go back to the woods the next morning. He called together those whom he wished and said that he would set out early, as soon as he had heard Mass. In the morning, he set out once he had heard Mass and went off into the woods; and the story has nothing more to say about him right now, but goes back to the Winner of the Tournament, at the moment when he agreed to stay overnight with the knight whom he was supposed to follow the next morning. 110 47. Lancelot, in a Lover’s Trance, Is Saved from Drowning by Yvain, Who Does Not Recognize Him but Is Subsequently Impressed by His Prowess in Battle.’ The Winner of the Tournament spent the night in the house of the knight who had broken into his thoughts. He rose early in the morning and followed his host where he wanted to lead him; but he left the young lady and the squires in the house, as he expected to come back that way. The host went ahead, and the guest followed, and thus they rode until they reached Camelot. The Good Knight looked at the city, and it seemed to him that he had been there before. He looked at the [442] setting of the town and the tower and the churches, and it came back to him that Camelot was where he had become a knight. He became utterly lost in his thoughts and rode more and more slowly. Meanwhile, his host sped on ahead to see whether he was dropping behind out of cowardice or because he was deep in thought. At last, the knight who was ahead reached the king’s lodgings, which, as was usual for Arthur, stood right at the edge of a river; and the river curved around the buildings. The knight, when he arrived, looked across the river and saw a lady on a balcony. It was the queen, who had accompanied the king just that far and no farther when he had gone out to hunt in the woods; she was on the balcony because she had no wish to go back to sleep. She was wearing a surcoat and a short cloak and had thrown a veil over her head because the weather was turning chilly. As she saw the knight draw near, she threw back her veil; he stopped on the other bank and said, “My lady, who are your If you are the queen, do say so.” “Yes, good sir, Iam. But why do you ask?” “Well,” he said, “because you must be! Even if you aren't, you surely look like the queen. And I keep looking at you on account of the craziest knight I’ve ever seen.” “Who is that, sir knight?” said the queen. “Is it you?” “No, my lady,” he said; “someone else.” Then he started off toward the woods, but the queen called him back and asked him to tell her who the knight was that he had in mind. But he [443] did not want to tell her, fearing that the queen might know him and the knight would be embarrassed or hurt. He rode away, then, not along the path that the king had taken, but along another. It was not long before the second knight came riding down alongside the river. He stopped in a field at the very edge of the water, where he saw some women washing clothes. He asked them, “Have you seen a knight pass this way?” They answered no; and they were telling the truth, for they had just arrived and so had not seen the man pass by. The queen, seeing that he could find no one to help him, called out, “Sir knight, I’ve just seen the man you’re asking for. He’s gone off to the woods over there.” The knight raised his head, saw the queen on the balcony, and recognized her by her speech. “Is that right, my lady?” he said. “And which way is he headed?” ‘Corresponds to Micha VII:XLVIla; Sommer III:202-208; Kennedy 265-272. Lancelot, Part I “There, into the woods,” and she pointed in that direction; “but hurry! It’s been a little while.” The knight spurred his horse forward and started off in the direction that she had shown, but he could not stop looking at the queen, and he let the horse go where it wished. Now, the horse felt like drinking, so it turned toward the water and plunged in. The riverbank was high and the water deep, since horse and rider had gone past the ford where the queen was, and at this point the water lapped against the walls [444] of houses. The horse, with no way out, turned around and swam but then became tired. The river was so deep that the horse was running out of breath and the water came up to the knight’s shoulders; the knight, besides, was making no attempt to get out of the water, and he just let the horse do what it could. When the queen saw the danger, she began to shout “Holy Mary!” At that moment, Yvain, the son of King Urien, came along, all ready to go hunting in the woods; he had meant to be up quite early, but he had delayed too long. Sir Yvain was mounted on a hunting horse and had his bow and quiver and was wearing winter boots, as the weather was turning cold, though the sun was as high and warm as it can be between All Saints’ Day and Christmas. When Sir Yvain had come into the great hall, he had asked where the king was; and when he was told that he had already left, he asked about the queen and was told that she was on the balcony. Then he went out; and when the queen saw him, she began to shout, “Sir Yvain! Look! There, in the water—a knight about to drown!” “Good God!” he said. “What’s happened?” “Good sir,” she said, “his horse plunged in with him, and he’ll soon be drowned!” Sir Yvain was stirred by the danger that he was witnessing. He rushed down to the river, as the story goes, and went right in until the water came up to his neck. At that point, the horse was so tired and stunned that it was helpless, and the water had already closed once over the knight’s bobbing helmet. Sir Yvain seized the horse by its reins and guided it over to the bank, where he pulled it out of the water. The knight’s body and armor were thoroughly drenched. Sir Yvain asked him, “Good sir, who are you? And how did you get into the water?” “My lord, Iam a knight. I was letting my horse drink.” “It was hardly [445] the way to let your horse drink,” said Sir Yvain. “You came very close to drowning. Where are you going?” “I was following another knight, my lord,” he answered. Now, Sir Yvain would have recognized him readily, had he been carrying the shield that he had had at the Tournament, but he had left it at the house of the knight whom he was following and had instead taken an old, sooty one. His host therefore thought that he would be recognized at the king’s court,* but Sir Yvain thought less of him for it, believing that he was a man of no standing. He asked whether he still wanted to follow the other knight, and he said yes. Then Sir Yain led him back to the ford; y . . 2“be recognized”: confusing, as one would have expected “not be recognized.” Lancelot, Part I and he crossed over. But he began to stare at the queen once more, and he let himself be guided along the riverbank by his horse. He had not gone far when he met Daguenct the Fool, who asked him where he was going, but he was lost in thought and said nothing. Then Daguenet said, “I am taking you prisoner,” and led him back, while the knight made no attempt to defend himself. Sir Yvain had come back to the queen, and she said, “There is no doubt the knight would have drowned if not for you.” “It would have been a pity, my lady,” he said, “since he is a very handsome man.” “He hasn’t finished surprising us,” she said. “He has gone off downstream, and he is supposed to be following someone.” It was not long before they saw the knight and Daguenet coming along. “Look!” said the queen. “Somebody’s captured our knight!” Sir Yvain went down to the ford and was astonished to find out that the captor was Daguenet. He brought him to the queen. “My lady,” he said, “Daguenet has captured our knight.” “Daguenet,” said the queen, “by the faith you owe my lord the king, how did you capture him?” “I met him,” he answered, “along the riverbank. He refused to say a word. I took [446] his horse by the reins, and he made no move to defend himself, so I’ve brought him here as my prisoner.” “That’s just the way it must have happened,” said Sir Yvain. “T’ll be his guarantor, if you like.” “All right,” said Daguenet. The queen found it all very funny and so did everyone else within earshot, for quite a number of knights and ladies and maidens had meanwhile come along. Daguenet, you see, was of course a knight, but he was a witless fool and the most cowardly excuse for a man that anyone knew of, and people made fun of him for his wild boasts; for he would go in search of adventures and claim, when he came back, that he had killed a knight, or two or three, and that is why he was making such a fuss over this one. The queen looked at the knight and saw that no one could be better built in body and limb than he. “Daguenet,” she said, “by the faith you owe my lord the king and myself, do you know who he is?” “No, my lady, so help me God,” he said. “He’s never said a single word to me.” The knight had been holding his lance down horizontally. At the sound of the queen’s words, he looked up, his hand let go, and the lance dropped, its tip tearing through the queen’s silk cloak. She glanced at him, then whispered to Sir Yvain, “This knight doesn’t seem very smart. Really, now, it’s not good sense that led him to surrender to Daguenet! It wouldn’t have taken much to fight him off. Besides, he hasn’t yet spoken to us.” “I want to ask him who he is,” said Sir Yvain. “Sir knight, who are you?” iid The knight was looking around, and he understood that he was in the great hall. “My lord,” he said, “I am a knight, as you see.” “And what are you seeking here?” “I don’t know, my lord,” he answered. “You are this knight’s prisoner,” said Sir Yvain, “and I have made myself [447] your guarantor.” “Yes, I see,” he said. “Sir knight, can you say anything more?” “My lord, I don’t know what to say.” “My lady,” said Sir Yvain to the queen, “I have made myself this man’s guarantor. If you were to answer to me for Daguenet, I would let him go.” “Really?” she said, with a laugh. “For Daguenet, I won’t hesitate to do it.” “In that case, I’ll let him go,” he said. Sir Yvain handed the knight his lance, took him downstairs, and pointed out the ford. “Good sir, that’s the ford over there, and there is the road taken by the man that you were following.” The knight crossed the ford and started down the road through the woods. Meanwhile, Sir Yvain hurried back to his quarters, jumped onto his horse without using the spurs, and rode out toward the woods, keeping some distance behind the knight because he did not want to be seen or heard. The knight rode into the woods and looked around to see whether he could find the knight whom he was following. Noticing the pennon of a lance on a little hill, he headed toward it and, when he reached the place, the knight came down toward him. “Sir knight,” said the one who had been following, “after all my riding, I’ve caught up with you at last. Tell me what you want of me.” “IT want you to give me your horse and your arms.” ‘T won’t do that,” he answered. “Yes, you will, whether you like it or not! I’ll take them by force!” “Not if I can help it!” said the knight. The knight who had come down the hill drew back onto an open field and, readying his shield and lance, turned [448] to attack. Seeing himself threatened, the other man did the same. They spurred their horses toward each other. The knight who had come down the hill struck his foe on his shield so hard that his lance broke apart; and the other struck back hard enough to throw him over the rear of his horse down to the ground. He seized the horse by the reins and led it back to its rider. “Here, take your horse,” he said, “and I'll be off. I have more pressing things to do than remain here.” The knight jumped to his feet and said, “You can’t go away like that! You’ve got to fight with me!” “With youe” “Yes, indeed!” he answered. The knight moved back and dismounted. He drew out his sword and, holding his shield up, attacked the other knight. The latter pulled out his sword as well, and the two of them rushed at each other, slicing at helmets and striking at shields. Daguenet’s Prisoner pressed hard and attacked with rage. The other kept giving ground, as he saw that he could not withstand his thrusts, and then he said, “Stop! I won’t 2 go on fighting with you! But come with me, and I'll show you an extraordinary thing.” “Where do you want to take me?” said Daguenet’s Prisoner. “It’s not far,” he answered. “Then I’ll gladly go with you.” They mounted their horses. Daguenet’s Prisoner still had his lance unbroken. The other knight went first, and he followed. Sir Yvain had heard everything they had said, and thought to himself that he would stay behind them. When they had gone some distance, the knight who was leading spoke to the other. “Over there,” he said, “there are two giants who have laid waste part of this land, and no one who loves King Arthur or [449] the queen or the people of their household dares go near where they live. But you, if you like,” he said, “you go up to them! Look, here’s one and there’s the other!” The knight did not wait to hear more, but took his shield by the straps and, gripping his lance and aiming it straight ahead, spurred his horse straight toward the first giant. The giant saw him coming and shouted to him, “Knight! If you hate King Arthur and the queen and the people of their household, then you’re safe: don’t be afraid of us! But if you love them, you’re dead!” “By God, I love them!” The giant then raised a large mace with which to strike the knight, but he was so tall and had such long arms that he swung past the knight and his horse and just hit the ground. The knight, though, ran him through with his lance as he galloped past and threw him down dead. Then the other giant raised his mace and struck the back of the horse, breaking both its hind legs. The knight jumped to his feet and, enraged to see his horse killed, drew his sword, grasped his shield, and came up to the giant. The giant raised the mace to strike, struck the shield, and knocked it to the ground. But the knight sliced at the giant’s arm with his sword in such a way that he sent both mace and hand that gripped it flying out into the field. The giant raised his foot to kick the knight, but he, slicing at the leg, hacked off the foot, and the giant fell. Meanwhile, a young woman came along to the spot where Sir Yvain was posted, watching the fight; she was very beautiful and well dressed. “Sir knight,” she said, “it is the [450] third one.” Sir Yvain understood not a word of it but simply went up to the knight, who, seeing him, said, “Did you see, sir knight, how those two boors killed my horse? Now I’ll have to walk!” “No, you won’t, my lord,” said Sir Yvain, “God willing; I'll give you my own. Just tell that knight over there to let me mount behind him, and he can take me back to Camelot.” “My lord, thank you very much for your horse. You couldn’t give it to me at a better time.” Then he said to the knight who had led him there, “Dismount.” And the knight dismounted. Then he said to Sir Yvain, “My lord, get into the saddle, and he'll sit behind you.” Sir Yvain climbed into the saddle without a moment’s pause, and the knight mounted behind him, all armed as he was. Lancelot, Part I The knight who had just defeated the giants went off on his own business, while Sir Yvain and the other knight rode to Camelot. When they came there, the queen, dressed and ready for the day, had just heard Mass, and Sir Gawain was escorting her back from the chapel, and the great hall was full of knights. Those who were standing by the balcony windows said, “Now there’s something to seel Sir Yvain is coming. back, with an armed knight mounted behind him.” At that, Sir Yvain reached the foot of the stairs and dismounted. “My lord,” said the knight, “I’ll be on my way now.” “Yes, go,” said Sir Yvain, “and God bring you good fortune!” The knight went on his way, and Sir Yvain went up to the great hall and met Sir [451] Gawain and the queen, who were coming from the chapel. “Sir Gawain,” he said, “people speak about the wonders of Camelot, since many of them occur here, they say. Well, it’s true, but I doubt there’s a knight here who has seen as many as I have today!” “Do tell us!” said Sir Gawain. To the queen and Sir Gawain and all the others he began to tell everything he had seen the knight do, recounting how he had fought with the other knight and would have defeated him utterly if he had wished, and how he had slain one of the giants and cut off the hand and foot of the other. Daguenet then sprang forward and cried, “That’s the knight I captured! It’s the knight I captured who did all that!” “Yes, indeed,” said Sir Yvain; “that’s right.” “Good God! What a knight I can capture! Now I’m really something! Good God, Sir Gawain,” he went on, “if you had captured him, you'd be very pleased with yourself!” And Sir Yvain said to Sir Gawain, “I'll tell you something else, too: just as the knight had overcome the giants, a young woman came along and said to me, ‘Sir knight, it is the third one.’” Hearing that, Sir Gawain looked down and smiled, and the queen noticed it. She took Sir Gawain by the hand, and they went over to a window and sat down. She said, “By the faith you owe the king and me, tell me why you smiled to yourself just now.” “Tl tell you,” he answered: “because the young woman said to him, ‘It is the third one.’” Sir Gawain went on, “Do you recall,” he said, “what [452] you were told by the young woman at the Dolorous Guard, the one who was being held captive in the tower? You heard it just as clearly as I did.” “I don’t recall it,” said the queen. “She told you,” said Sir Gawain, “that we would have news of the knight who let us into the Dolorous Guard at the first tournament that would take place in the kingdom of Logres, and at the second and third. Well, this is the third. The knight who slew the giants is none other than Lancelot of the Lake. You may be sure of it!” “I believe you,” said the queen. Meanwhile, Daguenet was making such a fuss that he was wearing everyone down, saying to one after another 3See chapter 31. Lancelot, Part I that he had captured the good knight who killed the giants and that “you have never captured knights like that!” Thus they remained until evening, when the king came back and they gave him the news that a knight had slain the giants. The king was delighted, as were his companions and all the people of the land. Daguenet came to him and said, “My lord, in all truthfulness, I captured that good knight!” And the king and everyone had a great laugh. But at this point the story takes leave of them, for it speaks no more right here about the king and his companions, but turns back to the knight who killed the giants. 48. Lancelot Is Imprisoned by the Lady of Malehaut.' At this point, the story says that, once the knight had slain the giants, he rode through the woods to the other side. The day was then drawing to a close, and he met a vavasor who was coming out of the forest. The vavasor was accompanied by no one but a squire of his, who was carrying a trussed-up roebuck that he had shot in the woods. Seeing the knight, the vavasor [453] greeted him and said, “My lord, it is dark now and time to take shelter for the night. I have good, comfortable quarters to offer you, if you wish, and you could have part of this roebuck.” The knight was aware that it was time to stop for the night, so he accepted the offer and started following the vavasor. Suddenly, the young lady came along who had said “It is the third one” to Sir Yvain, and all four of them moved on to the vavasor’s house. That night they were very well lodged, and in the morning, once they had heard Mass, the knight went on his way to seek adventures. One day, as he and the young woman were riding along, they happened to reach, at the hour of tierce, a road that ran on for a good league and had a broad, deep ditch on either side. At the entry stood a knight in full armor. At the approach of Daguenet’s Prisoner, he stepped forward and asked who the newcomer was, and the newcomer answered that he was a knight of King Arthur’s. ‘In the name of God, then,” said the other, “you will not pass through, neither you nor anyone else in Arthur’s service! I hate him more than any other man, and I can never love anyone who loves him!” “Why?” said the other. “Because,” he answered, “knights of his household have caused my family very great harm.” “What harm?” he said. ‘It once happened, [454] quite some time ago, that a wounded knight came to Arthur and had broken sections of three lances stuck in his body.? He asked for his help, and Arthur had the pieces pulled out by a knight who then took an oath to avenge the wounded knight on all those who might say they had greater love for the man who had 1Corresponds to Micha VII:XLVIIIa; Sommer III:208-210; Kennedy 272-275. *See chapter 22, p. [261], where there were two sections and one sword. Ss wounded him than they had for him. Well, not long ago he killed a cousin of mine who was a fine, upstanding knight. But the. fellow who did that has more to do than he thinks, for now he has to kill all the dead man’s kinsmen!” “What do you mean?” said Daguenet’s Prisoner. “Are you one of the people who prefer the dead man to the wounded one?” “Of course,” he answered; “he was my uncle.” “That’s really too bad,” said the other. “It means I’m going to come to blows with you, and I was expecting to be on my way with no delay.” “Are you, then, the man who is bound to avenge the wounded knight?” And he answered that he would do his utmost to that end. “In that case, I tell you, either you will kill me or I'll avenge my cousin.” They moved to attack each other as swiftly as their horses could run. The knight at the entry to the road broke his lance, and the other gave him a blow that sent him down to the ground. But he was young and quick, and was on his feet in no time. He positioned his shield and drew his sword, and the two of them rushed at each other. They sliced away at their helmets, denting them all over the crown, and they tore holes in each other’s hauberk. The battle reached such a pitch that [455] the knight of the road began to falter and yield more and more ground. The other pressed him very hard, still full of breath and strength as he was, and ripped away a large part of his shield. His foe had lost a lot of blood, and one of the fastenings of his helmet was torn apart. He leapt at him, pulled the helmet from his head, and flung it as far away as he could throw, saying, “Now you have to grant that you have greater love for the wounded knight than for the dead one!” “T still don’t see,” he answered, “why I should say that.” “You must Say it,” he insisted, “or you die!” He fell on him again, as the other covered his head with as much of his shield as he had left. The man fought back hard for a long while, but in the end he could not hold out and again began to give ground. Meanwhile the other went on urging him to say that he preferred the wounded knight to the dead one, but he refused to say it. Then the knight thrust at his left arm and hurt him badly. Dropping his shield and with his helmet already gone, he struck back as best he could, but, as he rebounded, the other dealt him a blow to the head and sliced down so boldly that he cleft it right down to the mouth, and the man fell dead. The other was very shaken and would gladly have seen a different outcome. [456] Then he walked back to his horse, which the young lady was holding; he mounted, and they went on their way along the road. They traveled along until they drew near to a city that was called Malehaut Bluff. Then two squires, one carrying the knight’s shield and the other his helmet, caught up with them and galloped past without a word. The knight went toward the town together with the young woman, and, when he reached the gate, a great shout went up and more than forty knights and men-at-arms came crowding toward him, shouting noisily, charging all together, covering him with their spears and throwing both horse and rider to the ground. They killed the horse, and oe he remained on his feet, putting up a staunch fight with his sword, breaking their spears, and killing whichever of their horses he could reach. But when he saw that he could not withstand much more, he ran up the stairs of a battlemented house that stood nearby. There he fought back as well as he could, until the lady of the city appeared. At that point he was so hard pressed that he had already been brought to his knees two or three times. She said that he should surrender to her. “My lady,” he said, “what wrong have I done?” “You have slain,” she said, “the son of my seneschal, the man over here.” “My lady,” he said, “I am sorry, but I had to do it.” “Surrender!” she said. “I want you to, and I advise you to.” And he held out his sword to her, and she led him into her house; nor was anyone about to touch him after that. [457] Lancelot, Part I The lady put him in prison, which meant a cell at one end of the great hall. The cell was made of stone and was large at the base but small farther up: the floor measured four yards by four, and the walls rose to the roof of the building. Each wall of the cell had two glass windows, so transparent that anyone inside could see whoever was entering or leaving the hall. The cell was very beautiful, though it was secured with long, rigid iron bars, and the knight could move around in it as much as his chain allowed. But the young woman traveling with him knew nothing of all that, for the city gate had been barred to her and she had gone away believing that the knight was slain. She felt such grief that she dared not go back to the Lady of the Lake, but instead entered the first nunnery that she found. But now the story grows silent about her and the knight and the lady who held him captive, and goes back to King Arthur. LANCELOT, PART IT translated by Carleton W. Carroll 1) acer aes - 4 Lancelot, Part II 49. Arthur Is Attacked by Galehaut and Gets Advice from a Wise and Worthy Man.' It came about one day, so says the story, when King Arthur was staying at Camelot, that the lady of the Borderlands sent a messenger to him and told him that Galehaut, the son of the Giantess, had entered her land and had taken it all from her except for two castles that she had at the near side of her land. “King Arthur,” said the messenger, “she asks that you come to defend your land, for she can’t resist for long if you don’t come.” “T’ll go at once,” said the king. “Does he have a large company?” “Yes, my lord, easily a hundred thousand horsemen.” “Dear friend,” said the king, “now tell your lady that I’ll set out today or tomorrow to go against Galehaut.” “My lord,” said his men, “you will not, but rather you will await your troops, for he has brought a very great force and you are here with just a few companions. My lord, you mustn’t put yourself at risk.” “May God never help me,” said the king, “if ever a man enters [2] my land to do evil, and I spend more than one night in any town? before I arrive there.” In the morning the king set out and traveled until he came to the lady’s castle, and there they lodged in pavilions, for there were easily seven thousand knights. There were no more than that, but he had sent out orders far and near and summoned all his knights to come, both on horse and on foot, and for each to bring along all the troops he could. Galehaut was staying at the castle to which he had laid siege, and had brought a great troop on foot who shot and carried poisoned arrows; they were well armed as footsoldiers and had brought iron nets in carts and wagons, and they had so many of these nets that they had enclosed all Galehaut’s camp so that they had nothing to fear from the rear. Galehaut heard that King Arthur had come but that he still had only a small force of men; from among his forces he sent for the thirty kings he had conquered, and as many of the others as he wished. “My lords,” he said, “King Arthur has come, but he has only a small force of men, so I’m told, and it would not be to my honor to attack him myself, as long as his forces are so small, but I’m willing for my troops to attack his.” “My lord,” said the King of the Hundred Knights, “send me there tomerrow.” Corresponds to Micha VIII:XLIXa; Sommer III:2]10-224; Kennedy 275-294. 2“more than one night in any town,” as in Kennedy 276.7 (Micha has “if I lie in town”). “Agreed,” said Galehaut. At dawn the next day the King of the Hundred Knights went to observe King Arthur’s forces. Near the castle where the king was there was a fortified town named Malehaut Bluff, but it was at least seven Welsh leagues away. Between King Arthur and the town there was a [3] high hill, nearer to the camp than to the town: the King of the Hundred Knights climbed up there to observe King Arthur’s forces, and it seemed to him there might be more than seven thousand knights. He returned to Galehaut and said to him, “My lord, I have estimated their forces, and they have no more than ten thousand knights.” He deliberately exaggerated, for he had no wish to be blamed by Galehaut’s followers. And Galehaut replied, “Take ten thousand of your knights, as you choose, and go attack them.” “Gladly, my lord,” said the King of the Hundred Knights. He chose the ten thousand knights he wanted, they armed themselves completely, and off they went in irregular order toward King Arthur’s troops, for never was there a pitched battle nor an orderly placement of forces. The news reached the camp that Galehaut’s knights were coming; they speedily armed themselves, and Sir Gawain went to his uncle the king and said to him, “My lord, Galehaut’s knights are coming to attack us, but he himself is not among them, and since he’s not, you will not go to meet them.” “No,” said the king to Sir Gawain, “but you will, and take along all the troops you have and arrange your horsemen and troops, and do so wisely, for they have more troops than we do at this point.” “My lord,” said Sir Gawain, “it will be done to the best of our ability.” Sir Gawain and the other knights crossed the water at a [4] ford, for the army was camped beside a river, and when they had done so they arranged their horsemen and their troops. And Galehaut’s forces came charging in great disorder and Sir Gawain sent a battalion against them to meet the attack. Galehaut’s® were fresh forces, impetuous and eager to attack, and Arthur’s met them well and the battle began. Galehaut’s forces were so numerous that Arthur’s could not withstand them, and when Sir Gawain saw that it was appropriate, he sent another battalion against them, and then a third and then a fourth. And when he saw that the ten thousand knights had all arrived, he himself rode to attack them. All the seven thousand 3The Old French text is ambiguous, but given the description “impetuous and eager to attack,” I conclude that the first group refers to Galehaut’s forces. Cf. Corin Corley’s translation (based on Elspeth Kennedy’s edition), Lancelot of the Lake (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989), 435 (note to 230). 117 118 knights fought very well, but Sir Gawain distinguished himself above all the others. There were many valiant knights of King Arthur’s household who performed many valorous deeds, and among Galehaut’s there were also plenty who fought very well. The battle lasted a long time, and there were plenty of deeds of chivalry on both sides. Galehaut’s forces could not withstand King Arthur’s, though they had the greater numbers, and the seven thousand vanquished them and chased them from the field. When the King of the Hundred Knights saw that his forces had been routed and were fleeing, it weighed heavily upon him, for he was a very fine knight. He chose a messenger and sent to Galehaut for help, for they could not withstand King Arthur’s forces. Then Galehaut sent thirty thousand men; they came in disorder, with great speed, and raised [5] the dust, as such a great army is wont to do. Sir Gawain saw them from afar and so did the rest of King Arthur’s household. If they were frightened by this, it was no wonder. The King of the Hundred Knights and his men saw them coming and were very glad; they turned their horses about and vehemently renewed their attack upon King Arthur’s forces, who repaid them just as well or better. Sir Gawain drew back and his men closed the ranks, for they feared the force that was rushing at them, impetuous and eager to attack. “Now, my lord knights,” said Sir Gawain, “now it will be seen who fights well, for there’s nothing else we can do. Now we shall see who truly loves the king’s honor and his own.” Sir Gawain and his men angrily turned to meet them head-on and moved to attack, and they struck back so violently that their lances splintered and many were struck down on both sides. In that place there was a wondrous battle of lances and of swords; King Arthur’s men held out and fought very well, but the force was so great on the other side that, had it not been for Sir Gawain’s prowess, they would all have been taken prisoner and none would have escaped, but he fought so well that no knight ever fought better. But good fighting was to no avail, for there were too many on the other side, and by the force of numbers they drove them back to a ford. There Sir Gawain and the good knights of the king’s household held out more valiantly [6] than any other troops ever, but his resistance surpassed all others, until at length the enemy drove them across the ford. The battle before the gate was wondrous to behold: there Sir Gawain defended himself so well that King Arthur's troops had entered inside, and yet they lost many, for Galehaut’s forces captured many of their knights. Then they withdrew, for it was nightfall. Sir Gawain was not forcibly driven into the castle, but he was so badly battered before the gate and he took so many blows that he was in great pain when Galehaut’s forces withdrew, and he fell senseless from his horse without anyone touching him. He had suffered such anguish all that day and had so struggled to fight well that he was reduced to such a state that they carried him off to his quarters. The king and the queen and all the others were extremely afraid for him and feared that 4uthe King’s honor and his own,” as in Kennedy 278.17 (Micha has “King Arthur and his honor”). Lancelot, Part IT he might be injured internally from the efforts and the wonders he had performed in the fighting that day. Near there was the town of Malehaut. It was held by a lady whose lord had died and she had children by him; she was a very good and sensible lady and was greatly loved and esteemed by all those who knew her. And the people of her land loved her so greatly that when other folk asked them “What is your lady like?” they replied that she was the queen of all the others. This lady was holding a knight prisoner, in a cell made of such clear stone [7] that he could see all those outside and those outside could see him. The cell was narrow and high enough that he could stand, and about as long as one could throw a large stone. Therein the lady held the knight prisoner. And that night, following the battle, the knights of the land came to the lady and told her news of the battle. And she asked who had fought best, and they said it had been Sir Gawain, and that no knight had ever fought better, in their opinion. The knight who was in the cell heard this news, and when the men-at-arms guarding him brought him his meal, he asked them who was the knight in the lady’s household who stood highest in her favor, and they named a very worthy knight who was very high in her favor. “My lords, please have him speak to me.” “Most gladly,” said the men-at-arms, “we'll tell him.” They went to the knight and told him, “That prisoner knight wants to speak to you.” And he went to the cell. When the prisoner saw him, he rose to meet him. “My lord,” he said, “I sent for you, and I beg you to ask that my lady allow me to speak to her.” “With pleasure, good sir,” said the knight. He left the cell and came before his lady and said, “My lady, grant me a boon.” “What boone” said the lady. “Grant it to me,” he said, “and I will tell you.” “Speak confidently,” she said. “Do you need anything? I will give it to you.” “I thank you, my lady,” he said; “you have agreed [8] that you will speak to that knight whom you are holding in prison.” “Gladly,”’ she replied; “bring him here.” The knight went to get him, brought him before his lady, and then retired, leaving him with her. “Fair lord,” said the lady, “you wished to speak to me, so I have been told.” “Indeed, my lady,” he said. “I am your prisoner, and I wish to beg you to release me for payment of ransom, for I've heard that King Arthur is in this land. Iam but a poor young knight, but am known to people of his household who would readily pay my ransom.” 6 5“and they named ... her favor” supplied from Micha’s note Oras ®The motif of the “rash boon,” in which someone agrees to grant a request before knowing what that request is, is frequently found in Arthurian romance, from Chrétien de Troyes's Erec et Enide onward. For an extensive analysis of this motif, see Jean Frappier, Travaux de Linguistique et de Littérature 7 (1969): 7-46. ™Gladly” supplied from Kennedy 280.1. 8A bacheler is not only young and unmarried but, more particularly, landless. Lancelot, Part IT “Fair lord,” she said, “I am not holding you because I desire your ransom, but for justice. You know well that you committed a grievous outrage, and for that I took you prisoner.”® “My lady,” he said, “I can’t deny the fact, but I had to do it, for my honor was at stake. But if it were your pleasure to release me for payment of ransom, you would act well, for I’ve heard that there has been a battle in this land and that there is to be another in two days’ time,!° as those knights were saying just now in this hall. And if you would allow it, I would earnestly beg you to let me go there, and I will promise to return at night to your prison, if I am not bodily prevented from doing so.” “I will do so,” she said, “on condition that you tell me your name.” “That I cannot do.” “Then you won’t go there.” “Let me go,” he said, “and I pledge to you that I will tell you as soon as circumstances allow me to do so.” “Do you pledge to do so?” she asked. “Yes.” “Then [9] you can go,” she said, “but you will solemnly promise that in the evening you will return to my prison, if you aren’t bodily prevented from doing so.” He made her this promise and she accepted his pledge; then he went back to his cell, and he stayed there that evening and the next day and the following night. Meanwhile King Arthur’s forces grew, for they came from all directions. Galehaut’s men came to him, and said, “My lord, will our forces do battle tomorrow against those of King Arthur?” “Yes,” said Galehaut, “I'll choose those I want to go there.” “Choose?” they said. “There’s no question of that. If you want to send those who were there the last time, all the others will go, whether you wish it or not, for they are so eager to do battle with Arthur’s knights that we could not hold them back. But send all those who weren’t there, and let those who were there remain with you.” “Fine,” said Galehaut. “Now the forty!! thousand who were not there will go, and on the third day I’ll go there myself.” The night passed, and in the morning the king ordered that none of his knights should cross the water, but that they should arm themselves in camp and decide on the arrangements for battle. And when they saw Galehaut’s troops,!* they should cross the water. The knights of the land had all come into camp, those from the town of Malehaut Bluff and from other lands around. %See chapter 48, pp. [454-457]. The question of honor, mentioned in the next paragraph, refers to Lancelot’s oath, chapter 22, p. [278]. Future events are very frequently mentioned as occurring two days after the present action, The phrase lier jor literally means “third day,” but the point of reference, the “present” of the action, is counted as day number 1. The subsequent narration in this passage makes the chronology quite clear. DS fontyie as in note 12.b and on p. [12] (Micha has “nine”). 12sGalehaut’s troops,” as in note 12.2 and Kennedy 281.7 (Micha has “Galehaut”). ie The lady of the town had given a horse and a red shield to the knight she held prisoner, along with [10] the very armor he had when she had taken him prisoner, for he wished to have no other. In the morning, at daybreak, he went forth from the town and rode toward King Arthur’s camp; he saw the knights fully armed on both sides. He stopped beside the ford, and did not cross. Above the ford there were stands where King Arthur, along with the queen and many ladies and maidens, had come to watch the army, and Sir Gawain had himself carried there, as ill as he was. The knight with the red shield stopped beside the ford and leaned upon his lance. Then Galehaut’s forces came all in order. To the first battle came the king whom he had first defeated, and as they drew near he separated from his men, took his shield, and went on ahead all alone. The idlers and braggarts who were there with King Arthur’s army and who boasted about feats of arms began to shout aloud, “Their knights are coming, they’re here!” And the First Defeated King came closer, and the idlers began to say to the knight with the red shield, “Sir knight, see one of theirs coming! What are you waiting for? He’s coming all alone!” Many times they said this, but he said nothing in reply. And the First Defeated King came swiftly on. The youths had tried so long to get his attention that they were thoroughly vexed. Then one fine idler came toward him, took the shield from his neck, and hung it around his own, but the knight never moved. And another youth, who was on foot, thought that the knight must be mad, so he stooped toward the water, picked up a clod of earth, and struck him with it [11] on the nasal of his helmet. “Dastardly coward,” said the youth, “what are you doing?” The clod was wet, and the water got into his eyes: he closed his eyes and then opened them because of the water he felt,!3 and heard the clamor; he looked about and saw the First Defeated King who was already very near. He spurred his horse, lowered his lance, and went to meet him. The king struck him in the chest, but his hauberk was strong; it did not break, and the lance splintered. The knight struck him so violently that he bore him to the ground, along with his horse, all in a heap. As the horse got up again, the youth who had taken the shield, and had it around his neck, grabbed the reins, but the knight never looked at it: had he wished, he could have taken it before the youth did, but he was not interested in that.!4 Then the idler who had taken his shield came toward him and put it around his neck. “Here, my lord,” he said; “it is put to better use than I thought.” The knight looked and saw that the other was putting the shield around his neck; he made no sign that he had noticed, but simply took it. The companions of the king whom he had struck down came charging that way when they saw their lord fall. And King Arthur’s troops made ready, and when they were prepared they came to the ford and crossed the water. The knights came at one another; 13because of the water he felt” supplied from Micha’s note 14.b. M4 That is, he was not interested in booty or spoils. 120 the one with the red shield gave his horse free rein to joust against one of the knights of the king he had struck down, and he struck him so that he bore him to the ground and his lance splintered. Then a youth came after him and took the horse. The battle began in earnest between King Arthur’s forces and those of Galehaut. The king’s battalions swarmed across the ford one after another, and Galehaut’s forces came from the other side, very [12] eager to do battle with King Arthur’s forces. The latter met them with the heads of their lances, leaving many dead and many wounded that day. Though Galehaut’s forces fought very well, King Arthur’s fought even better; they had to do so, for they were outnumbered, being only twenty thousand and the others forty thousand. The battle lasted a long time, and the fighting was very fine; there were many knightly deeds, and King Arthur’s companions and the valiant knights of his household fought very well. There were many deeds of prowess on both sides that day, but the knight with the red armor conquered all, and he stole away that night without anyone knowing what had become of him. The king was greatly afraid of losing his land and all honor, and his men were deserting him in great numbers, as the wise clerics had predicted,!® and he was terrified. And on the other side, Galehaut spoke to his men and said that he had won no great honor by making war upon King Arthur in this way, for the king had too few men, “and if I conquered his land at this time,” he said, “I would not win honor, but rather shame.” “My lord,” said his men, “what do you mean by this?” ‘I'll tell you,” he said. “It now no longer pleases me to make war upon him in this way; rather I'll grant him a truce for one year on condition that he bring his full forces with him at the end of the year, and then I'll win greater honor in making war upon him than I would now.” So the night passed, and the next day a very wise gentleman arrived at King Arthur’s camp. [13] When the king heard that he was coming, he was greatly comforted, and it seemed to him that God was sending him help, Then the king mounted and went forth with a great company of people and greeted him simply, but instead of returning his greeting, the wise man spoke in great anger: “I care neither for you nor your greeting and do not like it, for you are the vilest of all sinners; and this will be clear to you, for you have come close to losing all worldly honor.” Then all drew back, and the king and the wise man rode side by side, and the king said to him, “Good master, tell me why you don’t care for my greeting and how it is that I’m such a vile sinner.” “I'll tell vous said the wise man, “for I know better who you are than you do yourself; and yet you know full well that you were neither conceived nor born in legal wedlock, but rather in the great sin of adultery.!7 And you 15See chapter 44, p. [436]. 16A¢ this point, the wise man passes from the formal personal pronoun vous to the informal tu in speaking to Arthur, and continues to use the familiar form for the remainder of the chapter. "See the Story of Merlin, chapter 4. Cf. Lancelot, chapter 6, p. [41], and chapter 95, p. [300]. Lancelot, Part IT must know that no mortal man entrusted you with the dominion that you hold but that God alone did so, and He entrusted you with it so that you would take good care of it.!8 But you, who should have taken care of it, have held it for Him in such a way that you have destroyed it, for the poor and the powerless cannot reach you to obtain justice, but the disloyal rich man is heard and honored before you because of his wealth, while the just and virtuous poor man gets no justice because of his poverty. The right of widows and orphans has perished in your kingdom, and with great severity God will hold you accountable for this above [14] all things, for He Himself said through the mouth of the prophet David that He is the protector of the poor and upholds the orphans and will destroy the ways of sinners. This is how you have served God, who gave you earthly dominion over His people, and through this you will come to destruction, for God will destroy sinners and so He will destroy you, for you are the vilest of all sinners.” “Ah, dear master,” he said, “advise me, for God’s sake, for I am terrified.” And the wise man said to him, “It is a wonder that you ask advice but won't believe it.” “Truly, good master,” said the king, ‘T will believe whatever you tell me.” Thus the two of them, speaking together, arrived at the king’s tent. And the king resumed speaking and said, “Good master, advise me, for God’s sake, for I greatly need your counsel.” And the wise man said, “The advice may yet come in time, if you!® are willing to believe it, and I will teach you the beginning of the way to Our Lord. Now go into your chapel and summon the noblest men and the wisest clerics you can find in this camp, and to all of them together make confession for all the sins that tongue can reveal through the recollection of the heart; and be sure that you take your heart with your tongue,”? for the confession is no good if the heart does not repent what the tongue confesses. You are very far from the love of Our Lord, because of your sin, and cannot be reconciled with it except by confession [15] first of all and then by true repentance of the heart afterwards, and then by bodily penitence and deeds of alms and charity. Such is the true way to the Lord. Go now, and make your confession in this way, and you will be scourged at the hands of your confessors, for this is the sign of humility. If I myself were ordained to hear confession, I would hear yours, but no one must do this who is not ordained, unless need demands it. For this reason, I must not hear your confession, for you will have plenty of confessors from the Holy Church. But after your confession you will come to me and God will send you counsel, if false belief does not hinder you. Go now, and do as I have told you, and do not fail to confess anything for which your conscience might blame you.” 18take good care of it,” as in note 18.a and Kennedy 283.23 (Micha has “be grateful to him for it”). 192 xceptionally, the wise man uses a formal form here, volés (“are willing”), then immediately resumes using the informal tu (see note 16). 206 with your tongue,” as in Kennedy 284.14 (Micha has “with you and your mouth”). Lancelot, Part IIT Then the king summoned his archbishops and his bishops, of whom there were a great number in the camp. And when they were assembled in his chapel, the king came before them all, naked but for his breeches,*! weeping and wailing; both his hands were full of thin wands, and he cast them before the priests and, weeping, told them to impose God’s vengeance upon him, “for I am the vilest and the most disloyal sinner in the world.” When they heard this, they were greatly astonished and said, “My lord, what is this? What troubles youe” “I come to you,” he replied, “as to my fathers, and wish to confess my great wickedness to God, in your hearing, for I am the vilest sinner that ever was.” Then [16] they felt great pity for him and began to weep. And he knelt down before them, naked and barefoot, until he believed he had confessed all the great sins by which he believed himself morally harmed. Afterwards they scourged him, and he received their punishment very meekly. Then the king returned to his master, who asked him straightway how things had gone. He told him he had confessed all the great sins he believed he had committed and that he could remember. And the wise man said to him, “Did you confess the great sin you committed toward King Ban of Benoic,2* who died in your service, and toward his wife, who was disinherited following her lord’s death? I do not mention her son, whom she also lost, but one loss is much easier to bear than the other.” Then the king was greatly aghast, and said, “Indeed, master, I didn’t confess this, and yet the sin is very grave, but truly I had forgotten it.” The king returned at once to his chapel and found his clerics still there, speaking of his confession, and he confessed his sin to them. But they imposed no penance on him, not for this one nor for the others, for they could not agree on his penance, and took it upon themselves to postpone it until after the battle,?? until there could be further deliberation. Then the king returned to his master and told him what he had done and then said to him, “Good master, for God’s sake, now counsel me, and I will believe®4 everything that you advise, [17] for I am terrified because of my men who are deserting me, for I have greatly loved them.” “Ah,” said the wise man, “it is no wonder if your men are deserting you, for since a man has failed himself, others must surely fail him; and you have failed, in that you have 2IThis passage could also be punctuated with the comma following aus (“them”), so that it would run “... before them, completely naked but for ...” (as in Kennedy 284.31). Note that “naked” (nu) did not have the absolute meaning it has acquired in modern usage, but could be combined, as here, with en plus the name of an article of clothing. Compare trestote nue en sa chemise (“clad in nothing but her shift”) in Chrétien’s The Knight with the Lion, or Yuain (Le Chevalier au Lion), ed. and trans. William W. Kibler (New York and London: Garland, 1985), line 4324. *2See the beginning of Lancelot, chapter 3. 23the battle,” as in note 22.a and Kennedy 285.22 (Micha has “August” or “harvest”). 24believe,” as in note 22.b and Kennedy 285.25-26 (Micha has “promise”). ye) behaved badly toward your Creator with respect to the dominion you were to hold from him, and not from any other. They must fail you;?> this is God’s sign that He wishes to remove you from your dominion, and therefore he took away those by whose aid you have long maintained it. And yet some are deserting you of their own free will, and others against their will. Those whom you should have treated with great honor and provided noble entertainment and fellowship, they are deserting you of their own free will:26 those are the lesser nobles of your land, by whom you must be maintained, for the kingdom cannot be maintained if the common people do not wish it. Those have deserted you of their own free will. The others, who desert you against their will, are those of your household to whom you have given great wealth and whom you have made lords of your household: those desert you against their will, because God wishes it so, and no resistance can withstand God’s will. Thus both groups are deserting you, but some come to serve you as a matter of necessity, for they have to safeguard their lands and their honors, and others do so because of the good you do them and will continue to do. So some come out of necessity and others of their own free will, but those who come out of necessity are worth no more to you than if they were dead, for you do not have their hearts, and a body without the heart has no power. Now consider what [18] worth a shield or hauberk or sword or might of horses can have without the heart of man: it can be worth nothing. If you now had all the kings that have ever lived since the world began, and they were all fully armed, if their hearts were not in it they would help you no more than they do now. And so it is with those who come to serve you out of necessity, for you have only their bodies, and not their hearts, which on the contrary you have lost. Does it seem to you that I am speaking the truth?” “Surely, master,” said the king, “I readily agree that you’re telling me the truth. But for God’s sake, advise me as to what I can do, for those who explained my dream?’ told me that this would happen. And since you have already counseled me so much, for God’s sake, advise me so that I may be saved, if that is possible.” “I will advise you,” said the wise man. “And do you know how? To the honor of your person and to the benefit of your soul, and I will teach you one of the finest remedies you ever heard, for I’ll teach you to heal a sick heart in a healthy body, and this is a very fine treatment. And you have promised me that you will do what I advise.” “Surely, master,” said the king, “I will indeed.” “Then I’ll tell you,” said the wise man, “what you will do. You will have counsel and help, and they won’t be long in coming, and you'll see what God does to put you right with Himself and with mankind. You will depart for your own land, and will stay in all the good cities,2° longer in some, more briefly in others, according to whether one is 25“for since aman... They must fail you” supplied from note 22.c, and Kennedy 285.2932. 26«and others against their will. Those” and “they are deserting you of their own free will” supplied from Kennedy 285.35-36. 27See chapter 44, p. [436]. 28The singular vile (“city”) would seem to be an error, since the plural is clearly intended. 122 better than another. And take care that you stay there until you have heard both [19] the rights and the wrongs, both great and small, for the poor man will be much more joyful if he obtains justice from you than if he received more from another, and he will say wherever he goes that you yourself upheld him in his cause. So must a king do who wishes to have the love of God and of man, the love of man from humility, and the love of God from righteousness: that is the beginning of the winning of honor and love. Next I will tell you what else you will do. While you stay in your cities, you will summon the highest men in your land, and all the knights, both poor and rich, and they will come willingly and in great numbers. And you will go forth to meet them, and accompany them nobly and honor them with great feasts and fine celebrations, and when you see a poor landless knight whom Poverty has in bondage and who has not forgotten knightly prowess, but who is down among the other poor men, do not forget him because of his poverty or his low birth, for beneath poverty of goods there lies great wealth of spirit, and poverty of spirit is often wrapped up in great abundance of gold and of lands. But since it would be impossible for you to recognize by yourself the good people and the bad of each land to which you come, summon the most loyal knight [20] in whom bravery is lodged, and by his testimony you will do good and show honor to those of his land, for no one knows a man of quality so well as he who is rooted in great prowess. And when he points out the good poor man seated at a distance among the other poor, take care not to value the company of the rich man so highly that you fail to rise from his side and go to sit beside the poor man, and ask him about himself and get acquainted with him. And then each one will say, ‘Have you seen what the king has done, leaving all the rich men for that poor man?’ In this way you will win the love of the low folk, for it will show great humility. Humility is the virtue through which one can most augment and advance one’s honor and one’s benefit, and you will never see a man so high, in whom there is any sense or goodness, that, if you rise from beside him to go keep a poorer man company, he will not consider it an act of wisdom and prowess. And if the fools reproach you for it, do not be concerned, for the fool’s blame declines, but the wise man’s praise increases and grows stronger. When you have stayed and become acquainted with the poor men, then return to the company of the great barons of your realm, for the benefit of one must not decrease because of the other. “When you have stayed in your city as long as you like, leave it with such company as you have had. And then fine horses and good arms, costly silken sheets, fine dishes of gold and silver, and great quantities of money will be prepared. And when you see the good poor man whom you have come to know through the reliable witness, choose one of your horses such as would suit him, and mount it. Ride up beside him and greet him joyfully; then dismount, have him mount, and tell him that you want him to ride it, for love of you. Then give him as much of your money as you think [21] right. You will give him the horse in consideration of his prowess and the money so that he may spend freely. Lancelot, Part IT “In this way you will make gifts to the poor but worthy man, but in another way to the vavasors, if they are comfortable in their lodgings. You will give them clothing, and palfreys to carry them where they need to go, but be sure that you have sat upon the palfrey beforehand, and everywhere they will say that they have the palfrey that you yourself rode. Make gifts to the vavasor as well, but do not neglect for all that to help the needy, by increasing their fiefs with fine revenues and rich lands, to each according to his condition, for you will lose nothing by this, but rather will win their hearts, for your lands will be better protected by a number of men of quality than they would be by you alone. You are but one man, and it is only through them that you can do what you can do, and you should prefer that your good men honorably hold a portion of your land than that you should shamefully lose both it and them. Then to the nobles, the kings and dukes, the counts and barons, give costly vessels, elegant jewels, fine silken fabrics, handsome birds and horses; and do not think so much of giving them costly gifts as fine and pleasing ones, for one must not give the rich man costly things, but rather pleasing ones of lesser value,* for it is a tiresome thing to pour one wealth upon another. But to the poor man [22] one must give such things as are more good than beautiful and more useful than pleasing, for poverty needs only improvement and wealth needs only pleasure, and the same things are not appropriate gifts for all, for one should not give a man something he already has in abundance. It is in this manner that you must give gifts, if you wish to give according to justice; and if you do thus, so must the queen do to the ladies and maidens of the land wherever she goes, and you and she must give gifts according to the wise man’s teaching. The wise man says that the giver must be just as joyful as he to whom the gift is made: one must not give with an unpleasant expression, but always with a joyful countenance, for in joyful giving there are two kinds of rewards, but that which is given with a grimace has no reward. “And there is yet another reason why you should never tire of giving, for you know well that you can never be destroyed thereby. But you can be undone by keeping too much of your wealth, for none was ever destroyed by generosity, but many have been destroyed by avarice. Always give generously, and you will always have enough, for whatever you give will remain in your land, and from many other lands wealth will come into yours. And giving will never fail you as long as you are watchful, for you will never wear out the gold and silver of your land; rather they will wear you out, as the water wears the mill-wheel. For this reason you must always think of giving. And if you behaved in this way, [23] you would win worldly honor, the hearts of your people, and the love of Our Lord, and these are the great rewards for which man was created, and none should think of winning any others. Does it seem to you that I am advising you in good faith?” “Truly, good master,” said the king, “you have advised me very well, and I'll do as you have ordered, if God brings 2obut ... of lesser value,” as in Kennedy 288.23 (Micha has “costly things for pleasing ones, but pleasing things for costly ones’). Lancelot, Part IT me honorably back to my land. But for God’s sake advise me about the great wonder that I was told by those who interpreted my dream, that nothing can save me from losing my land except for the Lion in Water and the Doctor without Medicine through the advice of the Flower.” Enlighten me concerning these three things, if that may be, for I can’t understand them and you will explain them fully to me, if that is your wish.” “Now listen,” said the wise man. “I have shown you how you have lost the hearts of your people and how you may get them back. And I will yet explain to you the three things that you ask, so that you will see and understand them clearly; and yet they who spoke of them did not know what they were talking about, any more than the madman who speaks and knows not whether he is telling the truth or not. But I will tell you the truth of it, and be assured that they were not without reason in speaking as they did, for the lion is God. God is represented by the lion, by the characteristics of the lion that are different from those of other beasts, but it is a great wonder that they saw it in water. [24] They called it ‘in water’ because they thought they saw it in the water: the water where they thought they saw it is the world, for just as the fish cannot live without water, so we cannot live without the world—that is to say, without the things of the world. Those who told you they had seen the lion were wrapped up in the world, and because they were wrapped up in and morally harmed by the sins of the world, they thought they had seen the lion in the water that represents this world, for if they were as they should be, loyal, chaste, charitable, merciful, religious, and full of other virtues, they would not have seen the lion in the water, but up above in heaven, for heaven is the eternal life prepared for man, if he is willing to act according to the commandments of his creator. And he who lives thus is not earthly, but rather heavenly, for if the body is in this world, the spirit is in heaven through holy thought. But the world is not at all like that; rather it is grave and burial for the man who lives contrary to reason, that is in pride, cruelty, wickedness, avarice, covetousness, lust, and in other mortal sins. Such were the clerks who interpreted your dream, and for that reason they thought they had seen the lion in the water, which represents sin; and yet it was not in the water, for God was never in sin: He was in his glorious seat, but the air was so thick between Him and them that they could not see Him except as they themselves were, in the water, for [25] the great learning that was in them made them see the figure of the lion by force of inquiry. But because of that learning, which was only earthly, they had only the image of the lion, but they could not recognize it nor know what it might be, for they were earthly and the lion is a heavenly thing. Thus they did not see its true nature, and believed they had seen it in the water, so they were mistaken and called it ‘in water.’ That lion is Jesus who was born of the Virgin, for just as the lion is lord of all the beasts, so is God lord of all things. The lion has many other attributes by which it represents God, of which I will speak no more now, for it is through that lion that you will have salvation, if you are ever to have it. That is Jesus Christ, the 30See chapter 44, p. [437]. I: true lion. Now have you understood who the Lion is and why it was called ‘in water’?” “Master,” he said, “I have understood this fully, and you have explained it to me very well, but for God’s sake, tell me who the Doctor without Medicine can be, for I would not believe that anyone could be a doctor without medicine, and I can make nothing of it.” “The more I look at you,” said the wise man, “the more foolish I find you, for if you had any sense, you could understand these two things quite clearly, one through the other. But since I have begun to teach you and to advise the royal crown through Our Lord, I will advise you to the end, not for your own sake, but for that of the common people, and I will tell you who is the Doctor without Medicine. It is God, and he is the only doctor without medicine, for all other doctors derive whatever powers they have [26] from Him, for recognizing the maladies of the body and how to cure them. All this they do by the knowledge that comes from God, who placed the power in herbs that cure the body, but they know only cures for the body. And still this power is not in all, for many times it happens that when they have done all they can to heal the body, it still dies. And if it happens that they cure the ills of the body, yet they have no power to heal the ills of the soul. But God is able to do so, for as soon as a man comes to Him following confession, he can never be so weighed down by vile sin that God will not look at him. And as soon as He has looked at him, no other doctor will be needed, nor other medicine nor the application of any other dressing; the wound is healthy and clean, as soon as He has looked at it. This is the Doctor without Medicine, who applies no medicine to the wounds of souls or of bodies, but rather all is made healthy and clean by His sweet glance. But mortal doctors®! cannot do this, for when they have seen the wounds, they must seek the herbs and the medicines needed for that illness. And sometimes all is lost, for Death shows his dominion in this. But He is a true doctor who by his glance alone gives health to the ills of bodies and of souls, and makes death withdraw from the body for as long as He wishes [27] and protects? us forever from the death of the soul. This is the Doctor without Medicine. And believe me truly, if today you gave yourself wholeheartedly to your confessors in genuine confession, you are healed in soul and in body, and you will never be dishonored on earth and your soul will never be the victim of everlasting death, for He will keep you from all perils, and He is rightly called the Doctor without Medicine.” “That may well be,” said the king, “but now I am more bewildered than before concerning the Flower’s advice, for I see clearly that a flower cannot give advice if it does not speak, and I cannot see how a flower can speak.” “Truly,” said the wise man, “you will clearly see that a flower can speak and give advice, and without the advice of the flower you cannot attain either the true Lion or the Doctor without Medicine, and if ever you are to surmount this sorrow in which you are, it will be by means of the advice of that flower. Now I will tell you who that flower is 31*mortal doctors,” as in Kennedy 291.15 (Micha has “other mortal doctors”). 325 rotects,” as in Kennedy 291.20 (Micha has “to protect”). ee and how its advice will save you. That flower is the flower of all flowers. From that flower was born the fruit by which all people are sustained; it is the fruit by which the body is sustained and the soul is fed; it is the fruit that [28] sated the five thousand in the meadow, when the twelve baskets were filled with table scraps.%° It is the fruit by which the sons and the people of Israel were sustained for forty-five years in the deserts, where the men, so says the Scripture, ate the bread of the angels. It is the fruit by which Joseph of Arimathea was sustained when he came from the Promised Land into that strange land, by the order of Jesus Christ and by his guidance. It is the fruit by which Holy Church is fed each day; it is Jesus Christ, the son of God. It is the flower whose advice and help you must have, if ever you are to have them; it is his sweet Mother, the glorious Virgin of whom he was born in defiance of natural custom. That lady is rightly called Flower, for no woman who was not previously deflowered through carnal union ever bore a child, before or since. But this noble lady** was a virgin before and after, for she never lost the flower of her virginity. She must therefore be called the Flower of all flowers, since she kept her glorious flower healthy and intact where all other flowers perish, that is in conceiving and in giving birth, and since from her was born the Fruit that gives life to all things. Through this Flower you will attain true wisdom, for she will reconcile you with her sweet son, and will send you the aid which will restore to you the honor you have begun to lose. And if by this Flower you do not attain [29] salvation both of soul and of body, you can do so through no other, for no one can intercede so well with the Savior as she can. She will never cease praying for the wretched, and if you honor this Flower, her advice will save you from all perils. This is the Flower of which your clerks spoke and yet did not recognize it; this is the Flower through which the true Lion and the great Doctor without Medicine will save you from the loss of land and honor, if you do not prevent it. Now what do you think? Do you again acknowledge that I have been a true interpreter of your dream?” “Indeed, master,” said the king, “you have well and truly explained it to me, so that you have already comforted me so much that it seems to me that I’ve already escaped from all my fears, for my heart is now much more at ease than it has been, and I promise you** in God’s name that I will do as you have ordered, if God grants that I may return with honor to my kingdom.” While they were speaking thus, two knights from Galehaut’s household arrived. When the king saw them, he ordered that they should come before him, and they did so. And the king who was called the King of the Hundred Knights spoke first, and the other was named the First Defeated King, because he was the first king over whom Galehaut had established his dominion. And King Arthur, who knew well how to honor men of quality, showed them 33For the Biblical references, see Matthew XIV, 19-21; Mark VI, 39-44; Luke IX, 12-17; John VI, 5-13 (Kennedy 2: 194). 34this noble lady,” as in note 39.a and Kennedy 292.14-15 (Micha has “this virgin maiden lady”). 35arthur switches to the familiar pronoun tu (“you”) at this point in Micha’s text (though not in Kennedy’s). Lancelot, Part IT great honor and rose to meet them without knowing who they were. “My lord king,” said the King of the Hundred Knights, [30] “we are sent here by Galehaut, the lord of the Distant Isles, whom we serve, who says he is amazed that you've come so poorly prepared to defend your land against him, you who are such a powerful man, for he had heard that you were the most powerful king in all the world. For this reason my lord believes that he would gain no honor by defeating such a king as you with as few men as you have here, for you are at too great a disadvantage. And so my lord gives you a truce for one year, on condition that you'll have your full forces here and he his, for his are not complete at present. Then be assured that he will not depart until he has defeated you and conquered your land; and be assured that at the end of the year, whatever the cost, he’ll have the good knight in his forces, the one with the red armor who carried the day in the battle.” “My lord,” said the king, “I hear clearly what you're saying, but, if it please God, he'll have neither power nor control over me or my land.” With that the messengers departed, and the king remained very joyful but also very frightened: joyful for the truce that was accorded him, and frightened because of the good knight whom Galehaut was to have in his forces, who had defended his land, and Galehaut was boasting that he would have him. Then the wise man called him and said, “Now you can see that the glorious Flower has brought you toward the glorious Lion and toward the Doctor without Medicine who will save you, if you do not lose him through laziness.” “Master,” said the king, “the first part is fine, but I’m greatly frightened concerning the good knight who defended my land, for Galehaut boasts that [31] he will have him. Master, who can he be, for I don’t know him?” The wise man replied, “Let that be, for Galehaut’s boasting will be put to the test.” “Ah, master,” he said, “can you at least tell me whether he will be in Galehaut’s service at the end of a year?” And he replied that he would not.*® Then the king was much comforted and reassured. Galehaut’s forces began to depart, and King Arthur ordered his forces to depart, and he took leave of his master, and he set out for his own land, having Sir Gawain, who was most gravely ill, borne in a litter. But now the story leaves off speaking of King Arthur and of Galehaut and his household, and resumes speaking of the lady of Malehaut Bluff, who was holding the good knight in her prison.?/ 50. Lancelot and the Lady of Malehaut.' When that battle was over, the story says that the very night they separated, as you have heard,* the knight went 36«Would not,” as in Kennedy 294.1 (Micha has “that he would”). 37See chapter 48, pp. [456-457]; cf. this chapter, pp. [6-10]. ‘Corresponds to Micha VII:La; Sommer III:224-226; Kennedy 294-296. 2See chapter 49, p. [12]. Lancelot, Part IT straight back to Malehaut, but it was night when he arrived there, and he entered the courtyard as secretly as he could, where the lady, who felt quite confident of his return, had people waiting for him. When his armor had been removed, he straightway returned to his cell and lay down, for he was in such pain that he could not eat. That night the knights arrived whom the lady of Malehaut had sent? to the battle. The lady asked them for news of the battle, how those on each side had acquitted themselves, and they said that a [32] knight with red armor had completely carried the day. When she heard this she began to look at a maiden who was her first cousin and a lady of her household; she was very eager that the knights should leave, and as soon as she could she dismissed them. Then she called her cousin, and said to her, “Could that be our knight?” “My lady,” she replied, “I do not know.” “Truly,” she said, “I would like to find out, and if he did carry the day, it must show on his body and on his armor.” “My lady,” she said, “we can easily find out how it is with him.” “That’s just what I want to do,” said the lady. “But beware lest anyone find out about it besides the two of us, if you value your limbs.” “Gladly, my lady.” Then the lady dismissed all the household, so that only the two of them remained. The maiden carried a handful of candles, and they first went to the stable and saw the knight’s horse, with wounds on its head, its neck, its chest, and its legs, its bones visible in several places, and lying before its manger in very bad shape, neither eating nor drinking. Then the lady said, “May God help me, you truly look like the horse of a knight. And what do you think?” she asked her cousin. “My lady,” she said, “what can I say? It seems to me that the horse has had more hardship than rest, and yet this is not the one he took with him.” “You may be sure,” said the lady, “that he used up more than one of them. But now let’s go look at his armor, and we'll see how it has fared.” Then they came to the room where the armor was, and they found the hauberk deformed and full of great [33] holes at the shoulders and along the arms and in many other points of the body. And his shield was split and broken and cut to pieces by sword-blows on the sides and from the summit to the boss, so that little remained of it, and what did remain was so pierced by blows of lances that in many spots one could thrust one’s fist right through it. And his helmet was split and dented, the nasal was all cut to pieces, and the circlet hung down so that it could no longer be of use to him or to anyone else. Then the lady said to her cousin, “What do you make of this armor?” “Truly, my lady, it seems to me that he who wore it has not been idle.” “You may say,” said the lady, “that it was worn by the world’s most valiant knight.” 3“had sent,” as in Kennedy 294.15-16 (Micha has “had in the battle”). 125 “My lady,” she replied, “that may well be, since you say so. “Now come,” said the lady, “let’s go see the knight, for so far I've seen nothing I can believe; his body will show the truth of this.” Then they came to the door of the cell and found it open. The lady took the candles in her hand, put her head through the doorway, and saw the knight lying naked in his bed. He had drawn his blanket up over his chest, but had stuck his arms outside because of the heat, and was sleeping very deeply. She looked and saw that his face was all swollen and battered and bruised by his chain-mail, his neck and nose skinned, his forehead swollen and his eyebrows grazed, his shoulders wounded and cut most dreadfully, his arms all black and blue from the blows he had borne, and his hands thick and swollen and full of blood. Then she looked at the maiden and began to smile: “Truly, you will see something wondrous.” She went into the cell, and the maiden put her head in, and looked carefully up and down. Then the lady* gave her the candles and [34] raised her skirts° slightly in order to go forward, and the maiden looked and said, “What is this, my lady? What do you intend to do?” ‘T’ll never have such a good opportunity to kiss him.” “Hold back, my lady,” she said, “what have you said? Don’t commit such an act of madness, for if he awoke he would think less of you and all women; don’t be so surprised by folly that you forget all shame!” “May God truly help me,” said the lady, “there could be no shame in something one did for such a valiant knight.” “No, my lady,” said the maiden, “not as long as it pleased him. But surely, if he refused it, the shame would be doubled, and a man may be very worthy in his body and yet not have all the virtues of the heart. However fine the welcome you might give him, he might still consider it an act of outrage and villainy, and you would have wasted your love and your service.” The maiden was eventually able to lead her lady away without her doing anything more. When they reached their chambers, they began to speak of the knight. The maiden tried as hard as she could to change the subject, so as to prevent her lady from thinking about him, if that could be done, for she realized that she was in love. And at last the maiden said, “The knight is thinking more of something else than of you: don’t imagine things, for imagination has disappointed many people.” “God help me,” said the lady, “I believe he has the noblest intentions that any man has ever been able to conceive. And may God, who has made him so handsome and better than all the others, grant that he may accomplish his goal.” [35] They spoke much of the knight that evening, and the lady wondered greatly why he performed such great feats of arms, and thought that he must be in love with some very highborn lady; she greatly desired to find out who he was and where he had placed his heart, and would have liked it to be in hers. She felt such great prowess and such nobility 4ethe lady,” as in Kennedy 295.33 (Micha has “the maiden”). 5“raised her skirts,” as in Kennedy 295.34 (Micha has “made an effort”). 126 in him that she could not believe he would love any but a noble lady. But she resolved to learn whom he loved, if she could, and so at that point she abandoned the conversation. But now the story leaves off speaking of the lady, the maiden, and the knight, and says no more of them at this point, returning instead to King Arthur, who had returned to his land. 51. Gawain and Thirty-Nine Other Knights Leave Arthur’s Court in Quest of Lancelot.’ At this point the story says that King Arthur came first to stay at Carduel in Wales, because it was nearest and was a very comfortable castle in every way. And he stayed there twenty-three days and every day held high court and followed his teacher’s commandments in all things. Within two weeks Sir Gawain was completely healed from his wounds, and the whole court was overjoyed. At the end of the twenty-three days, it came about that the king was seated at dinner, and when he had eaten a little, he began to think very deeply, and it was evident from his brooding that his heart was not at ease, and it was obvious that he was deeply troubled. Then Sir Gawain, who was serving with the others, came before him and said, “My lord, you’re too pensive at this dinner: it will be held against you, for there are many knights here who blame you for it.” [36] And the king angrily replied, “Gawain, Gawain, you’ve disturbed me from the most courtly thoughts I ever had, and I shouldn’t be blamed, for I was thinking of the best of all knights, the one who carried the day in the battle between Galehaut and me, of whom Galehaut has boasted that he will have him in his household.* There was a time when, if the knights of my household and my companions knew of something I desired, they sought it for me, no matter in what strange land. And it used to be said that all earthly prowess was at my court, but I say that now it’s not, since the world’s best knight is absent from it.” “Indeed, my lord,” said Sir Gawain, “you’re quite right, and if it please God you will have that knight, if he can be found anywhere in the world.” . Then Sir Gawain turned away, and when he came to the door of the great hall, in which many good knights were seated, he turned back to the feast and said, so loudly that all might hear, “My lord knights, whoever wishes to embark upon the noblest quest that ever was after that of the Grail, let him follow me, for today all worldly esteem and honor are prepared for him to whom God will grant the good fortune of the great discovery, and it will be useless for anyone to boast of winning honor if he abandons this quest.” Then Sir Gawain left, and knights jumped up to follow him and the tables began to empty. Then the king began to grow angry that no one was staying there, and he had Sir Gawain called back. He came before him, and the king said, “Good nephew, you greatly 1Corresponds to Micha VUHI:Lla; Sommer III:226-228; Kennedy 296-299. 2See chapter 49, p. [30]. Lancelot, Part IT anger me and bring me great shame by wanting to take away all my company this way, for I’m now at a point when J must hold court more honorably, wherever I may be, than I have been accustomed to do. Such a great troop [37] was never assembled to find just one knight! Do you expect to take him by force with all the knights of my kingdom? The fewer the people you take along, the greater the honor for you.” . Then Sir Gawain realized the truth of the king’s words, and said, “My lord, no more will come with me than you wish, nor did I speak out of a desire for company, for I will seek him all alone. But if many knights sought him, each by himself, he would be more quickly found than if just one left on the quest all alone.” “You speak well,” said the king. “Now let any forty you may choose go along, for I don’t wish the announcement to be made in vain.” Then Sir Gawain chose forty of those whom he loved most, for each was overjoyed to be able to accompany him. Then all forty went to put on their armor, after which they came before the king. And the holy relics were brought forward, as it was the custom that no knight would set forth from court to seek adventure without first swearing on relics that upon his return he would tell the truth as he knew it concerning everything that befell him. And if he did not swear that oath upon setting out, he did so upon his return, before he was believed about anything. Then Sir Gawain knelt down to swear his oath, and the king was in front, and said to them, “My lord knights, go forth, and let it not be for any frivolous thing, for you [38] are all knights, so valiant that there is nothing so great that you cannot accomplish it.” Then Sir Gawain considered, and said to the armed knights, as he knelt there, “My lords, if each of you would put into his oath what I’ll put into mine, I would swear it.” They all agreed to this. “Now swear first to all that I’ll swear, and I will swear last.” And they did so. Then Sir Gawain swore that he would tell the truth upon his return, and that he would not return without the knight he was going to seek or without definite knowledge of him, and that he would not return without any of his companions, unless he were dead. All the knights who were to go on the quest were dismayed at this oath, but the king was even more so, for he remembered the day of the battle that was to take place between him and Galehaut. “Fair nephew,” said the king, “you were wrong not to exclude the legitimate excuse of the battle from your oath.” “My lord,” he said, “that cannot now be.” Then he laced on his helmet and mounted his horse and left the court with the knights he had chosen. There were Sir Yvain, son of King Urien, and Kay the Seneschal, Sagremor the Unruly, Lucan the Wine Steward, Yder the son of Nut, Girflet the son of Doon, Yvain of Lionel, Yvain of the White Hands, Yvain the Deer, Yvain the Bastard, Galegantin [39] the Welshman, Gaswain of Estrangort, the Gay Gallant, Caradigain, Agloas, Magloas, Duke Taullas, Quenus of Carec, Guerrehet and his brother Agravain, Cadwain, Kay of Estral, Dodinel the Wildman, Caradoc Shortarm, the King of Gennes and the King of the Fens, Helain the Blond, Sir Brandin, Adam the Fair, Oswain the Lancelot, Part IT Bold, Aglin of the Vales, Gaheriet, Blioberis, the Ugly Hero, Gale the Bald, Aguisant of Scotland, Hervi of Rivel, Conan the Bold, and the fortieth was the Youth of Norz.3 These were the forty who went on the quest. But never was there a one so valiant or so bold that he did not consider himself a fool thereafter, for all were later called forsworn by the king’s own lips,‘ for they all wandered for the whole year, until it came time for the battle, and then Sir Gawain brought them all back. But now the story leaves off speaking of Sir Gawain and his company, saying no more of them, and returns to the lady of Malehaut, who was most anxious to learn the name of the good knight and his circumstances, for she loved him so much that she could love no one more. 52. The End of Galehaut’s War with Arthur; the Meeting of Lancelot and Guenevere.' Now the story says that one day the lady had him brought from his cell so that he might speak with her. And when he came before her, he was about to sit on the floor at her feet, but she, who was eager to honor him, had him sit up next to her, and said to him, “Sir knight, I have long [40] held you prisoner for the great wrong you committed,” and I’ve kept you most honorably, against the wishes of my seneschal and all his kin. You must be very grateful to me for this, and so you are, if there is as much good in you as I believe.” “My lady,” he said, “I’m so grateful to you that I’ll be your knight in your every need and in all places.” “Many thanks,” said the lady; “you’ll have occasion to prove this. Now I beg you to repay me by granting what I wish: that you tell me who you are and to what you aspire. If this is something you wish to conceal, be assured that no one else will know of it.” “My lady,” he said, “for God’s sake, and may God help me, you cannot know this, for there is no one to whom I would reveal it.” “No?” she said. “And you won’t tell me for anything?” “My lady,” he said, “you may do with me what you will, for if you were to cut off my head, I still wouldn’t tell you.” “Truly,” she said, “woe unto you for concealing it from me, for by the honor I owe you and by what I hold most dear, you’ll never leave my house before the battle that is to take place between King Arthur and Galehaut. And you may be sure that you’ll have plenty of shame and suffering 3youth of Norz,” as in chapter 54, p. [142] (cf. Kennedy 299.12, “Nort”). This list in Micha includes only thirty-eight names. I have followed Kennedy in adding Agloas, a name present ina dozen manuscripts, to bring the list to thirty-nine. The similarity between Agloas and Magloas could easily account for one name getting omitted. The manuscripts present enormous variations in both the form of the names and their number. The text clearly states (chapter 52, p. [42]) that the total group numbered forty, including Gawain. 4See chapter 54, p. [137]. 'Corresponds to Micha VIII:LIla; Sommer III:228-269; Kennedy 299-356. 2See chapter 48, pp. [455-457]. 127 from now on, for there is still nearly a year before the day of the battle, but if you had told me, you would have been freed from my prison this very day. But I’ll discover it in spite of you, for I’ll go to a place where they [41] will tell me,” “Where, my lady?” he asked. “Why,” she said, “to King Arthur’s court, where all news is known.” “My lady,” he said, “I can do nothing to stop you.” Then she sent him back to his cell and pretended to be very angry with him and full of hatred for him, but she was not, and in fact she loved him more than was her wont, and this love grew and strengthened every day. Then she summoned her cousin and said to her, “Be sure to tell the knight that I hate him worse than any man and that I'll make him endure all the ills a man’s body can bear.” The lady spoke to her cousin in this way in order to conceal her feelings. She nevertheless made ready to go to King Arthur’s court to learn the knight’s name, and she prepared to do so in a grand manner. Three days later, the lady set out, leaving her cousin in her place, and she said to her, “Dear cousin, I’m going to King Arthur’s court where I have much to do. I’ve shown hatred toward the knight because he would not tell me his name, but I wouldn’t hate him, for he is too worthy a knight. I beg and request, as you value my love and your own honor, that you provide whatever you think he may desire, saving your own honor, so that you may return him to me.” And she promised to do so. Then the lady set out and journeyed until she found the king at Logres, the capital of his kingdom. When he heard she was coming, he and the queen went to meet her, and he welcomed her most joyfully. But before they entered the city, [42] each of her? knights received a gift from the king. And the queen was similarly generous to the ladies and maidens, because of the lady of Malehaut, and the king would never allow her to stay anywhere except in his dwellings, for she had greatly aided him in his wars. The king and queen received the lady with great honor. In the evening, after supper, all three were seated on a couch, and the king said to the lady, “Truly, my lady, you've made a great effort in coming here so far from your own land. It’s obvious you had a serious reason, for you don’t usually travel so far from home.” “Indeed, my lord,” she said, “it isn’t without purpose; in fact, the matter is serious, and I’ll tell you what it is. The truth is that I have a cousin whose neighbor is trying to dispossess her, and she can find no knight to champion her quarrel, for her neighbor is a very accomplished knight from a powerful line, and she has no help but me. For this reason I’ve come to you, so that you might help me obtain the services of the good knight, the one with the red armor who carried the day in the recent battle; I’ve been told that if I had him, no one would be a better champion than he. For this reason I’ve come to you. Now help me, for my need is great.” ‘Dear friend,” said the king, “by the loyalty I owe my lady the queen here, whom I love more than anyone else, I 3“her,” as in note 4.I and Kennedy 301.1 (Micha has “each knight”). 128 never, to my knowledge, met that knight, and I believe he is neither of my house nor of my land, but I’m very eager to see him again. And Sir Gawain is looking for him as part of a company of forty of my best knights; they set out [43] nearly forty days ago, and they won’t set foot in my house again until they have found him.” Then the lady began to smile at the thought of the knights who were searching for him, because they were pursuing an illusory quarry. The queen saw this and, thinking she must have some reason to smile, said to her, “I believe you know better where he is than the king and I do.” And she replied, “By the loyalty I owe my lord the king, whose liegewoman I am, and you who are my lady, I came here only to find out who he was, for I thought I'd have news of him here.” “Indeed,” said the queen, “I thought as much, because I saw you smile when my lord spoke of him.” “My lady,” she said, “it was because I thought I had been misled and that I had made such an effort for nothing. But since I can learn nothing of him here, I ask to take my leave and will depart tomorrow morning, for I have much to do in my land.” “What?” exclaimed the king. “Are you thinking of leaving already? You will not leave so soon, but will keep the queen company for a week or two, and from all my knights you will take with you the one that best pleases you to fight your battle, for you can be assured that you’re one of the ladies I would most wish to honor in all the world, for you have greatly helped me in time of need.” “My lord,” she said, “many thanks for all you say, but [44] there’s no way I could stay longer, and I'll take no knight with me, since I can’t have the one I was seeking, for I have plenty of others.” The king and queen together entreated her so much that she remained two more days. Then she departed with the permission of both of them, and journeyed quickly back to her land, for she was eager to return and see him for whom all the best knights were exerting themselves. She was very proud to have in her power the one whom no one else could have. So she returned happy and joyful, and gave her cousin to understand she had gone to King Arthur’s court because she believed her prisoner was from there, and that the king was angry with her for doing so. “Now I have learned that he’s not of the king’s household‘ nor of his land. But how have you fared in the meantime, you and he?” “My lady,” she said, “very well. He has had whatever he needed.” Then she scarcely waited to have him brought forth from his cell and spoke to him as though she were very angry. “Sir knight,” she said, “you recently refused to tell me your name and who you were, but I have since learned so much about you that I will now allow you to ransom yourself, if you wish.” “My lady,” he said, “many thanks. I'll gladly purchase my freedom, if I can meet your terms.” 4«and that the king ... of the king’s household” supplied from Kennedy 302.22-23. Lancelot, Part IT “Do you know,” she said, “what your ransom will be? I'll name? three things, and if you don’t grant [45] one of them, then God help me if you ever leave my prison, for either riches or entreaties.” “My lady, now tell me what you have in mind, and since I’ve agreed to this, which one I must choose.” ‘T’ll tell you: if you tell me who you are and what your name is, I’ll free you from my prison. And if you don’t wish to tell me that, then tell me with whom you are in love. And if you wish to tell me neither, then tell me whether you ever expect to perform as many feats of arms as you did in the recent battle.” When he heard this, he began to sigh bitterly, and said, “My lady, I see that you hate me too greatly, since you offer to free me so shamefully. My lady, for God’s sake, when you have made me say something that will satisfy you but pain me, what assurance will I have that you’ll let me go free?” “I faithfully promise,” she replied, “that as soon as you have chosen one of the three ransoms, you will be free to go. Now it’s up to you whether to go or to stay.” Then the knight began to weep most bitterly, and said, “My lady, I see that I must escape by means of a shameful ransom, if I wish to leave. It is therefore better I reveal my own shame than that of another, for you can be assured that I will never tell you who I am or what my name is; and if I were in love, so help me God, you would never know with whom, if I could help it. So I must say the other thing and I’ll [46] do so, whatever shame it may bring me. So be assured that I expect to fight even better than I ever did, if I’m ordered to do so. So now you’ve made me reveal my shame, and I’ll leave at once, if that is your will.” “You have said enough. Now you may leave whenever you wish, for now I understand you better than I ever did before. But since I have kept you so honorably, I ask you to grant me a request that will scarcely weigh upon you, and I say it more in your interest than in my own.” “My lady, tell me what you wish, and you’ll have what you request, if it is possible.” “Many thanks,” she replied. “I ask that you remain here until the battle, and I'll provide you with a good horse and whatever sort of armor you wish to wear; you’ll go from here to the battle, and I’ll let you know when it is to be.” “My lady, I will do as you wish.” “Now I'll tell you,” she said, “what you will do. You’ll be in your cell and will have whatever you wish, and I will often keep you company and so will my cousin. But I want no one to know that you have paid your ransom to me. Now tell me what sort of armor you wish to wear.” He asked to have completely black armor. Than he went back to his cell, and in secret the lady ordered a completely black shield and a matching horse, surcoat, and trappings prepared for his use. Thus the knight remained. And the king was in his land and honored his people as his teacher had taught him until, before the year was half over, he had so regained their hearts that they had built more than [47] a thousand houses on the field where the battle was to be,® boasting 5 “name,” as in note 9.a (O) and Kennedy 302.34 (Micha has “order”). 6“where the battle was to be” supplied from Kennedy 304.7. Lancelot, Part IT that they would sooner die painfully in battle than have the king lose his land while they lived. Thus they all gave their hearts to the king, because of the great goodness he had shown them, and they came with him in as great numbers as they could to the field, two weeks before the end of the truce. Then, on the other hand, Sir Gawain and his companions returned from their quest; they had achieved nothing, and they were deeply ashamed, but the king’s urgent need brought them back. And Sir Gawain said that it was better for them all to be disgraced in the honor of their liege lord than for him to be dishonored and dispossessed all alone. “He cannot be dishonored,” said Gawain, “without us, but we could be dishonored without him, for we can lose land without it being to his shame, but he cannot lose it without it being to ours.” Because of Sir Gawain’s words, the forty knights came to the battle. And the king joyfully welcomed them, for he had greatly feared that they would not arrive in time. So the king came, prepared to defend his land, and on the other side Galehaut returned with a mighty force: for every man he had brought the other time, he now brought two, so that the iron nets that had enclosed the first camp could not enclose the half of this one. When the end of the truce arrived, the landless knights on both sides were very eager to do battle. Then Galehaut’s advisors asked whom he wanted to send into battle the first day, [48] and with how many men, and he said that he himself would not bear arms, neither now nor at another time, unless a pressing need made him do so. “At this time,” he said, “my troops’ will go into battle only in order to see the valor of King Arthur’s knights; but the next time they will do battle so earnestly that one side will be utterly defeated.” Then he ordered the First Defeated King to go into battle on the first day with thirty thousand men, and if he wanted more, once he saw how King Arthur’s troops acquitted themselves, he could send for as many as he wished. So spoke Galehaut to his men. And on the other side, Sir Gawain spoke to his uncle and said, “My lord, if Galehaut does not bear arms tomorrow, neither will you.” “Dear nephew,” he said, “you are right, but you will bear them and lead a portion of my troops. And be intent upon fighting well, as is necessary.” “My lord,” he said, “as you wish.” The next day they arose early on both sides, and when they had all heard Mass they went to put on their armor. The king’s men gradually passed the lists, and each side joined battle with the other, and there were fine jousts and vigorous fighting in many places. Then one of Galehaut’s valiant companions joined the fray: his name was Estorel the Poor, and he was later a member of King Arthur’s household. He was a bold fighter, and was more greatly loved than any other landless knight that Galehaut had. [49] All alone he attacked a troop of more than a hundred knights, and came at them so violently that everyone watched him in amazement. In the troop there were many good knights, yet they let him strike wherever he would. He shattered his lance where he thought to use it best, riding unhindered right into the Tomy troops,” as in Kennedy 304.32 (Micha has “they”). TZ midst of the troop to strike a valiant knight named Galeguinant, the bastard brother of Sir Yvain. Galeguinant came to.meet him as fast as he could spur, to win esteem and honor—of which he already had plenty. There, as he was riding in this manner, Estorel quickly met him, and after breaking their lances, they collided so violently, with bodies, faces, and horses, that they bore each other to the ground quite stunned, their horses on top of them, and lay there a long time without getting up. Seven of King Arthur’s knights sprang forward to subdue Estorel; when his men saw this, some thirty knights rushed toward him, and had already put Estorel back on his horse and unhorsed the seven and captured Galeguinant, when Yvain the Bastard came spurring toward them, followed by some of his friends. The melee was fierce, and Galehaut’s troops defended themselves very well, but they could not hold out for long, for they were not as numerous, nor were they as good knights as were the others. So with great force Galeguinant was rescued from them, and the other seven as well, and Estorel was unhorsed again. The whole battle converged there to rescue Estorel and Galeguinant, so that in a short time more than fifty thousand men had come together there. [50] King Arthur’s troops fought very well, for Galehaut’s troops numbered fully thirty thousand to their twenty thousand, and yet they were winning the battle. Then the First Defeated King came into the fray, an excellent and reliable knight who did much to rally Galehaut’s troops. But once Sir Gawain arrived, Galehaut’s troops could make only a very poor showing, and things began to go very badly for them. When Galehaut saw this, he sent them so many knights that all the fields were covered with them. When Sir Gawain saw them coming, he gathered his men closely around him and beseeched them to fight well. Then their enemy came upon them, rushing in among them as fiercely as they could, and they met them® as vigorously as they could, for they had many good knights. Sir Gawain worked wonders there,? and all his companions again took heart and renewed their bravery, and he alone rallied them all. But valiant fighting was to no avail, since for one of his men there were three of Galehaut’s. They withstood them for a while, but with great difficulty, and in the end they abandoned the field and were forcibly driven back to their camp. There Sir Gawain demonstrated some of his prowess, for he held out so well that all those on his side wondered at it, and all those on Galehaut’s side were dumbfounded. When King Arthur saw that they could hold out no longer, he said that he had been too patient, since he had allowed them to be so badly trampled. Then he sent in all the [51] knights he had, placing them under Sir Yvain’s command and begging him to go cautiously. When he got there, all their troops had already retreated within the palisade, Sir Gawain’s horse had been killed and he himself wounded, and he had great need of help. As soon as they 8«them,” as in Sommer 233.13 and Kennedy 306.12 (Micha has “him” or “it”). 9“Sir Gawain ... there,” as in note 18.a and Kennedy 306.1314 (Micha has “There was Sir Gawain, and he worked wonders”). 130 entered the fray, their enemy stayed outside the palisade only until the king of the Land Beyond the Borders came galloping in great disorder, and with him twenty thousand men by actual count. There the melee was great, and many fought well on each side. And Sir Yvain took up the fighting so well that he had never fought better on any day, for he forcibly remounted Sir Gawain on the horse from which he had unhorsed the First Defeated King; but Sir Gawain had already been so badly battered that he suffered from it forever thereafter.! Then began the feats of prowess of Sir Yvain, but those of Sir Gawain did not cease for all that. The battle lasted the whole day, for when one side was getting the worst of it, their companions rallied them little by little, until evening arrived and they began to withdraw on both sides, and there was not a one so strong that he was not completely weary. Sir Gawain did not go with the others, but rather went to rescue a companion of his named Gaheris of Carahan. Sir Yvain knew nothing of this, for he and the other companions of the king were already on their way, when a squire came spurring after [52] Sir Yvain and cried out to him that his friend and companion would be taken prisoner if he did not hurry. Then Sir Yvain turned back, as fast as his horse could go, and was so dismayed that he called no one to go with him, but numerous worthy knights accompanied him. When he reached the melee, he found Sir Gawain in such a state that blood was coming out of his nose and mouth, and he thought he was going to die without confession, but he was still on his horse. There the battle was more intense, and there was more damage done, on each side, than there had been all that day, for many knights were killed or wounded or taken prisoner. But King Arthur’s troops still won the battle that time and defeated the others. Then they turned back, taking along many prisoners, and this pleased them very well. The king was dismayed that his nephew was so gravely wounded, and when he spoke to him in front of his tent, he could not answer a single word, but rather fell to the ground unconscious, without anyone touching him. There the king and queen mourned bitterly. All the physicians were summoned; they laid him down and found that he had two broken ribs; they believed he might be ruptured. They dared not tell the king, lest he lose all hope; instead they said that he should not be alarmed and that his nephew would soon be well again. Great was the sorrowing for Sir Gawain in King Arthur’s camp; all the knights wept and said that no more worthy knight than he would ever bear arms. But there were also many who [53] rejoiced at this. When Sir Gawain fainted in front of his tent, the knights of Malehaut had seen it, and had heard rumors that he was dead. When they returned to Malehaut, the lady asked for news of the battle, and they said that Sir Gawain had carried the day, but that he was gravely wounded and near death. 10Translation based on Kennedy 306.35, literally “there was never a day thereafter when he was not worse off because of it” (Micha has “.. . when he was worse off. ..”). Lancelot, Part IT The lady was greatly distressed at this news, and said, “Truly, it was a great misfortune for Sir Gawain to be there! No nobler knight will ever die.” The news of Sir Gawain spread so that every servingboy in the place was speaking of it. The knight in the cell heard of it as well, and if the others were sorrowful, his grief alone surpassed that of all other men, and he said, “Truly, if he dies, this loss will never be restored.” When the knights had left, the knight from the cell sought out the lady and spoke to her: “My lady, is it true that Sir Gawain is dead?” “Indeed,” she replied, “he is fatally wounded, as I have heard.” “God help me, this is a great sorrow for all, and all joy must cease on the day of his death. My lady, my lady, why have you betrayed me so dishonorably? You had promised to tell me when the day of the battle would be.” ‘If I promised you this, now I keep my promise, for our troops have already lost enough.” “My lady,” he replied, “now it’s too late.” “No, it’s not: you can still get there in time, for the battle will resume two days from now, and I have prepared a horse and armor according to your instructions. But I advise you not to leave here before the day of the battle. Then you can go straight to the field—you know the way.” “My lady,” he said, “as you wish.” Then the knight went back to lie down, and the lady did likewise. [54] The next day after dinner, the lady came to the knight, commended him to God, and said that she was leaving to tend to some business; the knight thanked her for the great honor she had shown him and said that he was her knight and would be so all his life. Then the lady departed and went to the camp. And the king and queen welcomed her as joyfully as they could, given their sorrow, and they brought her to Sir Gawain, whom she was very eager to see. She found he looked much better than she had been told, and she was very glad. Thus passed that night. But it was in great fear that King Arthur awaited the next day,!! for he had lost many of his knights. That night the lady of Malehaut’s cousin, who had stayed behind, prepared the knight’s armor, laid him in her lady’s bed, and stayed beside him until he went to sleep, for the lady had told her to show him all the honor she could, saving her own honor.!* The next morning the knight rose very early, and the maiden helped him put on his armor. When he had commended her to God, he departed and rode until he reached the field of battle at sunrise. He stopped beside the river and leaned upon his lance at the very place where he had been at the other battle, and he began to look at the brattice where Sir Gawain lay [55] ill, because of the ladies and maidens he saw there. The queen had come there, and the lady of Malehaut, and many other ladies and maidens. King Arthur’s troops were already armed, and those who wished to fight were streaming across the water, and Galehaut’s forces were doing likewise. The meadows were soon covered with jousts and melees. And the knight lle 308.33. !2See p. [41]. the next day” supplied from note 24.b and Kennedy Lancelot, Part II remained all the while in thought, leaning on his lance and looking very tenderly toward the brattice where the ladies were. The lady of Malehaut saw him, clearly recognized him, and began to speak of him, so that the queen and the other ladies could hear. “Heavens,” she exclaimed, “who can that knight be whom I see there beside the river? He is neither helping us nor hurting us.” Then everyone began to look, and Sir Gawain asked, “May I see him?” And the lady of Malehaut said she would arrange it so that he could. Then she herself arranged a seat beside a window, and they positioned him so that he could see all the way down the meadow. He looked, and saw the knight with the black shield, leaning on his lance, lost in thought, and he said to the queen, “My lady, do you recall that I was once before wounded, and lay here, and that a knight, either this one or another, was thus lost in thought beside that river? But he wore red armor, and it was he who carried the day in the battle.” “Dear nephew,” she said, “that may well be, but why do you mention it?” “Because, my lady, I wish it were he, [56] for I never saw the valorous deeds of any other knight as gladly as I saw his.” They spoke of him for a long time, but never did he move from his position. King Arthur had already organized his troops, and had set up four battalions of fifteen thousand men and a fifth with more than twenty thousand. The first battalion was under the command of King Yder, a very worthy knight who fought very well that day. Hervi de Rivel led the second; in all the world, he was one of the knights who knew the most about warfare. Aguisant, king of Scotland and King Arthur’s cousin, led the third, and he would have had the first, if he had known as much about fighting as some others. King Yon led the fourth, and Sir Yvain, son of King Urien, the fifth, with more than twenty thousand men; it was to be the very last to join in the battle. So King Arthur had set up five battalions, and Galehaut did likewise: there were twenty thousand men in each of the first four, and forty thousand in the fifth. Malaguin, his seneschal, had the first battalion; he was the King of the Hundred Knights,!3 and was very valiant and bold. The First Defeated King had the second. The king of Vadoan had the third, and King Clamadeu of the Distant Isles led the fourth. The fifth, with [57] the forty thousand, was led by King Bademagu of Gorre, who was greatly esteemed for his valor and his counsel. That day Galehaut did not bear the arms of a knight, but he put on a short habergeon, such as a foot-soldier would wear, with an iron helmet on his head, his sword girt on, and a short, heavy stick in his hand, but he sat upon a horse befitting a knight, for he had more fine horses than anyone else. Thus both sides were arrayed on the field to do battle. And the Black Knight was still deep in thought beside the river. The lady of Malehaut called to the queen and said, “My lady, do a good thing and send word to that knight that he should take part in the fighting for your sake, and show you which side he is on, ours or theirs. Then we shall know I3This name is explained in chapter 33, p. [383]. 13] what he intends to do and whether there is any valor in him.” “Fair lady,” said the queen, “I have many other things on my mind, for today my lord the king is in danger of losing all his land and all his honor. And my nephew is lying here in such a state as you can see, and I see so much misfortune that I no longer have any desire for great challenges or entertainments the way I used to, for I have much to occupy myself. But you may send him that message, as may these other ladies, if they wish.” “Indeed, [58] my lady, I am all ready to do so, if someone else were willing to join me. If you will, send him word, and I’ll gladly join in.” “My lady,” said the queen, “I will not become involved in this. Send him a message, you and these other ladies, if you wish.” Then the lady of Malehaut said that if the other ladies wished to send him a message on their part, she would do so on hers. They all agreed to this. The queen lent them one of her maidens to bear this message. The lady of Malehaut composed the message, and Sir Gawain added two of his lances and a squire to carry them. Then the lady said to the maiden, “My lady, you will go to that knight who is lost in thought, and tell him that all the ladies and maidens of King Arthur’s household send him greetings, except for my lady the queen, and they send him this message and beseech him, if he ever expects to win wealth or honor in any place where any of them has authority or power, to perform such feats of arms today, for their sake, that they may be grateful to him. And give him these two lances which Sir Gawain sends him.” Then the maiden mounted upon a palfrey, and the squire followed her bearing the lances; they came to the knight, and the maiden delivered her message. When he heard Sir Gawain’s name, he asked where he was, and the maiden said, “He is in that brattice, with many ladies and maidens.” Then he took leave of the maiden and told the squire to follow him. He looked at his legs and settled himself firmly in!4 his stirrups, and it seemed to Sir Gawain, who was watching him, that he grew by half a foot. Then he looked toward the brattice and went spurring across the fields. When Sir Gawain saw him go, he said to the queen, “My lady, my lady, behold the finest knight in the world, [59] for I never saw any other bear arms so well as this one.” Then they all, ladies and maidens, ran to the windows and the battlements to watch him. He galloped off as hard and as fast as his horse could go, and saw to right and left much fine jousting and many fine melees, for a large portion of the lively young knights of King Arthur’s court had already entered the field in order to perform feats of arms; and from Galehaut’s army came now ten, now twenty, now thirty, now forty, now a hundred, in one place more and in another fewer. The Black Knight avoided all the melees and spurred to meet a large troop where there were fully one hundred knights. He plunged among them and 14«cettled himself firmly in,” as in Kennedy 311.18 (Micha has “put his stirrups in good order”). 132 struck one knight so violently that he bore both him and his horse to the ground, all in a heap. And when his lance failed him, he struck with the stump as long as it lasted, right down to the grip, and then he rushed back to his squire who bore the two lances, took one of them, threw himself back among them, and jousted so skillfully that all the others left off their jousting and fighting so as to watch him. He performed so many feats of arms with the three lances, as long as they lasted, that Sir Gawain swore that to his knowledge no other man could have done as much. As soon as all three lances were shattered, he came back beside the river, to the place where he had been before, and turned his face toward the brattice, with great tenderness in his gaze. [60] Sir Gawain spoke of this and said, “My lady, do you see that knight? You may be sure that he is the most valiant in the world. But you gravely erred by refusing to be named in the message that was sent to him. He may have taken it for pride on your part, for he clearly sees that the matter at hand concerns you more than it does all the others, and perhaps he thinks that you had little esteem for him, since you did not deign to ask him to fight for your sake.” “Upon my word,” exclaimed the lady of Malehaut, “he is clearly showing us that he’ll do no more for us. Now let anyone who wishes send him a message, for our challenge will accomplish no more today.” “My lady,” said Sir Gawain to the queen, “do you think I was correct in what I said?” “Dear nephew,” she said, “what do you want me to do?” “My lady, I'll tell you. He has much who has the services of a man of quality, for many things have been accomplished through the presence of a man of quality, which otherwise would have failed. So I'll tell you what to do. Send greetings to this man, and beseech him to take pity on the kingdom of Logres and the honor of my lord the king, which will be lost today unless God and he intervene.!° And if he expects ever to have joy or honor in any place where you have power, then let him today perform such feats of arms for your sake that you will be grateful to him, and let it appear by his deeds that he has come to the rescue of the king’s honor and your own. And you may be sure, if this knight is willing to defend our cause, that my lord the king will not be defeated this’ day, whatever power Galehaut may have. And I’ll send him ten lances with sharp heads and thick and sturdy shafts, with which you will see many a fine joust before the day is out, and I'll send him three of my finest horses, all covered with my arms. And be assured [61] that if he does his best, he will make good use of all three.” Thus spoke Sir Gawain, and the queen readily granted him permission to send whatever message he wished in her name. And the lady of Malehaut was so happy at this that she was practically flying, for she thought she had attained all she had always sought. Then Sir Gawain called the maiden who had carried the first message, and sent her to the pensive knight, wording the message as he had said it to the queen; then he 15“ nless God and he intervene,” as in Kennedy 312.23—-24 (Micha has “unless God takes pity on them”). Lancelot, Part II called four of his squires and ordered three of them!® to take three of his horses to the knight, appropriately covered, and the fourth was to take ten of his strongest lances. Then the maiden went to the knight and delivered the message from Sir Gawain and the queen and gave him the gifts. And the knight asked the maiden, “Where is my lady?” “My lord,” she said, “up in that brattice, with many ladies and maidens, and that’s where Sir Gawain lies wounded. You may be sure that you’ll be well observed.” And the knight said to her, “My lady, tell my lady the queen that it will be as she desires, and convey my thanks to Sir Gawain for his gift.” Then he took the strongest of the lances that the squire carried and told them all to follow him, The maiden took her leave, and returned and delivered the knight’s messages to the queen and Sir Gawain.!? Then the lady [62] of Malehaut began to smile very broadly. The knight went!8 charging down the field, where many good knights from each side were already joined in battle. King Yder’s!® battalion had already entered the field and attacked that of the King of the Hundred Knights, and both were fighting bravely. But he avoided all the melees, feigning not to see them, and went on to the battalion led by the First Defeated King, where there were easily twenty thousand knights. He resolutely turned his horse’s head toward them and plunged among them as hard as his horse could go. He went wherever he thought he could strike with greatest effect, so that everything he reached fell before his lance: he knocked everything, both knights and horses, into a heap, and his lance was shattered to bits. Many of King Arthur’s knights saw this encounter: Sir Kay the Seneschal, Sagremor the Unruly, Girflet the son of Doon, Yvain the Bastard, Sir Brandeliz, and Gaheriet, the brother of Sir Gawain. In great disorder they came to perform feats of arms, for the prize of love and their high spirits drove them to win honor, and the very swiftest of them thought he would never get there in time. Following them came fully a hundred, their helmets laced on, their lances firmly grasped, all ready to fight well. And Kay the Seneschal, who had seen the knight do battle, called the five who were with him: “My lords,” he said, “you have just seen the finest attack ever [63] made by a single knight. We are all here to win honor and esteem, and never in all our lives will we find such a fine occasion for knightly deeds, if we have any in us. Right here and now I boast that I will follow him, for he can only be a worthy knight. Now let him who wishes to win honor follow me, for I won’t abandon him unless I am dead or seriously wounded.” Then he dug in his spurs, and all the others followed suit. And the Black Knight, who had shattered his lance, 16“three of them” supplied from Kennedy 313.3-4. I7«and delivered . .. Sir Gawain,” as in note 36.a and Kennedy 313.18-19 (Micha has “came back to the queen and said his message to Sir Gawain, what the knight sent to him”). ! “broadly. The knight went,” as in Kennedy 313.20 (Micha has “broadly, and the one and the other. And he avoided all the melees and went”). 19eKing Yder’s,” as in Kennedy 313.22 (Micha omits the title “King”). Lancelot, Part I] dashed out and took a new one from his squires, and returned full speed to the melee. The others followed, joining hirn, and thrust themselves into the battle. And he began to lay low knights and horses alike, and to knock shields from shoulders and to tear helmets from heads, and he performed so many feats of arms that all those who were with him marveled at the sight, and those on the other side were taken aback. He fought so fiercely that all the lances were shattered and one of the horses Sir Gawain had sent was dead, for it had fallen under him. One of the squires brought him another one, holding it very firmly. The hundred knights came galloping to where he was on foot amid the press, and he jumped upon the charger that the squire had brought him, and came back to the battle, his naked sword in his hand, as fresh as if he had not yet [64] been in it. And when the companions saw beneath him the horse covered with Sir Gawain’s arms, they wondered greatly and knew for certain that this was an exceptional knight. They followed him, all ready to perform valorous deeds or to die with honor in his company. Then they began to perform great feats of arms. At that time a knight did not seize another by the reins, and two or three did not attack just one, but each sought to fight as valiantly as he could, and one knight could strike two or three or as many as he could. In this way the Black Knight and his company fought valiantly, but they were at a great disadvantage and could not have held out for long, had it not been for some good fortune that occurred, for the battalion led by the King of the Hundred Knights was routed and could no longer stand against that of King Yder. They fled in great haste, driven into the men of the First Defeated King, and the King of the Hundred Knights was greatly sorrowed and ashamed, for he was a very fine knight and very reliable. There the routed troops recovered?” and found much help; they greatly outnumbered the others, for they were easily forty thousand in the two battalions, whereas there were only fifteen thousand with the companions of Sir Gawain—and yet they had routed them in battle. There could be seen the valorous deeds of the Black Knight, for he unhorsed every knight he came upon. He struck down knights and horses with blows of lance and [65] sword, and by seizing helmets and shields and by thrusting his horse and himself into the fray, he accomplished many wonders. Wherever he came, sword drawn, it often happened that he found nothing to strike at along his way, for they all fled before him, because wherever he was able to land a proper blow, neither wood nor iron could last, nor body of man withstand his blows. He alone fought so well that he rallied all those on his side, and he withstood all those who were against him. And those on his side fought valiantly, both because of his example and their own valor. Thus all focused their attention upon him, and all wondered who he was, because of his great feats of arms. The Black Knight fought valiantly, and the news spread far and wide, so that in all King Arthur’s camp people spoke only of him, and in Galehaut’s camp as well, and all 20“-ecovered,” as in note 40.a and Kennedy 315.2 (Micha has “ran”). LD who had seen his feats of arms said that those of the knight in red armor were nothing in comparison.*! In this way he kept on a long time, and the six companions named in the story were ever near him. Then his horse was killed under him, and he immediately jumped onto the other one that was brought to him. But then his company, which had stayed all day to help him, began to do less well. So the seneschal called the squire who had brought the horse, and said to him, “Friend, go quickly to Hervi of Rivel, there where you [66] see that banner striped with gold and red, as much of one as of the other, and tell him that I send him this message: that I and everyone else must henceforth find fault with him, for he has abandoned the best knight who ever bore a shield. And tell him that if this man dies, the flower of the king’s companions will die with him, and that he who should have aided him will be considered cowardly all the days of his life.” Then the squire departed, came to Hervi, and related his message in its entirety. When Hervi heard it, he was greatly dismayed and ashamed, and he said, “God help me, I never committed any treason, and I won’t start now, for I am too old.” Then he told his men to ride in close ranks,22 “and you will go before,” he said to the squire, “and tell the seneschal for me that if he can hold out until I reach the field of battle, he will consider me no traitor.” The squire went back to Kay and told him Hervi’s words, and Kay laughed, concerned though he was. Then he asked the squire who the Black Knight was, and he replied that he had no idea. “Then why did Sir Gawain send him his horses?” The squire replied that he knew no more of this than he had told him. Then Kay put his helmet back on, and furiously rejoined the melee. Then came Hervi, riding with his whole troop. When they joined the battle, they yelled so loudly that through all the field nothing could be heard but “Hervi.” And Sir Gawain laughed at this, ill as he was. They charged into the melee, their lances held firmly under their arms. The melee was fierce in that spot, and there were [67] many slain and riderless horses, and many knights unhorsed, dead and wounded; you would have seen riderless horses fleeing in all directions, and others lying upon the bodies of knights, and many fine weapons lying on the ground, for there was no one to pick them up. There Hervi of Rivel began to perform great deeds of arms in the sight of Kay the Seneschal, because of the message he had sent him, and he did more that day than he should have at his age, for he was well over eighty years old. King Arthur’s troops fought very well, but the Black Knight performed quite remarkably, and once Hervi had joined the battle Galehaut’s troops could not long endure, and yet they had a fourth more men. But as soon as the king of Vadoan saw that their forces were getting the worst of it, he came riding to their assistance, with his whole troop, in great disorder, as fast as their horses could carry them. Then King Arthur’s troops were at a disadvantage, since for one of theirs there were two of Galehaut’s. But 2lSee chapter 49, pp. [9-12]. 224in close ranks,” as in note 42.a and Kennedy 316.5 (Micha has “confidently”). 134 after they had had the worst of it for a while, King Aguisant came to their aid, and then the forces were roughly even; each side held out against the other, and the sun was already high. Then King Clamadeu and King Yon joined in battle against each other. Thus four battalions on one side were ranged against four on the other, but there were easily twenty thousand more on Galehaut’s side than on the side of the Black Knight. But his troops held very well, whereas Galehaut’s had suffered great losses, for King Arthur’s troops had performed great feats of arms at the beginning. When noon arrived Galehaut’s troops were very much on the defensive; although they numbered fully [68] twenty thousand more than the others, they nevertheless had the worst of it. Had it not been for the Black Knight’s skill in fighting, those on his side could never have held out, but he so dismayed all his foes with his skill that it seemed to them that no multitude of people would have been of use to them. They were so terrorized by the wonders he performed that many turned their backs and went most shamefully straight back to their tents. When Galehaut saw this he wondered what this could mean, for he knew full well that his forces outnumbered the others; he went to meet the runaways and asked them what this meant. “Well, my lord,” said a knight who had no more wish to fight, “whoever wishes to see marvels should go where we have just been, and he will see the greatest ever seen or that ever may be.” “What?” asked Galehaut. “What wonders are these, then?” “What wonders, my lord?” said the knight. “Down there there’s a knight who has won the battle all by himself! No one can stand up to him or withstand his blows, and the knight with the red armor was not worth a halfpenny compared to this one, and nothing can tire him out, for he has not stopped since this morning, and he’s still just as fresh and as bold as if he hadn’t borne arms at all today!” “By God,” said Galehaut, “I am going to see that for myself!” Then he went to his main army and detached ten thousand men—thirty thousand were still left—and he said to King Bademagu, [69] “If you value your honor and my good will, see to it that my army does not move, unless I myself come and get you. And you,” he said to the ten thousand, “lie low somewhere far from the others, until I come to you.” Then he returned to the battle armed as he was, and brought all the runaways back with him. His forces were already in such a bad way that they were being completely routed. But when King Clamadeu saw them coming he took heart again, shouted his battlecry, and returned to the charge with a vigorous assault upon his foes. And Galehaut ordered those he was bringing with him to dash pell-mell into the fray just as soon as they could, “and have no fear,” he said, “for you will receive whatever aid you need.” And at their lord’s command they charged into the fray, striking among the enemy. Then all their companions renewed their attack, loudly shouting Galehaut’s battlecry, for all believed a large force had come to their assistance, and they would have violently repulsed the king’s men, had it not been for the Black Lancelot, Part IT Knight. But all alone he bore the brunt of their attack, so that the others all rallied to him for whatever need or difficulty, and he was ready to defend or to give chase. There his horse was killed beneath him, and he was forced to fight on foot, for that was the last [70] of his horses. The press was great around him, so that no one could immediately reach him to bring him another horse. There on foot he fought so well that no one could observe any cowardice or laziness in him; rather he was like a battle standard, thrust into the fray. Right and left he struck without respite, his sword constantly dealing blows. He split helmets, he cut shields apart, he battered hauberks upon shoulders and severed arms from knights; he performed wonders for all to see. When Galehaut saw these wonders, he marveled at how one knight could accomplish this, and said to himself that he would not want to have conquered all the lands under the heavens, if such a splendid knight were to die through his fault. Then he spurred his horse and galloped into the press, stick in hand, in order to disperse the melee and rescue the knight who was on foot. With great difficulty he made his men draw back, then called to the knight and said, “Sir knight, now have no fear!” The knight boldly replied that he had none. “Do you know,” said Galehaut, “what I’m going to tell you? I wish to teach you something of my customs, and be assured that I forbid all my men to lay a hand on you, as long as you are on foot, nor should anyone pursue you. But if out of cowardice you were to hide and cease fighting, I would in no way prevent [71] your being taken prisoner. But as long as you continue to bear arms, no one will attack you. And don’t be dismayed if your horse has died, for I will give you all the horses you can use, and I’ll be your squire all this day. And if I can’t tire you, then no man alive will ever do so.” Then he dismounted and gave his horse to the knight, who mounted at once and returned to the melee as if he had not struck a blow that day. And Galehaut in turn mounted a horse that had been brought to him, returned to his army, took the ten thousand, and told them to attack first. “And you,” he said to King Bademagu, “will attack afterward. You are not to attack as soon as these go into action, but when the last of the enemy has arrived: then you are to attack, for those on the other side will think that all my troops have already arrived, when these ten thousand have attacked, and I myself will come to get you.” Then he left with the ten thousand, and had them ride in disorder and spread out, far from one another, to give the impression that there were more of them. And when they were near the battle, he had them sound horns and trumpets; there were so many that all the countryside trembled at the sound. When the knight heard them, it seemed to him that a great army was coming; he drew near [72] his people, called them around him, and said, “My lords, you are all friends of the king; I cannot name you, but you are considered excellent knights. Now we shall see who is rightly praised!” At that point the enemy arrived, in great disorder. Sir Yvain, seeing them coming, ordered his troops to move quietly and told them they were in no danger, “for we’ll lose nothing today because of any forces I have seen.” He Lancelot, Part IT said this because he thought all Galehaut’s men were there. But Sir Gawain knew well, as soon as he saw them coming from the place where he was lying, that that was not all of them. Great was the noise when the ten thousand attacked. King Arthur’s forces met them as vigorously*? as they could, but Galehaut’s attacked so violently that they struck down many as they came. But Sir Yvain’s arrival greatly encouraged them, and great was their need, for they were already giving way everywhere. They rallied when Sir Yvain attacked. Then Galehaut went back to his army and ordered them to ride with such vigor that no one ever went so furiously into battle. “Strike them,” he said, “so swiftly that not one remains on his horse, for you are all fresh,24 strong, and rested, since you have not borne arms since you arrived here. Now we shall see how well you can fight!” [73] Then they rode down the slope of a valley. Their troops were already getting the worst of it, for Sir Yvain's companions were fighting very valiantly, and he better than all the rest. But none of his feats of arms nor anyone else’s measured up to those of the Black Knight, who surpassed all others. When Galehaut’s army arrived, however, the situation changed profoundly, for there was too great a mass of troops. At their arrival the Good Knight was unhorsed, as were the six companions who had been beside him all that day.*° Then Galehaut came spurring and remounted him upon the horse where he himself sat, for the other was no longer fit for use. As soon as he was remounted, he returned to the melee, just as speedily as he had done before, and performed more feats of arms, as Galehaut witnessed, than any other man could do, to the amazement of all. So his skill in fighting continued until nightfall, and never was there a time when he and his men did not have the better of the battle. When night fell, they began to disperse on each side, and he went off as secretly as he could and went up the fields between the hill and the river. And Galehaut, who was paying close attention to him, saw him [74] go, spurred his horse in pursuit and followed him at a distance along the path on the hill, until he caught up with him at the bottom.*® He drew alongside him as courteously as he could and said, “God bless you, my lord!” The other looked at him askance and reluctantly returned his greeting. “My lord,” said Galehaut, “who are you?” “Good sir, 1am a knight, as you can see.” “Indeed,” said Galehaut, “a knight you are, the best there is, and the man I would most wish to honor in all the world: I’ve come to ask you, as a favor, to come stay with me tonight.” 23\igorously,” as in note 51.a and Kennedy 319.26 (Micha has “quickly”). 4efresh,” as in note 51.b and Kennedy 319.34 (Micha has “proud” or “fierce”). 25The reference is to Kay and the others; cf. pp. [62-65]. 26«at the bottom,” as in Kennedy 320.21 (Micha has “in the valley”). pei And the knight spoke to him as if he did not know him and had never seen him before: “Who are you, my lord, who beg me to stay with you?” “My lord,” he said, “I am Galehaut, son of the Fair Giantess, lord of all these troops against whom you have today defended the kingdom of Logres, which I had made a good start at conquering, and I would have conquered it, had it not been for you.” “What?” exclaimed the knight. “You are an enemy of King Arthur, and you ask me to stay with you? I'll never stay with you, God willing, as things now stand.” “My lord,” said Galehaut, “I would do more for you than you believe, and I have already begun. Again I beg you, for God’s sake, to stay with me tonight, on condition that I’ll do whatever you ask of me.” Then the knight halted, and looked fixedly at Galehaut and said, “Truly, my lord, you are a great maker of promises! But I don’t know how good you are at keeping them.” [75] And Galehaut replied, “My lord, I tell you truly that I make the fewest promises of any powerful man in the world. And again I assure you that if you come stay with me I'll grant you what you ask of me, and I’!] guarantee this in whatever way you stipulate.” “My lord,” said the knight, “you are considered a very worthy knight, and it would not be to your honor to promise something if you didn’t intend to keep your word.” “My lord,” said Galehaut, “have no doubt of that, for I wouldn’t lie to win the whole kingdom of Logres. And I pledge you, on my honor as a loyal knight, that I'll give you what you ask of me, for I’m not a king, and I wish to have your company this night; and if I can have more of it, Pl take it. And if you’re not satisfied with my pledge, I'll make whatever additional guarantees you wish.” “My lord,” said the knight, “it seems to me that you greatly desire my company, if your intentions are like your words. I'll stay with you tonight, provided you pledge to give me whatever I ask. And I ask you to give me an additional guarantee.” Thus the two of them reached an agreement, and Galehaut pledged that he would honor his side of the compact. Then both rode off toward the tents, the king’s men having already returned to theirs. Sir Gawain had seen the knight ride off; he was most anxious [76] about his going, and had he been well he would have taken great pains to bring him back. He requested that the king come to him, for he wished to tell him to go after the knight and retain him. While he was waiting for the king, he looked up across the fields and saw Galehaut coming, his right arm around the knight’s shoulders, bringing him along between the hill and the river, so that King Arthur’s men would see them. When Sir Gawain saw them, he knew for certain that Galehaut had taken the knight into his service, and he said to the queen who was there with him, “Oh, my lady, my lady, now you can well say that your men are defeated and dead. See, this is what Galehaut has won through his wisdom.” And the queen looked, and saw the knight that Galehaut was bringing, and was so furious that she could not utter a word. And Sir Gawain was so distressed that he 156 fainted three times in less time than it takes to go a small stone’s throw. Then the king arrived and heard everyone crying, “He’s dead! He’s dead!” He came to Gawain and, weeping, embraced him and began calling softly to him. Then Sir Gawain recovered from his faint. When he saw the king, he began to reproach him bitterly: “My lord, now the time has come that was predicted by your wise men.’ See what a treasure you have lost! He who has defended your land all this day will now take it from you; if you had behaved wisely, you would have retained him, just as the world’s finest knight has done, he who is leading him away before your eyes, and yet this knight never did Galehaut anything but harm. You have lost him, you to whom he restored both land and honor! In such a way do men of quality show themselves, wherever they may be.” [77] Then the king saw the knight whom Galehaut was leading away, and felt such grief that he nearly fell down; he could not refrain from weeping, but in order to comfort his nephew he put on as brave a face as he could. As soon as he could, he went back to his tent and gave way to a great outpouring of grief, and so did all the knights, each one sorrowing privately. Everyone in the king’s camp grieved bitterly for the good knight whom Galehaut was leading off. They kept on riding meanwhile, and when they approached the camp, the knight called to Galehaut and said, “My lord, I’m going with you, but I request, before I enter your camp, that you arrange for me speak to the two gentlemen you most trust in all the world.” And he granted that. Then Galehaut went to two of his men and said, “Follow me, and this very night you'll see the most powerful man in all the world.” And they said to him, “What, my lord, are you not the most powerful man in all the world?” “No,” he said, “but I will be this very night, before I go to sleep.” Those two were the King of the Hundred Knights and the First Defeated King, the two men in all the world in whom Galehaut trusted most. And when they saw the knight, they welcomed him most joyfully, for they recognized him by his arms. He asked them who they were, and they named themselves as you have heard. And he said to them, “My lords, your lord shows you great honor, for he says that you are [78] the two men in whom he most trusts and believes and whom he loves best. He and I have agreed to a compact, which I wish you to hear, for he pledges that in return for my staying with him tonight he will grant me whatever I may ask. You may ask him about this.” Galehaut said that this was true. “My lord,” he said, “I wish in addition to have the guarantee of these two gentlemen.” Galehaut granted this. “And say in what way,” he said. “They will pledge that, if you fail in this compact, they'll abandon you and come to me, wherever I wish, and will work to harm you and to help me, and will henceforth 27See chapter 44, p. [436]. Lancelot, Part IT owe me what they now owe you, and will owe you what they now owe me as their mortal enemy.” Then Galehaut ordered them to make this pledge. And the King of the Hundred Knights, who was his seneschal and his first cousin, said, “My lord, you are such a good man and so wise that you must know what you’re asking of us, for this is a very weighty undertaking.” “Don't meddle in this,” said Galehaut, “for this is my wish, and I know what I’m doing. Now make your pledge to him as I have agreed.” And he dictated the terms, and they both made their pledge just as they were ordered. Then Galehaut called the First Defeated King aside and said to him, “Ride ahead to all my lords, and tell them from me that they are presently to be at my tent, and to come with all possible splendor. And tell them how much I’ve gained tonight, and make sure that in my tent are all the entertainments that can be found in all the camp.” Then the king spurred away [79] and carried out his overlord’s order. Galehaut and his seneschal detained the knight a long time, speaking to him, until his orders could be carried out. Two hundred knights, all of whom were Galehaut’s men, soon came to meet them; twenty-eight of them were kings, and the others were dukes and counts. There the knight was honored and welcomed, for never was an unknown man received as joyfully as he was on that occasion. Everyone, both high and low, said, “Welcome to the flower of the world’s knights,” so that the knight was deeply embarrassed. Thus they came to Galehaut’s tent, and no one could relate the entertainments and the rejoicing that took place there that night. With such joy was the knight received and honored. When his armor had been removed, Galehaut had a very costly and beautiful robe brought to him, and after much urging, the knight put it on. When it was time to eat, they ate. Afterwards, Galehaut had four beds prepared in his chamber: one was very large, both broad and high; the second, beside it, was less large; the other two were much smaller. When the high bed was adorned with all the finery that can be put upon a bed—and this was all for the knight who was to sleep there—and it came [80] time for bed, Galehaut said to him, “My lord, you will sleep in that bed.” “My lord,” said the knight, “then who will sleep in the other beds?” “My lord,” said Galehaut, “my servants who will keep you company; I’ll sleep in a nearby chamber, with my men, to solace and comfort them; you'll sleep here, where you will be more tranquil and more comfortable.” “My lord,” he said, “for God’s sake, don’t make me lie higher than the other knights who are to keep me company; you mustn’t disgrace me so.” “Don’t be concerned,” said Galehaut; “you'll never be considered base or cowardly because of what you do by my orders.” Then Galehaut departed. The knight began to think about the great honor shown him by Galehaut, and in his heart he esteemed him most highly. Once he was in bed, he very quickly fell asleep, for he was exceedingly tired. When Galehaut was sure the knight was asleep, he lay down beside him as quietly as he could, and two of his knights joined him; there were no others in the room. The knight slept Lancelot, Part IT very soundly, but all night long he moaned in his sleep. Galehaut heard him clearly, for he scarcely slept at all, but spent the time thinking of a way to retain the knight. In the morning the knight rose and heard Mass. Galehaut had already risen quietly, for he did not wish [81] the knight to notice. When they had heard Mass, the knight asked for his armor; Galehaut asked him why, and he replied that he wished to leave. Then Galehaut said to him, “My dear friend, stay yet awhile, and do not think I wish to deceive you, for there’s nothing you could request that you would not have, if you will stay. I assure you, you can have the company of a more powerful man than I, but you’ll never have that of a man who loves you as much. And since I would do more than anyone else to have your company, then I deserve it more than anyone else.” “My lord,” said the knight, “I’ll stay, for I could have no better company than yours. Now I'll tell you the gift that will make me stay; if I don’t receive it, your talk of staying will be in vain.” “My lord,” said Galehaut, “speak confidently,?° and you'll have it, if it is within my power.” Then the knight called for the two guarantors, and in their presence said, “My lord, I ask you that as soon as you overcome King Arthur, and his forces are totally unable to recover, as soon as I summon you, you are to ask him for mercy and put yourself entirely in his power.” When Galehaut heard this, he was aghast and became very pensive. And the two kings said to him, “My lord, what are you thinking about? [82] There is nothing to be gained from reflection now: you have gone so far that there is no turning back.” “What?” he exclaimed. “Do you suppose I have any regrets? If all the world were mine, I wouldn’t hesitate to give it to him. I was thinking of the splendid thing he said, for never did any man say anything finer. My lord,” he said, “may God never help me if you don’t receive this gift, for I could do nothing for you that would bring me shame, but I beg you not to deprive me of your company, since I would do more to have you with me than any other.” The knight granted him this, and he remained. The meal was prepared, and they went to eat. In Galehaut’s camp there was great rejoicing over the knight who was staying, but in King Arthur’s camp, where they did not know of the compact, there was bitter mourning. So they spent that day. The next day Galehaut and his companion rose and went to hear Mass. And Galehaut said, “My lord, today is the day of the battle; do you intend to fight?” The knight replied that he did. “Then I ask you,” said Galehaut, “to wear my armor, as a beginning of our companionship.” He answered, “Most willingly. But you must not wear the armor of a foot-soldier.”29 “No, if you wish it,” said Galehaut. Then they had the armor brought, and they completely armed the knight except for the hauberk and the greaves, which were too large. Then Galehaut’s men put on their armor, as did King Arthur’s, and all who were there passed onto the field of battle. The king had given 28My lord ... confidently” supplied from Kennedy 325.5. 22Compare p. [57] of this chapter. 137 the order that none of them was to pass beyond the water, for he feared defeat, because of the good knight he had lost. But no [83] order could restrain the lively young knights from crossing the water: soon jousts and melees were occurring in many places. The two sides began to do battle, and whenever Galehaut’s men were getting the worst, their companions came to their aid, and King Arthur’s men did likewise. They all assembled on the field, and the king’s men began to perform great feats of arms. The king was by his standard, along with four®? valiant knights whom he had ordered to take the queen to safety, if they saw that their side was losing. When all King Arthur’s troops had gone into battle, the good knight wearing Galehaut’s armor joined the fray; everyone who saw him thought it was Galehaut, and all cried out, “There’s Galehaut! There’s Galehaut!” But Sir Gawain recognized him and said, “That is not Galehaut, but the Good?! Knight who wore the black armor, two days ago! I recognize him.” Once he had joined the battle, the king’s people did not hold out for long, for they were completely disheartened by the Good Knight who fought against them: they were soon driven back from the field, for they were badly outnumbered by Galehaut’s forces. At the edge of the field, some held out a long time and put up a strong defense, but it was to no avail, for they were at too great a disadvantage. Great was the anguish among King Arthur’s men in withstanding the melee at the edge of the field. The story tells that the Good Knight had no less difficulty in restraining Galehaut’s men from going any farther than he had had in pursuing King Arthur’s,** and yet he had done much to spare them. [84] When he had forced them back, he remained at the passageway to keep the others back, for they were frantic to get out. Then he looked around, and began to shout to Galehaut. He came spurring up and said, “Dear friend, what do you wish?” “What?” he said. “I wish something remarkable.” “Speak confidently,” he said. “My lord,” said the knight, “are you ready?” “Yes, indeed,” said Galehaut, “tell me your pleasure.” “Sir,” said the knight, “the time has come for you to honor your side of our compact.” “In God’s name,” said Galehaut, “this pains me not at all, since it is your wish.” Then he spurred straight for the standard where the king was nearly dying from sorrow as he witnessed the defeat of his forces. The queen had already mounted, and the four knights were galloping away with her, for there was no more hope of recovery. They wanted to bear Sir Gawain away in a stretcher, but he said he preferred to die where he was than to see all joy dead and all honor lost, and he kept fainting so frequently that whoever saw him thought he was at death’s door. 30“four,” as on p. [84] (Micha has “one of a group of four,” i.e., three knights and the king). 31“Good,” as in note 67.a and Kennedy 326.19 (Micha has “black”). 32«in withstanding ... King Arthur’s” supplied from Kennedy 326.28-31. 138 When the Good Knight saw Galehaut go off to perform such a great sacrifice for him, he readily believed and said that he never had such a good friend or so true a companion. He was so moved that his sighs came from the bottom of his heart; tears ran from his eyes, and he said between clenched teeth, “Blessed Lord God, who can be worthy of this?” Galehaut rode up to the standard and asked for King Arthur. The king came forward, as dispirited as if he believed he was about to lose all worldly honor forever. When Galehaut saw him, he said, “Come forward and do not be concerned, for I [85] wish to speak with you.” Then all began to say, “It’s Galehaut!” The king marveled greatly at what this might mean, yet he came forward, and as soon as Galehaut saw him he dismounted, knelt down and joined his hands, and said, “My lord, I come to make reparation for the wrongs I have done you; I repent and place myself entirely in your power.” When the king heard this, he was filled with joy; he raised his hands toward heaven, and was so glad he could not believe it, yet he controlled himself and behaved humbly toward Galehaut. Then Galehaut got up from his knees, and they embraced and joyfully greeted one another. Galehaut said, “My lord, do with me as you will, and have no fear, for I will place myself in your power wherever you please. Now if you will, I'll have my troops withdraw and then come back to you.” “Go then,” said the king, “and come back quickly, for I’m most eager to talk to you.” Then Galehaut went to his troops and had them withdraw. And King Arthur immediately sent for the queen, who was bitterly grieving as she went away; the messengers pursued her and caught up with her, and told her of the great joy that had befallen her. She could not believe it until she had the genuine proof sent to her by the king. Then she returned, full of great joy. The news of the peace spread quickly; Sir Gawain heard it from the king himself. He was more joyful at this than anyone else, and asked, “My lord, how did this come to be?” “Truly,” said the king, “I don’t know. It is the wilh of Our Lord.” Great was the king’s joy, and everyone was amazed and wondered how this could have come about. After Galehaut had [86] removed his troops, he said to his companion, “My dear companion, what do you wish me to do? I have carried out your orders, and the king has told me to return to him, but I'll accompany you to our tents and keep you company for a while, for I have not been with you much; then I’ll return to the king.” “My lord,” exclaimed the knight, “you’ll go back to the king and bring him all the company you can, for you have rendered me great service and done more for me than I could ever deserve. But I ask this much of you: let not a living soul know where I am.” Galehaut gave him his word. Speaking in this way, they reached their tents, and it was proclaimed through all the camp that peace had been Lancelot, Part IT made, and how this had been done. Many, who preferred war, were saddened by this. Then the two companions dismounted. When they had removed their armor, Galehaut dressed in his finest robes to go to court, with his companion’s permission. He had it announced through all his camp that anyone who wished to leave might do so, except for those of his household. Next he summoned the two kings in whom he placed so much trust, presented his companion to them, and begged them to treat him just as they would treat their rightful overlord himself, Then he went to court. The king had already removed his armor, and he went to meet Galehaut, along with the queen, the lady of Malehaut, and many ladies and maidens. Then they went to the brattice where Sir Gawain lay ill; when he learned that Galehaut was coming, he sought to welcome him properly, for he had never seen [87] or met him. When Galehaut approached, Sir Gawain said to him, “My lord, you are welcome as the man in all the world I most wish to see and whose friendship I most wish to have.33 And you must be proud to be the most rightly praised man in the world, and the most beloved of his people. I believe that no one else is as capable of recognizing a man of quality as you are: we have clearly seen this.” So spoke Sir Gawain to Galehaut. Then Galehaut asked him how he was, and he replied, “My lord, I was near death, but the great joy that reigns between you and my lord the king because of the love and the peace that God has made between you has completely cured me, for no one could have health or joy as long as such great hatred lasted between the two finest men in the world.” The king, the queen, and Sir Gawain welcomed Galehaut most joyfully, and spoke at length that day of many things, and of their friendship in particular, but they spoke not a word of the Black Knight, for it would have been too soon for that; rather they whiled away the day until evening in the joy of each other’s company. Then Galehaut asked leave to go see his men. The king granted it, adding “but you must come back soon,” and Galehaut promised to do so. He returned to his companion and asked him how he had been; he replied, “Very well.” Then Galehaut said to him, “My lord, what shall I do? The king has insistently begged me to return to him, but it would grieve me to leave you [88] at this point.” “Ah, my lord,” said the knight, “for God’s sake, you must do what my lord the king wishes, for be assured that you have never met a more worthy man than he. But I wish to ask a favor of you, which it will be to your benefit and mine for you to grant.” Galehaut replied, “Ask whatever you wish, and I'll never refuse you, for you are dearer to me than worldly honor.” “My lord,” he said, “many thanks. You have granted that you will not ask me my name until I have revealed it to you, or someone else has done so for me.” 33and whose .. . to have” supplied from note 73.b. Lancelot, Part IT “Then I will keep silent,” said Galehaut, “since you wish it so, and yet that would have been the first thing I would have asked, but I don’t wish to know it until you wish me to.” Then the knight asked him about the behavior of the king and his company, but he did not mention the queen. Galehaut replied that the king was an excellent gentleman, “and it grieves me much,” he said, “that I didn’t get to know him long ago the way I do now, for I’d have been much the better for it. And my lady the queen is the most worthy lady God ever made.” When the knight heard him mention the queen, he bowed his head and fell into such a deep reverie that he quite forgot himself. And Galehaut looked at him and saw that he had tears in his eyes and could barely keep from weeping. He was amazed at this, and began to speak of other things. When he had spoken at length, the knight said, “Go, my lord, and keep company with Sir Gawain and the king, and listen for any word or any news of me, and tomorrow you'll tell me whatever anyone has said about me.” “Gladly, my lord,” said Galehaut. Then he embraced him and kissed him, commended him to God, and told the two kings to watch over him as they would over their overlord himself. [89] Then Galehaut left and the knight remained with the two good men, who treated him with great honor. That night Galehaut slept in the king’s tent with the king himself and Sir Gawain, who had himself brought there, and Sir Yvain and many other knights. And the queen slept in the brattice where Sir Gawain had lain ill, as did the lady of Malehaut, who was constantly watching and listening to see how things would go, and there were many other maidens and ladies. There is no need to ask whether the knight who had stayed in the keeping of the two kings was honored, for more was made of him than he would have wished, and he was deeply embarrassed and distressed. That night the two kings slept in Galehaut’s tent out of love for the knight, and they informed him that they would sleep just as Galehaut had done the first night, so that he would not realize"? it, for he would not have consented to it for anything. At the beginning, the knight slept very soundly, but after the first sleep he began to toss and turn, and very soon he began to show such grief that it awakened those who lay near him. He wept copiously, shedding many tears, but tried to keep from being heard, and as he wept he said often, “Oh, miserable wretch, what can I do?” But he said this very softly. This grief and this anguish lasted all night. When day broke, the two kings rose as quietly as they could and marveled at [90] what might be wrong with this knight who grieved so bitterly. Galehaut also rose very early and came to his tent to see his companion. He found the two kings up and about, and asked them about his companion; they told him about the great grief he had shown throughout the night. 34«night ... realize,” as in Kennedy 330.29 (Micha has “night that he did not realize”). 139 When he heard this, Galehaut was most astonished and sorrowful. Then he went to the room where his companion lay. The knight heard him coming and wiped his eyes, for he was still weeping just as bitterly as he had during the night. When Galehaut did not hear him speak, he went out again, believing him to be asleep. The knight arose soon after that; when he had arisen, Galehaut came before him and saw that his eyes were all swollen and red, and that he was so hoarse that he could scarcely say a word. And the sheets of his bed where his head had lain were as wet as if they had been pulled from the water, for he had wept a great deal, and yet he sought to look cheerful and rose to meet Galehaut. The latter took him by the hand and drew him aside to speak privately to him: “My dear companion, why do you torment yourself so? What is the cause of this grief you have indulged in all night?” The knight cleverly concealed the truth and replied that he was often so agitated in his sleep. “Truly,” said Galehaut, “it clearly shows in your appearance and in your eyes that you've been grieving deeply. For God's sake, I beg you to tell me the reason, and be assured that there’s no misfortune so great that I may not help you get out of it, if any man can find a solution to your problem.” When he heard this, the knight was so distressed that he could not utter a word, and he began to weep as bitterly [91] as if he saw the being he most loved in the world lying dead before him, and he grieved so bitterly that he nearly fainted. Galehaut ran to grasp him in his arms, and he kissed him on the mouth and eyes, tried to comfort him, and said, “My dear friend, tell me your misfortune, for there’s no man so highly placed, if he has sought to do you ill, that you will not be avenged just as you wish.” But he replied that no one had wronged him in any way. “My dear friend, then why do you grieve so bitterly? Does it grieve you that I’ve made you my lord and my companion?” “Oh, good sir, for God’s sake, you’ve done much more for me than I could ever deserve; nothing troubles me except my own heart, which suffers all the fears that mortal heart can suffer, and fears that your noble generosity may be the death of me.” Galehaut was greatly troubled by this, but he comforted his companion as best he could. After this, they went to hear Mass. When the priest had divided the body of Our Lord into three parts, Galehaut went forward and took his companion by the hand and showed him the three parts that the priest held in his hands, and said, “My lord, do you not believe that this is the body of Our Lord?” “My lord,” said the knight, “I do indeed believe it.” “My dear friend,” said Galehaut, “then never fear, for by these three parts that you see here in the form of bread, I will never in my life do anything to harm or displease you, but I’ll do all I can to procure whatever is pleasing to you.” [92] “My lord,” he said, “I beg of you, you've done too much; this grieves me, for I don’t see how I can ever deserve it.” 140 Then they fell silent until the end of the Mass. Then Galehaut again asked his companion what he was to do. “My lord,” he said, “you’re not to abandon my lord the king, but rather keep him company. And if you hear any talk of me, keep the secret as I have begged you to do.” “My lord,” said Galehaut, “have no fear, for nothing you wish to conceal will be revealed by me.” Then Galehaut left his companion, entrusting him anew to the two gentlemen, who had much love for him, and he went to King Arthur’s court. All welcomed him as joyfully as they could. After dinner Galehaut, the king and the queen were relaxing around the couch where Sir Gawain lay, and Gawain said to Galehaut, “My lord, may you not be upset by what I’m about to ask you.” “Truly,” said Galehaut, “I won’t be.” “My lord, this peace between you and my lord the king, in the name of the person you love most, by whom was it brought about?” “Truly,” said Galehaut, “you have so adjured me that I'll tell no lie: a knight accomplished this.” “Who is he?” asked Sir Gawain. “May God help me truly,” said Galehaut, “] don’t know who he is.” “Was it the knight,” asked the queen, “with the black armor?” “You can reveal that much,” said Sir Gawain, “if you wish to uphold your side of our agreement.” “My lord,” said Galehaut, “I did so when I said it was a knight; [93] I'll tell you no more now, and I would have said nothing had you not adjured me in the name of the person I loved most. So be assured that the person I love most brought about the peace.” “By God,” said the queen, “it was the Black Knight! Then bring him before us!” “J, my lady? Truly, my lady, I cannot bring him to you, since I know nothing of him.” “Nonsense! He stayed with you, and yesterday he wore your armor.” “My lady,” he said, “that is true, but I’ve never seen him since I first left my lord the king.” “What?” exclaimed the king. “Do you not know him at all, the knight with the black armor? And I thought he was of your land.” i “God help me, he is not,” said Galehaut. “Sir,” said the king, “neither is he of mine, for it has been a while since I heard of any valiant knight whose device was unknown.” The king and queen pressed Galehaut to reveal the knight’s name, but they could get no more out of him. Sir Gawain feared that this might irritate him, and said to the king, “My lord, speak no more of this at present, for truly this knight, whoever he may be, is an excellent one, and there is none more valiant in this world.” When all had left off speaking of this, Galehaut resumed the conversation and said to the king, “My lord, my lord, did you ever see a finer knight than the one with the black shield?” “Indeed,” said the king, “I never saw any man whom I’d so much like to know, because of his knightly qualities.” Lancelot, Part IT “No?” said Galehaut. “Then tell me, by the loyalty you owe [94] my lady the queen and Sir Gawain, how much would you give in order to have his company forever?” “May God truly help me,” he said, “I’d share with him equally everything I have, with the sole exception of the person of this lady, whom I'd share with no one.” “Truly,” said Galehaut, “you'd pay a high price. And you, Sir Gawain, if.God gives you the health you desire, what sacrifice would you make in order to have the company of such an excellent knight?” Then Sir Gawain thought a little, like a man who believed he would never be well again. “If God were to grant me my health,” he said, “I'd immediately wish to be the most beautiful maiden in the world, happy and healthy, on condition that he would love me above all others, all his life and mine.” “Well,” said Galehaut, “you have offered a lot! And you, my lady,” he said, “in the name of the person you most love, what sacrifice would you make, on condition that such a knight would always be in your service?” “Well,” she said, “Sir Gawain has proposed all that a lady can give, and a lady can offer no more.” Then they all began to laugh. “And you, Galehaut,” said Sir Gawain, “you who have challenged us all, by the oath I swore to you today, what would you do?” “God help me, it would be worth having my great honor turned to shame, if I could be as sure of him as I would wish him to be of me.” “God give me joy,” said Sir Gawain, “you have pledged more than any of us.” [95] Then Sir Gawain thought it must be the same knight who had brought about the peace between the two of them, and that it was for him that Galehaut, when he saw that he had the better of the battle, had turned his honor to shame. He spoke privately to the queen of this, and Galehaut was more esteemed as a result. They went on speaking of the Black Knight at great length. Finally the queen rose and said she wished to go to the brattice where Sir Gawain’s room was, and Galehaut accompanied her. Once there, the queen spoke privately to Galehaut and said, “Galehaut, I love you dearly, and would do more for you than you may believe. It’s true that you have the Good Knight in your company and in your power, and it may be that I know him well. So I beg of you, if you value my love, and on condition that I will place at your disposal and in your power anything you may desire, arrange things so that I may see him.” “My lady,” said Galehaut, “I have no power over him, and I’ve never seen him since the peace was arranged between my lord the king and me.” “Surely,” said the queen, “it cannot be that you don’t know where he is.” “My lady,” he replied, “that may well be.*> But if he were now in my tent, it would take another will than yours or mine, especially as he is not presently in this land.” “Then where is he?” asked the queen. “You can surely tell me that much.” 35«Miy lady ... be” supplied from Kennedy 335.3. Lancelot, Part II “My lady,” he said, “I believe he may be in my land. Be assured [96] that, since you have begged and adjured me to do all I can, I will do so.” ‘I’m sure,” said the queen, “that if you do all you can, I'll see him. I’m counting on you; do what will place me forever in your debt, for he is one of the men I would most like to see in all the world, and not because I have any hope that I already know him, but®® because anyone should welcome the acquaintance of a worthy knight.” “My lady,” said Galehaut, “I know this very well, and you may be sure that I’ll do everything in my power.” “Many thanks,” said the queen. “Now go, and make every effort so that I may see him as soon as possible. And if he is in your land, have him sought out day and night, so that he may be here as soon as he can.” Then Galehaut left there and returned to the king and Sir Gawain and the other knights who were present. And the king said to Galehaut, “We no longer have our armies; only the members of our households remain. Have your people draw closer to ours, or I'll have mine draw closer to yours, and we’ll be nearer to one another.” “My lord,” said Galehaut, “I'll have my people draw closer, on the opposite bank, so that my tent will be [97] across from yours, and a boat will be readied that will go between the two. I'll set about it straightway.” “Truly,” said the king, “you have spoken well.” Then Galehaut went back to his tent and found his companion deep in thought; he asked him how he was, and he replied that he was fine, except for the fear that tormented him. And Galehaut said to him, “My lord, for God’s sake, what?’ are you afraid of?” “My lord,” he said, “I am afraid of being recognized.” “My lord,” said Galehaut, “have no fear, for by the loyalty I owe you, you’ll never be recognized here, unless it is by your own wish.” Then he told him what the king and Sir Gawain had said they would do to win his company, and how the queen had in turn pressed him to see the Good Knight, and how he had replied. “And be assured that she yearns for nothing else so much as she does to see you. And my lord the king suggested that I have my people draw closer to his so that my tent should be across from his, for we’re too far from one another. Now tell me what you wish me to do, for he wishes only to do as you wish.” “My lord,” he said, “I strongly advise you to do as my lord the king requests, for much good may come to you thereby.” “My dear friend,” said Galehaut, “and how shall I answer my lady concerning what I told you?” “Truly,” he said, “I don’t know.” Then he began to sigh, and his eyes filled with tears; he turned away, and was in such a state that he did not know where he was. And Galehaut said to him, [98] “My lord, don’t be concerned, but tell me without more ado how you wish things to be, and be assured that it will be as you desire, for I would prefer to be at odds with half the world 36k now him, but,” as in Kennedy 335.14. (Micha’s text does not make sense.) 37 hat,” as in Kennedy 335.38 (Micha has “of whom are you afraid”). 14] than with you alone. It is for your sake that they have my love. Now tell me what you wish.” “My lord,” said the knight, “whatever you advise, for I'm henceforth in your keeping.” “God help me,” he said, “I don’t see how anyone could be worse off for seeing my lady.” “In truth,” said the knight, “I know it will bring me much uneasiness and also much joy.” Then Galehaut realized how he felt, and pressed him until he agreed to what he asked, “but,” he added, “it will have to be done so secretly that no one knows of it. And tell my lady that you have sent for me.” “Leave the rest to me,” said Galehaut, “for I believe much good will come of it.” Then he called his seneschal and told him that, as soon as he went off to court, his pavilion, his tents, and his iron nets should all be gathered up and carried to a spot across from the king’s encampment and installed so near that there would be nothing but the river between them. Then he left, with only a small escort. The queen had already returned from the brattice. When she saw Galehaut coming, she jumped up to meet him and asked him how he had succeeded in his task. “My lady,” he replied, “so well that I fear your wish will take from me the dearest person in the world.” “God help me,” she said, “you will never lose anything because of me that I will not repay you doubly. But what will you lose in this?” “My lady,” he said, “the very person you request; I fear something may happen that would turn him against me,?8 and I would lose him [99] forever more.” “Indeed,” she said, “I could never make good such a loss. But if it please God, you won’t lose him through me, and he wouldn’t be chivalrous if he did anything unpleasant®? to you because I asked him to. But in any case, when will he be here?” “My lady, as soon as he can, for I have sent people spurring in search of him.” “We shall see,” she said, “for he will be here tomorrow, if you wish.” “My lady,” he said, “that could not be, even if he set out straightway from where he is, though I wish that he could be here immediately.” While they were speaking thus, Galehaut’s people had arrived on the other side of the river, and had begun to set up his pavilion across from the king’s. People looked at it with wonder, for it was splendid and luxurious. When everyone was installed and the iron nets were set up, King Arthur’s people looked on in wonder, for never had they seen such splendor, and there were many that day who came to look at it more closely. That night Galehaut came back to see his companion and told him what he had found and that the queen was most anxious to see him; this made him feel both fear and joy in his heart. After they had spoken together at length, Galehaut returned, with his friend’s leave, to the king. The queen spoke to him anew and asked him whether he had any news of the knight, and he replied that there 38«me” supplied from Sommer 256.1. 39 unpleasant,” as in Kennedy 2: 229 (note to 337.12). 142 was none yet. And she said to him, laughing, “Dear friend, are you not postponing what you can hasten?” “My lady,” he said, “God help me, I’d be no less [100] glad to see him than you yourself would.” “That,” she said, “is what makes me fear the fact that you’re not showing greater pleasure. It’s customary that what is most desired is most forbidden, and there are people who reluctantly” give others the opportunity to enjoy what they most like. But have no fear, for I will never be the cause of your losing anything you've had.” “My lady,” said Galehaut, “many thanks, for I believe that you can be of more help to me in this than I can to you.” They spent the day in such conversation, and that night Galehaut returned to the king’s pavilion, and the king did not want him to leave. Early the next morning Galehaut returned to his companion and recounted the queen’s words; he spoke so much of them that the knight overcame much of the fear he had had, and was no longer as wretched as he had been. His body and his face, which had been pale and dejected, and his eyes, which had been red and swollen, improved their appearance, and something of his good looks returned. Galehaut was very glad of this, and asked, “Sir, my lady is sure to ask me about you. What shall I reply?” “My lord,” he said, “whatever you think best, for it is all up to you from now on.” Galehaut said, “J know that she’ll want to see you tomorrow, and that’s what I would readily advise.” “My lord,” said the knight, “that’s a day I wish I had already lived through with honor and joy.” Then he was overcome with emotion. Galehaut saw this clearly, and left him then and returned to the king’s pavilion. As soon as the queen saw him, she asked him for news, and he said to her, “My lady, it’s still too early, but we’ll know by tomorrow.” “What do you mean?” [101] she asked. “You have the power to hasten things or to delay them. Now do me the sort of favor that you would wish me to do you, if I had the chance.” Then Galehaut began to smile, and the lady of Malehaut stayed very close by, watching and listening to their words; she thought she knew what they were planning, and would consider herself dishonored if she failed to find out any more.*! Thus Galehaut went back to his companion in the morning and in the evening, and each time he returned to the queen she asked him what he had learned. That night he slept*? in his usual place. The next day he rose early and went to his companion and told him that his waiting was over. “Today,” he said, “the queen must see you.” “My lord,” he replied, “for God’s sake, take care that she and we are the only ones who know of this, for there 40«reluctantly,” as in Sommer 256.24 and Kennedy 337.38 (Micha has “harmfully”). 4lTyanslation based on Kennedy 2: 229 (note to 338.30). 424Slept,” as in note 96.a and Kennedy 338.33 (Micha has “came”). Lancelot, Part IT are people at my lord King Arthur’s court who would easily recognize me if they saw me.” “Now have no fear,” said Galehaut; “I’ll take care of everything.” Then he again took leave of him and summoned his seneschal. “When I send for you,” he said, “take care that you come to me and bring my companion with you in such a way that no one learns from you that it is he.” “As you wish, my lord,” he replied. [102] Then Galehaut returned to the king’s pavilion, and the queen asked him, “What news?” “My lady, very good indeed. The flower of the world’s knights has arrived.” “Heavens,” she exclaimed, “how shall I see him? But I want to see him in such a way that no one may know that it is he, apart from you and me, for I have no wish for others to benefit from this.” “By God,” said Galehaut, “so shall it be, for he said that it was most important that the king’s people should not recognize him.” “What?” she asked. “Is he then known here?” “My lady, there are some people who might recognize him if they saw him.” “Heavens, who can he be?” “God help me,” said Galehaut, “I don’t know, for he has never told me his name or who he is.” “He hasn’t? May God help me, this is a wonder. Now I’m all the more impatient to see him.” “My lady, you'll see him this very day, and Ill tell you how. We’ll go down there for our pleasure,” and he showed her a place beside the meadows that was full of bushy trees, “and we’ll have as little company as we can. There you'll see him shortly before nightfall.” “Ah,” she said, “what a good idea, my dear friend! If only it might please the Savior of the World to make it be night straightway!” Then they both began to laugh, and the queen embraced him and delightedly shared her joy. And the lady of Malehaut saw them and thought that the matter was more urgent than she had supposed; she paid very close attention, and no knight entered whose face she did not scrutinize. The queen rejoiced at the knight’s arrival, [103] and she was most impatient for nightfall; she made a deliberate effort to keep herself occupied in conversation, in order to forget the hours of the day, which were tedious to her. me So passed the day until, after dinner, evening had fallen. The queen took Galehaut by the hand and called the lady of Malehaut and Lady Lore of Carduel and just one of her maidens who had always been in her service, and she went down the meadows straight to the place Galehaut had suggested. When they had gone a little way, Galehaut looked about and saw a squire; he called to him and told him to go to his seneschal and tell him to come to him, and he showed the squire where. And when the queen heard this, she looked at Galehaut and said, “What? Is he your seneschal?” “No, my lady, but he’ll come with him.” Then they sat down beneath the trees, Galehaut and the queen on one side, far from the others, and the ladies Lancelot, Part IT on another,* very surprised to be left so alone. The squire came to the seneschal, and delivered his message. At once the seneschal took the knight, and they crossed the water and came down the meadows, as the squire had instructed them; they were the most handsome knights who could be found in their lands. When they approached, the ladies looked at them, [104] and the lady of Malehaut immediately recognized the knight, for she had held him captive many a day, but because she did not wish him to recognize her, she bowed her head and drew close to Lady Lore. They passed by, the seneschal greeted them, and Galehaut said to the queen, “Here is the best knight in the world.” “Which one is he?” asked the queen. “My lady,” he said, “which one do you suppose?” “Truly,” she said, “they are both very handsome knights, but I see no one in whom there might be half the prowess of the Black Knight.” “My lady,” said Galehaut, “I tell you that he’s one of these two.” Then they came before the queen. The knight was trembling so violently that he could scarcely greet her, his face had lost all color, which astonished the queen. Then both knelt down; the seneschal greeted her, as did the other, but this was very poorly done, and he kept his eyes cast down, like a man ashamed. Then the queen thought that this was he. And Galehaut said to the seneschal, “Go keep those ladies company over there, for they are all alone.” He did as his lord commanded. Then the queen took the knight, who was still on his knees, by the hand, seated him before her, welcomed him warmly, and said with a smile, “My lord, we have long wished for your company, until, thanks to God and to Galehaut here, we see you now, at last. And yet I don’t yet know whether you are the knight whom I request, though Galehaut says you are. But I’d still like to learn who you are from your own lips, [105] if you would be so kind.” He replied that he did not know whom she sought, and not once did he look at her face. The queen was most curious to know what might be wrong with him, but at length she began to suspect part of what it was. Galehaut, seeing that the knight was embarrassed and ill at ease, thought that he would speak openly to the queen if he were alone with her, and he said loudly, so that the ladies might hear, “I am certainly most ungallant, for all those ladies have but one knight to keep them company, and are otherwise all alone!” Then he rose and went to where the ladies were sitting. They jumped up to greet him; he bade them be seated again, and they began to speak of many things. And the queen said to the knight, “Good sir, why do you conceal yourself from me? Truly there is no reason; you can at least tell me whether it was you who carried the day in the recent battle.” “My lady,” he said, “it was not.” “What?” she exclaimed. “Were you not wearing black armor? Was it not to you that Sir Gawain sent three horses?” “My lady,” he said, “it was.” 43, nd the ladies on another,” as in note 100.a and Kennedy 340.9 (Micha has “and the other ladies were very surprised”). igs “Are you not he who wore Galehaut’s armor, on the last day?” “Yes, my lady,” he said, “that is true, Iam.” “And are you not he who was the victor of the second days?! “My lady,” he said, “indeed I’m not.” Then the queen saw that he did not wish to acknowledge that he had carried the day, and she esteemed him highly for that. “Now tell me,” she asked, “who made you a knight?” “You, my lady.” “I? When?” “My lady, do you recall that a knight came to my lord King Arthur at Camelot, [106] wounded in both body and head by the blow of a sword, and that a squire came to him on Friday evening, and he was knighted on Sunday?”*° “I remember it well,” she said. “And, God help you, was it you whom the lady brought to the king dressed in a white robe?”™46 “Yes, my lady.” “Then why do you say that I made you a knight?” “Because it’s the truth, my lady, for it was the custom in the kingdom of Logres that one could not be knighted without girding on a sword, and he from whom he holds the sword makes him a knight. I hold mine from you, for the king gave me none; for this reason I say that you made me a knight.”47 “Truly,” she said, “I’m very glad of this. And where did you go from there?” “My lady, I went to the aid of the lady of Nohaut, and then Sir Kay came there and fought along with me.”48 “And did the two of you send nothing to me?” “We did,” he said; “I sent you two maidens. "49 “Upon my word, that’s true. And when you came back from Nohaut, did you find along the way no man who spoke in my name?” “Yes, my lady, a knight who guarded a ford who ordered me to get down off my horse; I asked him in whose service he was, and he told me he was in yours. ‘Dismount at once,’ he said. I asked him under whose orders he was, and he said there were no orders there but his own. I put my right foot, which I had already withdrawn, back into the stirrup, and told him he would certainly have no more from me that day; I jousted with him, and I know I committed an outrage. My lady, I beg your mercy; punish me [107] as you will.” The queen replied, as though she were sure that he could not escape being hers, “Indeed, you committed no injury toward me, dear friend, for he was not in my service, and I expressed my displeasure at what he had said to you, 44«the second day,” as in Kennedy 341.26 (Micha has “the first ay) and the second”). 45See chapter 22: pp. [261-262] for the wounded knight; [273] and [277-278] for the knighting. 465ee chapters 21 and 22, particularly pp. [264-268]. The queen uses damoisele (“damsel”), but the usual title is “lady (of the Lake).” 47See chapter 22, p. [286], and chapter 23, p. [298]. 48see chapters 22-23, pp. [286-304]. 49See chapter 23, p. [298]. 50see chapter 23, pp. [306-310]. 144 for he came back to me.*! But tell me now, where did you go from there?” “To Dolorous Guard,” he said. “And who conquered it?” “My lady, I entered there.” “And did I ever see you there?” “Yes, my lady, more than once.” “In what place?” “My lady, one day I asked you whether you wished to enter there; you said you did, but you seemed very frightened, and I asked you this twice.”>? “What shield were your carrying?” she asked. ‘First, my lady, a white shield with a diagonal red band, and the second time there were two bands.” ‘I’m well acquainted with those devices. And did I see you there again?” “Yes, my lady, the night you thought you had lost Sir Gawain, your nephew, and his companions, and the people of the castle were shouting ‘Seize him! Seize him!’ And I came out with a shield with three diagonal red bands, and my lord the king was in a gallery with you. And when I came toward him, they shouted, ‘Seize him, Your Majesty, seize him!’53 —but he let me go, for which I thank him.” “Truly,” she said, “this saddens me, for had he taken you prisoner, the enchantments of the castle would have ceased. But tell me now, was it you who liberated Sir Gawain and his companions from prison?”>* “My lady, I did what I could.” “In all the things you’ve told me I have found nothing but truth. But tell me now, [108] for God’s sake, who was the maiden who spent the night in a turret above the lodging of my lord the king, dressed in a white dress?”° “Truly, my lady, that was the maiden whom I wronged terribly, for my lady of the Lake, who raised me, had sent her to me; she found me in that turret, and she was greatly honored for my sake. And when I heard Sir Gawain had been taken prisoner, I was deeply troubled, and I left the maiden, who wanted to come with me. I asked her, by the loyalty she owed me, not to move from there until she saw Sir Gawain or me. And I got caught up in such great matters that I forgot her and never went back to her. She was more loyal to me than I was chivalrous to her, for she never stirred until she heard news of me, and that was only much later.”°® When the queen heard him speak of the maiden, she immediately knew that this was Lancelot; she questioned him about all the things she had heard concerning him, and in all she found him truthful. “Now tell me,” she said, 51See chapter 23, pp. [310-311]. In fact, the knight had admitted to Lancelot that he was not in the queen’s service, p. [308]. 52See chapter 28, pp. [352] and [365]. The narrative is not completely consistent, however, or else Lancelot’s memory of the earlier events is inaccurate, for Guenevere is not described as “frightened” (¢sbahie) in either of the earlier passages. >3See chapter 29, pp. [367-368]. 54See chapter 31, p. [371]. See chapter 31, pp. [370-371]; “spent,” as in Kennedy 343.16 (Micha has “came”). 56see chapters 28, p. [349], and 31, p. [372]; she finally leaves in chapter 37, pp. [401-402]. Lancelot, Part II “after you were knighted and left Camelot, did I ever see you again?” “Yes, my lady, at a time when you rendered me a great service, for I would have been killed, had it not been for you, who had Sir Yvain pull me out of the water. »57 “What?” she exclaimed. “Was it you who were taken prisoner by Daguenet the Coward?” “My lady, I don’t know who that was, but I was most surely captured.” “And where were you going?” “My lady, [109] I was following a knight.” “And when you left us the last time, where did you go?” “My lady, after a knight I was following.” “And did you do battle with him?” “Yes, my lady.” “And where did you go next?” “My lady, I met two giants, who killed my horse, but Sir Yvain, may he have good fortune, gave me his.”58 “Aha,” she said, “then I indeed know who you are: your name is Lancelot of the Lake.” Then he said nothing. “In God’s name,” she said, “it does you no good to conceal it;°? this has long been known at court. Sir Gawain first revealed your name there.” Then she told him, just as Sir Gawain had done, of the third battle, when Sir Yvain said that the maiden had said “This is the third one.”©° Then she asked him why he had allowed the worst man in the world® to lead him by the bridle. “My lady, because I had power®? over neither my heart nor my body.” “Now tell me,” she said, “were you ever at the battle?” “Yes, my lady.” “And what sort of armor were you wearing?” “My lady, it was completely red.” “Upon my word,” she said, “you speak the truth. And at the most recent battle, why did you perform so many feats of arms?” He began to sigh deeply, and the queen pressed him with questions, [110] as though she clearly knew how things were with him. “Tell me confidently,” she said, “how things are with you, for I’ll never betray you. I know that you acted as you did for some lady; tell me who she is, by the allegiance you owe me.” “Ah, my lady, I see that I must tell you. My lady, it is you.” se “Tp?” she asked. “In truth, my lady.” 57See chapter 47, p. [444]. 58See chapter 47, pp. [448-450]. 5%she said ... conceal it” supplied from Kennedy 344.14. The reference in the next sentence is to chapter 42, pp. [428-429]. 69see chapter 47, pp. [449-450] and [451-452]. This third battle is that of Lancelot against the two giants; the maiden had first announced it to Gawain in chapter 31, p. [372]. 6lReference to Daguenet, chapter 47, p. [445]. 62« 5 ower,” as in note 107.a (RO) and Kennedy 344.20 (Micha has “I had nothing of my heart or of my body”). Lancelot, Part IT “It was not for me that you splintered the three lances my maiden brought you, for I had not associated myself with the message.”63 “My lady,” he said, “I did for them what I had to and for you what I could.” “Now tell me: all the things you have done, for whom did you do them?” “For you, my lady.” “What? Do you love me so much?” “My lady, I do not love myself or any other so much.” “And since when do you love me so much?” “My lady, since the moment I was called a knight and yet was not one.”®4 “And by the allegiance you owe me, what is the source of this love you have placed in me?” At these words the lady of Malehaut, who had kept her head lowered, made a point of clearing her throat and raised her head. He immediately recognized the sound, for he had heard it many times before. He looked at her, recognized her, and was so overcome with fear and anguish in his heart that he could not respond to what the queen had said. He began to sigh deeply, and the tears flowed from his eyes [111] so abundantly that the samite he was wearing was wet down to the knees. And the more he looked at the lady of Malehaut, the more his heart was saddened. The queen noticed this, and saw that he was looking most piteously in the direction of the ladies, and she said to him, “Tell me, where does this love come from that I am asking you about?” He did his best to reply, and said, “My lady, from the moment I’ve just told you about.” “How then was that?” “My lady, you yourself made it happen, by making me your friend, if your words did not lie to me.” “My friend?” she asked. “How was that?” “My lady,” he said, “I came before you, when I took my leave of my lord the king, fully armed but for my head and my hands, and I commended you to God and said that I was your knight in whatever place I might be. And you said that you wanted me to be your knight and your friend. Then I said, ‘Farewell, my lady,’ and you said, ‘Farewell, dear friend.’®° Since then those words could never leave my heart; those were the words that made me a worthy knight, if I am one; never have I been so badly off that I did not remember those words. They comfort me in all my troubles; they have kept me from all evil and saved me from all dangers; those words satisfied me in all my hunger, and made me rich in my great poverty.” “My word,” said the queen, “those were fortunate words, and God be praised for making me say them. [112] But I didn’t take them as seriously as you did, and I’ve said that to many a knight without a thought that went beyond the words. Your thought was not base in the least, but on the contrary generous and noble, and good has come to 63See this chapter, p. [58]. 641 ancelot had gone through most of the knighting ceremony, but had not yet received the sword. Cf. p. [106] and chapter 22, p. [286]. In chapter 23, p. [298], the queen sends him a sword, at his request. 65See chapter 22, pp. [285-286]. Ne you thereby, for it has made a worthy knight of you. And yet it is now® customary for knights to make a great show to many ladies of what they value little in their hearts. Your appearance tells me that you love one of those ladies there—I don’t know which one—more than you love me, for you wept from fear, and you dare not look directly at them. I can tell that your thoughts are not of me as much as you pretend. Now by the faith you owe the person you love most, tell me which of the three you love so much.” “Ah, my lady, may God truly help me, none of them ever had my heart in her power.” “That will not avail you,” said the queen; “you can conceal nothing, for I’ve seen many such things, and I can see that your heart is over there, even though your body is here.” She said this®” deliberately to see how she could make him ill at ease, for she was quite sure his thoughts of love were only for her; otherwise he would never have performed such feats for her, the day of the black armor, but she delighted in watching his discomfiture. He was so full of anguish at this that he was near to fainting, [113] but his fear concerning the ladies held him back. And the queen herself feared for him, seeing him change so; she grasped him by the shoulder, to keep him from falling, and called to Galehaut. The latter jumped up, ran to her, and saw that his companion was in such a sorry state that his heart was in turn filled with anguish, and he said, “Oh, my lady, tell me, for God’s sake, what has happened to him.” And the queen told him what she had alleged. “Ah, my lady,” said Galehaut, “for God’s sake, you might well take him from me through such violent emotion, and that would be a great wrong.” “Truly,” she said, “it would indeed, but do you know why he performed so many feats of arms?” “Indeed, my lady, I do not.” “My lord,” she said, “if what he has told me is true, it was for me.” “My lady,” he replied, “may God truly help me, you may well believe that, for just as he is more valiant than other men, so too is his heart truer than all others.” “You were very right to say he was an excellent knight,” she said. “If you only knew what feats of arms he has performed, since he became a knight!” Then she related all his knightly deeds, as he had told them to her, and said he had acknowledged that he had worn the red armor at the other battle, “and I must tell you that he did all that because of a single word.” Then she told him, just as you have heard, what she had said. “Ah, my lady,” said Galehaut, “for God’s sake and because of his great merit, have pity on him, just as I did for you what you asked.” “What pity,” she said, “do you want me to show him?” “My lady, [114] you know that he loves you above all others, and has done more for you than any knight ever did for a woman. And be assured that the peace between my 66«n ow,” as in Kennedy 346.9 (Micha has “it is not at all”). 67"She said this,” as in note 110.a and Kennedy 346.23 (Micha has “she knew for certain how she could”). 146 lord the king and me would never have been, had it not been for this knight and if he himself had not brought it about.” “Indeed,” she said, “I know full well that he’s done more for me than I could ever deserve, had he done no more than try to bring about the peace; there’s nothing he could ask of me that I could honestly refuse. But he asks nothing of me and is instead sorrowful and downcast ever since he looked toward those ladies. I do not suspect him of feeling love for one of them, but he fears one of them may recognize him.” “My lady,” said Galehaut, “it’s not fitting to speak of this, but take pity on him, for he loves you more than himself; God help me, when he came I knew nothing of his thoughts except that he was afraid of being recognized, and he never revealed anything else to me.” “ll take pity on him as you wish, for you have done what IJ asked of you, and I must do what you wish, but he asks nothing of me.” “My lady,” said Galehaut, “surely he doesn’t have the power to do so, for one cannot love what one doesn't fear. But J ask something of you on his behalf, though even if I didn’t ask anything of you, you should nevertheless take steps to win him, for you could conquer no richer treasure.” “Truly,” she said, “I know that well, and I'll do whatever you direct.” “My lady,” said Galehaut, “many thanks; I ask that you give him [115] your love, and that you take him as your knight forevermore, and become his loyal lady for all the days of your life, and you will have made him richer than if you had given him the whole world.” “In that case,” she said, “I grant that he should be entirely mine and I entirely his, and that any breach or violation of our compact should be repaired by you.” “Thank you, my lady. But now there must be a preliminary pledge.” “Whatever you stipulate,” said the queen, “I will do illo “My lady,” said Galehaut, “many thanks. Therefore, give him a kiss, in my presence, to mark the beginning ofa true love.” “This is neither the time nor the place for kissing,” she said. “Have no fear, I’m as eager for it as he is, but those ladies there are already wondering that we have done so much, and they would necessarily see it. And yet, if he wishes, I will most willingly give him a kiss.” Lancelot was so joyful and also so dismayed by this that all he could reply was, “Thank you, my lady.” “Ah, my lady,” said Galehaut, “have no doubt about his wishes, for that’s all he thinks of. And be assured that no one will know, for we will withdraw, the three of us, as if we were conferring together.” “Why should I need to be urged?” she asked. “I wish it more than you or he.” Then all three withdrew together, as if they were conferring. Secing that the knight dared do no more, the queen took him by the chin and [116] gave him a prolonged kiss in front of Galehaut, so that the lady of Malehaut knew that she was kissing him. Then the queen, who was a most wise and worthy lady, began to speak: “Dear friend,” she said to the knight, “I’m Lancelot, Part IT yours, because you have done so much, and this gives me great joy. Now take care that this be kept secret: this is necessary, for I’m one of the ladies in all the world about whom the greatest good has been said. If my reputation were to suffer because of you, it would be a base and ugly love. And J ask the same of you, Galehaut, who are so wise, for if harm came to me from this, it could only be because of you; but if it brings me benefit or joy, you will have bestowed it.” “My lady,” said Galehaut, “he could do you no wrong, but I’ve merely done what you ordered me to do. Now you must hear a request from me, for I told you yesterday that you could soon do more for me than I for you.” “Speak confidently,” she said, “for there’s nothing you could request that I wouldn’t do.” “Then you have accepted, my lady,” he said, “to grant me his companionship.” “Indeed,” she replied, “if you didn’t have that, then you would have profited little by the great sacrifice you made for him.” Then she took the knight by the right hand and said, “Galehaut, I give you this knight forevermore, except for what I have previously had of him. And you,” she said to the knight, “give your solemn word on this.” And the knight did so. “Now do you know,” she said to Galehaut, “whom I have given you?” “My lady, I do not.” “I have given you Lancelot of the Lake, the son of King Ban of Benoic.” And in this way she revealed his identity to Galehaut, whose [117] joy was the greatest he had ever known, for he had heard many rumors that this was Lancelot of the Lake and that he was the finest knight in the world, though landless, and he knew well that King Ban had been a very noble man. Thus was the first tryst between Lancelot and the queen brought about by Galehaut. Galehaut had known him only by sight, and for that reason Lancelot had made him promise that he would not ask him his name until he himself revealed it or another did so for him.® Then all three arose. Night had by then completely fallen, but it was clear, for the moon had risen, and one could see clearly all down the meadow. The three of them set off in the same direction, up the meadow, straight toward the king’s tent. Galehaut’s seneschal followed, accompanying the ladies, until they were opposite Galehaut’s tents. Then Galehaut sent his companion to his tent; Lancelot took his leave of the queen, and he and the seneschal went across the river. Galehaut escorted the queen as far as the king’s tent. When the king saw them coming, he asked where they had been. “My lord,” said Galehaut, “we have just been out in the meadows, with the company of these few people, as you see.” Then they sat and spoke of many things, and Galehaut and the queen were quite at ease together. [118] After some time, the queen arose and went to the brattice to spend the night, and Galehaut escorted her there, then commended her to God and said that he would go spend the night with his companion. 68See this chapter, p. [88]. Lancelot, Part IT “My lady,” he said, “I’ll comfort him, for now I know why he needs it, but very recently I didn’t know why he needed comforting.”©9 “Ah,” she replied, “what a good idea! He’ll be much better off for that.” Then Galehaut left and went to take leave of the king, expressing the wish that it might not displease him if he were to spend the night across the river with his men, whom he had not seen for some time, “and I must, my lord, do as they wish, for they have great affection for me.” “Truly, sir,” said Sir Gawain, “you have spoken well, for whoever has worthy men must honor them.” Then Galehaut left and returned to his companion; they lay down together in one bed, and spoke all night about what brought joy to their hearts. But now we will leave off speaking of Galehaut and his companion and speak of the queen, who had come to the brattice, full of joy and happiness. She thought she had managed things very discreetly, but she was mistaken, for the lady of Malehaut had seen everything she did. When Galehaut had left, the queen went to a window and began to think of what pleased her most. Then the lady of Malehaut drew near her, seeing her all alone, and said as discreetly as she could, “Ah, my lady, four is such good company!” The queen heard her quite clearly but said not a word and pretended she had heard nothing. But very soon [119] the lady repeated these same words, and the queen challenged her: “Tell me why you said that.” “My lady,” she said, “begging your pardon, I’ll say no more now, for I may have said more than I should have; one must not attempt to be more familiar with one’s lady or with one’s lord than one already is, for one might incur her lady’s hatred.” “God help me,” said the queen, “you could not say anything that would provoke my hatred, for I know you to be so sensible and so courtly that you would say nothing that would not be to my liking. So speak up without more ado, for that’s what I wish and what I ask of you.” “In that case, my lady,” she replied, “I'll speak. I said that four is very good company, for I saw you getting acquainted with the knight who spoke to you down in the orchard. And I know that you are the person he most loves in all the world, and you are not wrong to love him, for your love could not be better placed.” “What?” exclaimed the queen. “Do you know him?” “Yes, my lady. There was a time this year when I could have stood in your way on his account, just as you could do toward me, because he was my prisoner for a long time. He is the knight in red armor who carried the day in the battle, and he of the black armor in the recent battle. ] gave him both suits of armor. And that day when he was lost in thought beside the river and I hastened to send him the message to join in the fighting,” I did so only because I suspected [120] that he loved you. There was a time when I thought that he loved me, but I learned otherwise when he revealed his thoughts to me.” 69«for now... comforting” supplied from Kennedy 350.3-4. See this chapter, pp. [54-58]. 147 Then she began to tell how she had held him prisoner for a year and a half, and why she had captured him and why she had gone to the king’s court. She told her everything, right up to his release from her prison. “Now tell me,” said the queen, “why you say that four are better company than three. A secret is better kept by three than by four.” “My lady,” she replied, “that is true.” “So the company of three is better than that of four,” said the queen. “Not in this case, my lady,” she said, “and Ill tell you why. It’s true that the knight loves you; Galehaut knows this, and henceforth they will take pleasure in speaking of this together, wherever they may be, for they won't stay here long. But you will be here all alone, not daring to reveal your thoughts to anyone; you'll be worse off for it, for you will bear the burden all alone. But if you agreed to make me the fourth member of your company, we two could console each other just as the two of them will do, and you'd be better off.” “Now tell me,” said the queen, “do you know who the knight is?” “God help me, I don’t,” she said, “for you have heard how he concealed his identity from me.” “Truly, my lady,” said the queen, [121] “you are very perceptive. Anyone who wanted to hide anything from you would have to be very clever! Since things are as you have seen and you request my company, you shall have it, but I want you to bear the burden just as I bear mine.” “My lady,” she asked, “what is your bidding? I will do absolutely whatever you wish, in order to have your company.” “By God,” said the queen, “you shall have it, for I could have no better company than yours, even if it were richer. But I'll never be able to get along without you, once I’ve made you my close friend, for when I begin to love, no one is more loving than I.” “My lady,” she replied, “we’ll be together whenever you wish.” “Then let me arrange it,” said the queen, “for tomorrow we'll establish our company of four.” Then she told her of Lancelot, how he had spoken and how he had wept when he looked toward them, “and I know he recognized you. I can tell you that he is Lancelot of the Lake, the best knight in the world.” Thus the two of them spoke at length together, taking great delight in their newfound friendship. That night the queen would not allow the lady of Malehaut to sleep anywhere but with her, but she accepted with great reluctance, fearful of sleeping with such a high-placed lady. When they were in bed, they began to speak of this new love. The queen asked the lady of Malehaut whether she was in love with anyone, [122] and she replied that she was not. “You may be sure, my lady,” she said, “that I was never in love but once, and that love never went beyond the thought.” She said this about Lancelot, whom she had loved as much as one heart can love another, though she had had no other joy from it, and she refrained from saying it had been he. Then the queen had the idea that she would arrange things between Galehaut and her friend, but she did not wish to speak of this until she could find out 148 whether Galehaut already had a ladylove, for in that case she would not seek him for her. The next morning the two of them rose early and went to the king’s tent; he slept there to keep Sir Gawain and the other knights company. The queen awakened him and said it was very wicked of him to be still in bed at such an hour. Then the queen and the lady of Malehaut went back down the meadows, with three other ladies and some of their ladies-in-waiting. They went to the place where the first love-tryst had taken place, and the queen said to the lady of Malehaut that she would always be fond of the spot forevermore. There she told the lady of Malehaut the details of her meeting with Lancelot, his appearance and how he had been dismayed in her presence. She left out nothing that she could remember. Then she began to praise Galehaut, saying that he was the wisest knight, the one who best knew how to honor a worthy person. “And I'll certainly tell him of our newfound friendship; you may be sure that he will be overjoyed. Now let’s go, for he is likely to be here soon.” [123] At that point the ladies turned back. When they arrived at the king’s tent, he had risen and sent for Galehaut, who quickly came there. The queen immediately told him of her friendship with the lady of Malehaut, but first she said, “Galehaut, by the allegiance you owe me, tell me the truth.” “My lady,” he said, “be assured that I will.” “I ask you whether you’re in love with any lady or maiden to whom you have given your love.” “My lady, I am not; by the oath that binds me to you, I give you my word.” “Do you know,” she said, “why I ask you this? I have placed my love according to your wish, and now I want you to place your love according to my wish. And do you know where? Upon a beautiful lady, courtly and wise, a very highborn woman, rich in land.” “My lady,” said Galehaut, “you can do as you wish with me, both body and heart. But who is this lady to whom you wish me to belong?” “Truly, my lord,” said the queen, “it is the lady of Malehaut. And there she is,” and she pointed her out to him. Then she told him how the lady had spied upon them, and how she had held Lancelot prisoner for a year and a half, and how he had come to an agreement with her, what she had told him, how Lancelot had wept, and that it had been because of her. “And because,” said the queen, “I know she’s the worthiest lady in the world, I want to be the one who brings you together in love, for the world’s worthiest knight should have the worthiest lady. When you and my knight are away in foreign lands, you will listen to each other’s laments, and we two ladies will console each other [124] for our troubles and rejoice together over our good fortune, and each of us will be able to bear her own burden.” “My lady,” said Galehaut, “here are my heart and my body; do with them as you wish, just as I placed your heart where I wished it to be.” Lancelot, Part IT Then the queen called the lady of Malehaut, and said to her, “My lady, are you prepared for what I wish to do with you?”/ “My lady, that is correct.” “In God’s name,” she said, “I wish to make a gift of your heart and of your person.” She answered sensibly, “My lady, you can do with me what you will.” The queen then took each of them by the hand” and said to Galehaut, “Sir knight, I give you to this lady as her true friend, loyal in heart and body. And you, my lady, I give you to this knight as his true friend, loyal in true love.” They both granted this, and the queen had them exchange a kiss. Afterwards, they arranged to speak together that evening, the four of them, “and we'll discuss,” said the queen, “how this may be.” Then they rose and went to summon the king to go hear Mass, and he said that he had been waiting for no one but them. Then they all went to the church. When they had heard Mass, food was prepared and they sat down. And when they had eaten, the king, the queen, and Galehaut went to sit with Sir Gawain for a long while, and then they went to where the other knights were, many of whom were wounded, and they walked around to see them all. The king held the lady of Malehaut by the hand, and Galehaut the queen. [125] There it was arranged that the four of them would converse together at nightfall, just as they had done the previous evening, and in the very same place. “But we will do things differently,” said the queen, “for we'll take my lord the king along, and you,” she said to Galehaut, “will prepare your knight; he shouldn’t be concerned, for no one will ever recognize him, since he wishes to keep his identity secret. And the more people there are, the less there will be any evil thought. Thus we'll be able to continue, for as long as my lord stays here, for there could be no better place.” In this way they arranged their conversation. And when evening came, Galehaut went to see his men and told his companion what had been devised, to which Lancelot agreed. When it was time for the evening meal, Galehaut told his seneschal that, when he saw his master coming down the meadows with the king and the queen, he was to cross the river with his companion. Then he left, in the company of many of his knights, and came to the king, who was waiting for him. Following the meal, the queen said to the king, “My lord, let’s go for a walk down through the meadows.” The king agreed to this and set out with Galehaut and a large number of their companions. And the queen set out with the lady of Malehaut and many ladies and [126] maidens. When the seneschal saw them, he came across with Lancelot and joined the king’s party. When they had gone quite a way, they sat down and began to converse. And while they were speaking, King Yon came to speak to King Arthur, for messengers had come 7 Question mark as in Kennedy 353.38 (period in Micha). The queen ... by the hand,” as in Kennedy 354.4 (Micha has “the queen took her by the hand and Galehaut by the other”). Lancelot, Part IT from his land and he had to depart. So he drew the king aside and conferred with him at length. Then the queen and Galehaut and the lady of Malehaut all rose together, and Galehaut called to his companion, and the four of them went off, speaking at great length, until they reached the beginning of the trees. Then they sat down, and the queen indicated to Lancelot the lady who had long held him in her prison: he was deeply embarrassed, and the queen told him laughingly that he had hidden this misdeed from her. They remained there a long time and neither debated nor spoke of anything but kisses and embraces, like people who enjoy doing just that. When they had sat there a long time, they went back to the king and then back up to his tent, and the seneschal took Lancelot back to their tents. And in such a way the four of them conversed together every evening, never speaking of any other pleasure. Thus they stayed there until Sir Gawain’s health was greatly improved and he felt much better than he had, and he grew impatient to be back in the land where he was deeply in love.”3 He told the king he was eager to leave, and the king replied, “Dear nephew, I’ve stayed here only for your sake, and for Galehaut, whom I deeply love.” “My lord, ask him tomorrow to leave here with you, and we can leave the following day. If he comes with you, [127] it will be a great honor for you, and if he doesn’t, you'll soon see him again, God willing, and he you.” The king agreed to this, and the next day he begged Galehaut to accompany him back to his land, but Galehaut said that that could not be, “for I have much to do in my own land, my lord, which is far away; I was staying here only for your sake, and you for mine, as I am well aware.” “Indeed,” said the king, “that’s true, but I beg you, my dear friend, to let me see you again as soon as you can.” Galehaut granted him this. That night the four again gathered together, and you may be sure that they were deeply troubled at parting; they arranged to meet at the first assembly to be held in the kingdom of Logres. Thus the two knights parted from their ladies, saddened by the separation but gladdened by the joy they anticipated at the first assembly. That night Galehaut took leave of the king, the queen, the lady of Malehaut, Sir Gawain, and all the others, and all were deeply saddened, for they esteemed him highly.”* And Galehaut went to his companion, and found him much different from the way he had been the previous evening, but he comforted him as best he could. And the queen went to the king and asked him to invite the lady of Malehaut to come with him and to remain forever part of his household, “for I’m very fond of her company,” she said, “and I believe she is so fond of mine that she’ll accept without being begged.” [128] “Indeed,” said the king, “that pleases me as well.” He went to the lady, and begged her so insistently that she had no choice but to stay. 73This seems to be an allusion to something outside the scope of the romance. See Alexandre Micha, Essais sur le cycle du LancelotGraal (Geneva: Droz, 1987), p. 123, n. 42. 74«.,ddened ... saddened” supplied from note 132.a and Kennedy 355.39-356.4; “him” as in Kennedy 356.4 (Micha has “them”). 1! In the morning the king set out in one direction and Galehaut in another, each of them for his own land. But now the story leaves off speaking of the king and queen and their company, saying no more of them, and returns to Galehaut and his companion, though it speaks but little of them at this point. 53. Lancelot and Galehaut in Sorelois.’ Here the story tells that Galehaut and his companion journeyed until at length they came to the land of which he was the lord, the land of Sorelois, which is situated between Wales and the Distant Isles. This land was not Galehaut’s by inheritance; rather he had conquered it from King Gloyer, the nephew of the king of Northumberland. King Gloyer had been killed in war, leaving a young daughter, very beautiful, whose mother had died at her birth. Galehaut had her kept most honorably until she was grown, and was to marry her to one of his nephews who was still very young; he had promised him all the land of Sorelois, which he would receive when he became a knight. This was the most pleasant land in the British Isles, full of good rivers and forests and fertile lands, and it was not far at all from the land of King Arthur. Galehaut enjoyed staying there, for he was very fond of hunting with dogs and birds, and he spent much time there, because the kingdom [129] of Logres was nearer there than to the Distant Isles, which was his principal domain. On the side toward King Arthur’s land, the kingdom of Sorelois was completely cut off by a single body of water, very broad and swift and deep, and it was called the Ausurne; on the other side it was entirely surrounded by the sea. There were castles and pleasant fortified towns, and rivers,2 woods, mountains, and many other streams, most of which flowed into the Ausurne, which in turn flowed into the sea, so that from King Arthur’s land no one could enter Sorelois except by first crossing the Ausurne. This was not fresh water, for its larger end came from the sea, and the other flowed into it. Thus was the land of Sorelois cut off on the side toward the kingdom of Logres, and there were but two entrances for the knight errant, and never more, for as long as the adventures lasted in the kingdom of Logres and the surrounding isles, and that, the text says, was one thousand six hundred ninety weeks.* These two passages were extremely treacherous and arduous, for each consisted of a high and narrow causeway, no more than three fathoms wide* but more than seven thousand long, and in some places there were more than seventy under water. Such 'Corresponds to Micha VIII:LIIIa, Sommer III:269-271; Kennedy 356-358. 2“rivers,” as in Sommer 269.30 (Micha has “walls”). 3“and that... weeks” supplied from note 3.a, Sommer 269.38, and Kennedy 357.9-10; 1,690 weeks is 32.5 years. 44 fathom (Old French foise) is six feet and is now used “principally in the measurement and specification of marine depths” (American Heritage Dictionary). The causeway was thus 18 feet wide, some eight miles long, and sometimes in as much as 420 feet of water. 150 were the two causeways, and at the head of each on the end toward Sorelois was a tall, strong tower, and in each [130] there was a knight, the best that could be found, and ten men-at-arms with axes, swords, and lances: they were there to win fame and honor, and for the good pay that they expected from their service. And if a foreign knight came to cross the causeway, he had to fight against the knight and the ten men-at-arms. If he could force his way past, his name was written down, and from then on he could pass without a fight, but if he was defeated he remained at the mercy of the knight and the ten men-at-arms who guarded the causeway. And they had to maintain the guard for one whole year. The story tells that at the time when Merlin prophesied the adventures that were to come, the two causeways were made by order of King Lohot, the father of King Gloyer, who at that time was lord of Sorelois, because he feared the destruction of Sorelois, his land. And yet, before the adventures began, there were many other wooden causeways and also boats, but as soon as they began, these others were completely destroyed, and no foreigner ever passed except by these two causeways. Into that land, which was thus cut off and fortified, Galehaut went to stay, along with his companion and the other people of his household, but this was with less company than usual, for he did all he could to conceal his identity, so that no one could discover his thoughts or learn the name of his companion, apart from the two kings who had been his guarantors.” Thus they stayed a long time [131] in Sorelois, and enjoyed many pleasures of river and of woods, but none of them pleased Lancelot, since he could not see her to whom he belonged completely, and he thought of nothing else. Galehaut was very concerned about his suffering, and did much to comfort him, telling him not to be downhearted, for they would soon have news of the assemblies. Within the month following their arrival, the Lady® of the Lake sent a page to Lancelot and asked him to retain him until he was ready to become a knight. Lancelot retained him and joyfully welcomed him and held him very dear for the sake of his lady, who had asked him to hold him as dear as he held her; and he did so, for he neither loved nor respected anyone else as much, and Galehaut did likewise, for the sake of the young man, who was very handsome and valiant. He was Lancelot’s first cousin, the son of King Bors of Gaunes, who had been Lancelot’s uncle and the brother of King Ban. When Lancelot learned who he was, he loved him all the more, for the company of his kinsman made him forget a large part of his sorrows, and so each cousin rejoiced over the other. [132] The young man was named Lionel, because of a wondrous thing that occurred at his birth: as soon as he came forth from his mother’s womb, a red spot in the shape of a lion appeared in the middle of his chest, and the child seized it round the neck with his two arms as if to strangle it. This was considered a prodigy, and for that 5See chapter 52, p. [77—78]. 6Although she is damoisele del Lac (“Damsel of the Lake”) here (and occasionally elsewhere), I have preferred to use “Lady of the Lake” consistently. Lancelot, Part IT reason the child was named Lionel; he later accomplished many valorous deeds, as the story of his life bears out, and the spot long remained upon his chest, until one day at King Arthur’s court he killed the crowned lion of Libya, which had been brought to court because a crowned lion had never been seen there. Sir Yvain, the son of King Urien, carried the skin of that lion upon his shield, because Lionel gave it to him when he had killed it, as the story of his deeds relates. The spot never again appeared upon his chest.” Lancelot welcomed his cousin most joyfully. But now the story leaves off speaking of Galehaut, for it says no more of him at this point, and returns to King Arthur, who had gone back to his land. 54. Gawain and Nineteen Other Knights Leave Arthur’s Court in Quest of Lancelot.’ At that time, the story says, when King Arthur was back in his land, he made great efforts to honor his people. He held great feasts and rich courts and gave away much more than had been his wont; he went from one to another of his good cities, staying in each, and followed the teachings of his master. The queen and the lady of Malehaut greatly enjoyed themselves; you would often have seen them [133] together, for noble love so harassed them that they thought about that more than about everything else. And their lovers, if suffering in some distant land, should not complain, for their ladies were not at rest, and they took pleasure in nothing but speaking of their love when leisure brought them together, and in thinking of it when they were apart. After the king’s return, Sir Gawain was soon much better, so that he could go riding and to the woods and enjoy other pleasures, and both his strength and his good looks had returned to him. And yet he was never again as strong and healthy as he had been before, though he struck many a fine blow with sword and with lance. Great was the joy in King Arthur’s court, when he was seen to be healed and recovered. When the king had visited Logres and Camelot and Carlion and many other good cities, he longed to return to Carduel: that was the city where he most liked to stay, for it was extremely well situated and comfortable. But before going there, he had it announced that he would hold a court of law there, and he ordered all important matters to be brought to it. After that, the king arrived with a great entourage; he stayed there two full weeks, and every day he held high court in splendor, and every day more and more splendidly. There was never a day when he did not make so many gifts that everyone wondered where he had acquired all these riches [134] he was distributing, and every day his court grew richer in gifts and in fine food. Before the two weeks were Over, some important matters were concluded, for “until one day ... upon his chest” supplied from note 7.a. Corresponds to Micha VIII:LIVa, Sommer III:271-276; Kennedy 358-366. Lancelot, Part II there were people in his company who were glad to advance those in the right and reject those in the wrong; as soon as the case was heard, the right had to be upheld. The end of the two weeks was a Tuesday, and the story tells that the queen and the lady of Malehaut were to begin discussing and take measures concerning arrangements for an assembly, in order to speak to their lovers. But they encountered a difficulty, for the story tells that when the king was seated at dinner and had had the third course, he fell so deeply into thought that he forgot about the feast and the meal and all those present, and he began to sigh and weep, leaning upon a knife. He stayed this way a very long time, until at last Sir Kay the Seneschal noticed. He pointed it out to Sir Gawain and Sir Yvain, to Lucan the Wine Steward, Sagremor the Unruly, and Girflet the son of Doon. These six served throughout the palace, and when they saw the king brooding so, they were utterly dismayed. But Sir Gawain said he would take care of it. He called to a squire and said, “Go quickly to that lady who is serving my lord with the cup, and tell her to come speak to me; then hold the cup until she returns.” At that time a young noblewoman had come to court named Lore of Carduel, because she had been born at Carduel. She was the daughter of the king of Northumberland [135] and of King Arthur’s sister, and her father had been master wine steward of the land of Logres; she had assumed that function as soon as she came to court, and she was one of the most beautiful young ladies in the world. The squire went to the maiden and gave her Sir Gawain’s message; she gave him the cup and went to speak to Sir Gawain. He said to her, “Fair cousin, go to my lord the king and tell him that we request, by the loyalty he owes us because he is our liege and we are his men, that he tell us why he has so long remained deep in thought; we wish him to tell us this, just as he wishes to know our thoughts.” The maiden went before the king and knelt down, but did not dare address him. He had leaned so heavily upon the knife that the blade was completely bent. There was not a knight present who was not utterly dismayed; most of them had left off eating. Then the maiden grasped the tablecloth and pulled it toward her; the knife escaped and the king’s hand struck upon the table. He left off his brooding and looked around him, and the maiden said to him, “My lord, I am sent to you by Sir Gawain and those five knights who are with him; they ask you, by the loyalty you owe them, to tell them what you’ve been thinking about for so long; they wish to know this, just as you wish to know their thoughts.” And the king looked at her fiercely and said, “Now [136] go, and tell them to leave me alone, for if they knew what I’ve been thinking about, they wouldn’t ask.” The maiden returned to the knights and reported the king’s words, and they were quite dismayed. Sir Gawain said that the matter would not be left there. “Fair cousin,” he said, “go back and tell my lord the king that we ask him anew, by the loyalty he owes us, to tell us what he has been thinking about so deeply.” She returned to the king and transmitted the message; he looked even more displeased than he had before, and iy said, “Since they won’t leave me alone, I’ll tell them. Go, and tell them that I was thinking of their great shame.” The maiden brought back this message. When they heard it they were so dismayed that for a long time they spoke not a word. Then Sir Yvain said, “We must not leave it at this! Let’s go before him, and we’ll hear how he has been thinking of our great shame.” They all agreed with him and came before the king. Then they said to him, “My lord, you have sent us word that you've been thinking of our great shame; we ask and beseech you as our liege lord, and by the loyalty you owe us, to tell us what you mean by our great shame.” “Indeed,” said the king, “if you believe me you'll let the matter be, for it is so weighty that you couldn’t put it right.” But they replied that if they could help it they would not let the matter be, and they insisted that he tell them. “Then I'll tell you,” said the king, “since you don’t wish to let it be. It’s true that I was thinking of your [137] great shame. Don’t you recall that you were among forty of the best knights of my household, chosen by oath to go in search of the knight with the red armor who carried the day in the battle between Galehaut and me, and the following one as well, as I believe?? All forty of you swore that you wouldn’t return without the knight or without definite knowledge of him; yet all forty of you returned and never brought me the knight or definite knowledge of him, and I still know nothing of him with certainty! I therefore call you all faithless, recreant, and forsworn, and that is the shame I was thinking of.” “Indeed,” said Sir Gawain, “you’re right and you speak the truth: it’s not right that you should tolerate us in your company, for we are dishonored. But I for one will cause you no more shame.” Then he went to a window and pointed to a church that he saw, and he said so loudly that he was heard throughout the hall, “By God and the saints, as far as I am able, I shall never again enter the house of my lord the king until I have found that knight, if he can be found. And you, my lords here present, I tell you all, upon your honor, to follow me, for am leaving.” Then Sir Gawain left and went to his lodgings, and the five who had come with him all went to theirs. And the word spread, so [138] that throughout the hall people knew why Sir Gawain was leaving. Some of the knights who had been on the other quest heard it, and fourteen of them jumped up. No more of them were present: the others were in their own lands and involved with their own business. Those fourteen hurried to arm themselves, following the other six who were already doing so. The king was dismayed and realized that he had spoken‘ rashly; he would gladly have retracted what he had said, if he could have, but he knew that by himself he could not detain them, and he was nearly mad with grief. He jumped up from the table, rushed over to the queen, and 2eput it right,” as in Kennedy 361.19 (Micha has “benefit from it”). 3See chapter 51, pp. [38-39]. 4«spoken,” as in note 8.a and Kennedy 362.13 (Micha has “thought”). 152 asked her to make an effort to detain their nephew. She replied that she would do so. Then the queen made her way to Sir Gawain’s lodgings and found that he was already completely armed except for his hands and his head. When he saw her he ran happily to meet her, like a man who was not the least intimidated by her. And the queen said to him, “Dear nephew, are you leaving on this quest?” “My lady,” he said, “I am.” “Then I beg you,” she said, “by the allegiance you owe my lord the king and me, to grant me a favor which I will ask of you.” “My lady,” said Sir Gawain, “I clearly remember a boon you asked of me the day my lord the king promised to protect the wretched maiden for a year and a day: you asked me to remain behind,® and I, like a fool, did so, [139] and saw a time when I should better have been dead and dishonored. But be assured that there is nothing that would make me stay behind now, for by the loyalty I owe you, if I had made you that promise, I would break it.” When the queen heard this, she knew that entreaties would be of no use, but still she said, “Dear nephew, you’re going questing, but you don’t know for whom, leaving your uncle the king more sorrowful and distraught than he has ever been. Not all the knights who were on that quest are here. Now act wisely, and stay until your companions are all here, and put the king at ease.” “My lady,” he said, “some of the companions who were on the quest are here, and each one must go to prove ig! loyalty, for my lord the king has called us all traitors, and whoever wants to will come along. But by the loyalty I owe you, I may die on this quest, but I will never enter the house of my lord the king until I’ve found the knight, and I'll bring back such news of him that people will have to believe me. But I don’t know who he is or where Ill find him.” “At least,” said the queen, “grant me that you'll come before the king before you have your helmet laced on, and he will speak to you.” He agreed to this. Then the queen called to one of her maidens and told her to go [140] tell the king that she could not manage to detain Sir Gawain, and that he should ask the whole court to plead with him. The maiden went to tell him. : Then the king summoned his knights, told them how upset he was, and begged each of them to detain Sir Gawain with his prayers and entreaties. So they followed the king out of the hall and found Sir Gawain completely armed except for his head and his hands. The king went to meet him, and beseeched him with all his might to remain, just until the others who had been on the quest were there, for easily half of them were still missing. But Sir Gawain would hear nothing of this. Then the king looked back at the knights, and they immediately all fell to their knees at his feet. When Sir Gawain saw this, he was nearly mad with °The episode to which this sentence alludes is nowhere set forth, according to both Micha (IX:[45] and [342]) and Kennedy (2: 246). 6“behind,” as in note 9.a (RO, de lost), Sommer 274.2, and Kennedy 362.29 (Micha has “beside”). This,” as in Sommer 274.12 (Micha’s text omits the reflexive idea). Lancelot, Part IT sorrow, and the ladies and the maidens had likewise fallen to their knees, and all of them were pleading with him and begging him to stay. But he said that their efforts were all in vain and that nothing would detain him unless the king were dispossessed or dishonored. “For these two reasons I would remain, but I see neither the one nor the other.” Then he asked for his helmet, and it was given him and laced on, and the companions who were to set out with him were there, ready. When the king saw that he was definitely leaving, he was afraid that he had lost him forever, and he pleaded with him as forcefully as he could and was about to fall at his feet. But Sir Gawain took him in his arms and cried, [141] “For God’s sake, don’t detain me against my honor. If you wish it, I’ll stay, but by the relics of that church,” and he pointed toward one of the king’s chapels, “P’1l kill myself tomorrow just as soon as I have the chance. However, if you let me leave, I’ll return as soon as I can bring back definite knowledge.” “My lord,” said the queen, “tet him leave, since his heart is set upon it. He has been on many other quests from which he has returned, thank God, and he’ll also return from this one, God willing.” “My lady,” said the king, “that’s true, but my heart tells me that I’ll never see him again.” Then he rushed off into another room, let himself collapse upon a bed, and grieved so bitterly that no one could comfort him. The queen had stayed with Sir Gawain; when she saw that he was definitely leaving, she drew him aside and said, “Dear nephew, you’re leaving and don’t know where you are going.” “My lady,” he said, “that is true.” ‘T’ll tell you how to find the knight, but you must promise me that you’ll reveal this to no man or woman, not now nor at any other time.” And he promised this. SGo,” she said, “wherever you expect to find Galehaut, and be assured that you’ll find the knight in his company, if you are to find him anywhere. I tell you that he is Lancelot of the Lake.” When Sir Gawain heard this, he was so [142] overjoyed that he was impatient to be on his horse, and he said that he knew Lancelot well. With that he left the queen, hung his shield about his neck, took his lance from his squire, and set out with nineteen other knights,® as you will hear. There were Sir Yvain the Great,? Sir Brandeliz,!® Kay the Seneschal, Sagremor the Unruly, Lucan the Wine Steward, Gaswain of Estrangort, Girflet the son of Doon, Cadwain of Carmurain, Galegantin the Welshman, Caradoc Shortarm, Caradigain, Yvain of Lionel, Duke Taullas, Quenus of Carec, the king of 8With just one exception (and one about which there is some doubt), these names can be found in the list of knights who accompanied Gawain on the first quest, chapter 51, pp. [38-39]. This time the count is accurate, since Micha has emended by adding Lucan the Wine Steward (note 14.1, bottom of p. 142). Gawain is referred to as lui vintasme, meaning he was the twentieth. °This is the same as the first-named knight in the earlier list, p. [38]. He is traditionally identified as the son of King Urien; the title i Grans is more unusual. his may or may not be the same character as mesire Brandis in the earlier list, p. [39]. Micha lists them separately, [X:[20}; Kennedy emends the earlier Brandiz to Brandeliz, 299.8. Lancelot, Part IT Gennes, Adam the Fair, Gale the Bald, the Youth of Norz, and King Yder. Of all the forty who had been on the quest, there were no more at the court or lodgings of the king, for the others were all in their own lands and involved with whatever important business they might have. Then the queen commended Sir Gawain to God, both before and after the others. The knights who remained behind were all deeply distressed and anxious. Then Sir Gawain, who knew what was right, thought of something for which he was greatly esteemed, and he said to the queen and to the knights who were staying behind, “My lady, my lady, and you, my lords who are staying behind, I want you to know that we who are leaving on this matter associate!! with our quest those who were with us on the other one, because they cannot now take part in it. And if it happens that we succeed in this, we [143] want them to succeed in it, but if we fail, this should not prevent each of them from seeking his honor there. Now, my lords, grant this, you who are companions of this quest.”!* And they did so. Then they departed, leaving the king and his company as sorrowful as they could be. When they had gone so far from Carduel that they could see no more of it, they came to a stone called Merlin’s Rock, where Merlin had slain the two enchanters.!8 Then Sir Gawain said, “My lords, we are setting out on one of the greatest tasks we have ever undertaken, and we must set about it in such a way that we will not be more dishonored than we already have been.!41 believe it would be well if each of us went off on his own; we will succeed in our quest more quickly than if we were all together.” They all agreed to this, and as they found forks in the road they separated as Sir Gawain had ordered, for they all considered him their lord. And as they separated, he told them that wherever they heard news of a knight errant they should head in that direction, “for in this way,” he said, “we'll able to find each other. And be sure that all of you come to the first assembly to take place in the kingdom of [144] Logres, and there each will learn how the other has fared. And whatever armor you wear, old or new, take care to conceal your identity as much as possible, so that the knights of my lord the king’s household won’t recognize you; but so that we won’t fail to recognize each other, let each one hang his shield with the inside outward: in this way we will recognize one another.” Thus, fifteen of them went their separate ways, and five rode on together: Sir Gawain, Sir Yvain, Kay the Seneschal, Sagremor the Unruly, and Girflet the son of Doon. These rode on for a long time together, for they had great ll«we who are... associate,” as in Kennedy 364.39 (Micha has “we are leaving on this matter and associate”). 12«-ompanions,” as in note 15.a and Kennedy 365.5 (Micha has “lords”); punctuation from Kennedy (Micha has a question mark). 13There seems to be no earlier text to which this refers, but an episode in the Suite du Merlin (2: 154-158), involving Merlin’s killing two enchanters, is evidently a development of this reference, according to Kennedy (2: 250). l4than we ... have been” supplied from note 16.a and Kennedy 365.14. JB, affection for one another, but at last they too went their separate ways. Now.the story leaves off speaking of them all, except for Sir Gawain, because he achieved this quest. And yet each of these twenty knights has his own complete story, which are branches of Sir Gawain’s, for this is the main story, and in the end they must all come together with this one, because they all issue from this one. 55. The Spring of the Pine.’ At this point, the story relates that Sir Gawain rode alone, deep in thought, for two whole days, without finding any adventure worth speaking of, and he had gone so far that the language changed around him so that he could barely understand the people anymore. And the story tells that on the third [145] day he arose very early and rode all morning until the hour of prime, and this was in summer, in the month of July. It was a lovely morning: the trees were leafy and green, the meadows covered with grass and flowers, and the songs of many birds re-echoed through the woods. And the story tells? that Sir Gawain came spurring forth from a forest and came into a broad and beautiful heath, which stretched at least half a Welsh league in every direction. After he had entered upon the heath, he rode straight along the beaten path toward the top of a rise. And when he looked about, he saw four knights at the edge of the heath, fully armed, their shields strapped over their shoulders, their helmets laced upon their heads, all ready to defend themselves and to attack anyone else. When they saw Sir Gawain, they began to point him out to one another, and very soon one of the four left the others and came galloping at full speed, with lance erect, toward Sir Gawain. When he came near, he put his lance beneath his arm and his shield before his chest, and rode as fast as his horse could carry him, all ready to strike. Sir Gawain made ready to defend himself, but when the knight was about to strike, he pulled so violently upon the reins that [146] horse and rider barely avoided falling together in a heap. Sir Gawain reined in his own in turn and they recognized each other, Sir Gawain seeing that it was Sagremor the Unruly. Sagremor was deeply ashamed of what he had done, and he said, “Ah, my lord, I beg your pardon. Truly, my lord, I didn’t recognize you.” “I know you didn’t,” said Sir Gawain. Then they embraced and rejoiced over each other. And the three spurring after him wondered greatly at the source of this love, and came along joking with one another. And Sir Gawain asked, “Who are these?” “Ah, my lord, these are Sir Yvain, Sir Kay, and Girflet.” “And how did you find one another?” “My lord, there is a crossroads down there, and just now chance brought the four of us together there, and the others will be very happy to see you.” 1Corresponds to Micha VIII:LVa, Sommer III:276-281; Kennedy 366-371. 2“the story tells,” as in Kennedy 366.12 (Micha’s text could be interpreted as “And until” or “And to such a degree that”). Le Then the three came galloping up, for they were impatient to find out how such great friendship had come about between these two knights. As they were speaking they recognized Sir Gawain; they ran to him with open arms, for they considered him to be their lord, and joyfully welcomed him. They joked and laughed together about what they had in mind when they saw him from the edge of the heath, and their intentions? at present, “for every one of us hoped to have unhorsed you by now,” and Kay the Seneschal said he had never seen a joust that had been so prepared [147] conclude without a fall or a miss. Thus they talked and joked at length, and Sir Yvain said, “Since God has brought us together, we won’t separate until we have found some adventure.” And Sir Gawain concurred. Then all five rode off together, and when they came to the edge of the heath they climbed a hill, and all five rode up to the top until they caught sight of a large valley below, surrounded by woods and hills on three sides. The valley was large and beautiful, all full of grass mixed in with flowers, and as far as it extended there was but one tree, one of the most beautiful pines in the world. This pine was right in the middle of the valley, and beneath it a large and beautiful spring gushed forth, and people of that land called it the Spring of the Pine. From that spring issued a brook, which made the whole valley more beautiful and more pleasant. The five companions rode in that direction. When they had come down the hill into the valley, Sir Gawain and Sir Yvain, his companion and cousin, who were riding ahead, looked about and saw a squire approaching on a draft horse, as fast as the horse could carry him, with a great bundle of lances at its neck. He left the forest and rode directly onto the heath, came to the pine, and speedily dismounted. Then he undid the lances and stacked them [148] all around the pine, the heads upward. Next he removed a shield that hung from his neck; it was black, closely speckled with silver. The squire took it by the guige* and hung it from one of the branches of the pine. When he had done this, he went spurring away and galloped into the forest at the nearest point. When Sir Gawain saw this, he drew upon the reins and went back into the wood, using the slope of the hill as cover. His companions did likéwise, and he said he would not move from there until he discovered what this might mean. When they had been there awhile, they saw a fullyarmed knight approaching, his helmet on his head, mounted upon a large, strong, and swift charger. He rode at full speed straight to the pine and began to look at the lances; then he dismounted, went to the spring, unlaced his helmet, knelt down upon the ground, and drank at length. After drinking, he stood up and took his helmet in his hand, but when he was about to put it back upon his head, he happened to strike the base of the shield that was 3“their intentions,” as in Sommer 277.21-22 (Micha has “and the fact that they had him now”). ‘The guige of a shield was a looped strap by means of which the shield could be suspended from the neck (Bradford B. Broughton, Dictionary of Medieval Knighthood and Chivalry, New York: Greenwood Press, 1986). Lancelot, Part II hanging from the pine. The knight looked up and saw the shield hanging there. Then he began to grieve most bitterly, weeping and crying and striking one fist against the other and cursing the day he was born. And when he had carried on for a while in this way, he began to regain his composure and to blame himself for lamenting so, and to display as much joy as he had displayed grief. And when he had been joyful for a goodly while, he began to grieve again, just as intensely as he had done before. But very soon he began to be joyful again. In [149] this way he went on for seven or eight times, alternately sorrowing and rejoicing. When the five knights saw this, they wondered greatly what it might mean. Kay the Seneschal said, “By God, if this isn’t a mad knight, then there is none in all the world, for he weeps one moment and laughs the next.” “Indeed,” said Sir Gawain, “this is one of the greatest wonders I have seen in a long time, and I would be very glad to know why he weeps and laughs.” Then Kay said that he would go ask him, and if he was unwilling to tell him, he would fight with him. “Go ahead,” said Sir Gawain, “and tell him that we are five knights errant, and that we ask him in friendship to tell us why he indulges in such great sorrow and joy.” Kay said that he would do so, “and if he doesn’t tell me, he’ll pay for it.” Then he turned to go, but Sagremor ran to seize his reins. “Wait, Sir Kay, you can’t go, for you know well that * any unruly acts in the king’s household are mine; that’s why I’m called ‘the Unruly’, and so it is right that I should have this one.” The others said that this was right. So Kay was forced to stay there, and Sagremor went toward the knight who was still carrying on in the same way, beneath the pine. And when he had come before him he said, “Sir knight, Iam sent here by four knights who are up there on that heath, to ask you to tell me who you are and why you show both grief and joy.” The knight, greatly displeased, scowled at him and said, “Good sir, what do they care who I am? Ill certainly not reveal that, either to you or to them; now leave me alone, for I have no wish for your company or theirs at this time.” “By God,” said Sagremor, “I won't leave it at that.” “How’s that?” said the knight. [150] “In God’s name,” said Sagremor, “you’ll have to do battle with me, if you won’t tell me ina friendly way.” “What do you say?” said the knight. “This would be an outrage, if I were forced to reveal my thoughts, and I’ve never heard of a battle between two knights because of such a quarrel. And I still see no knight for whom I'd speak out.” “By God,” said Sagremor, “then you'll have to fight with me.” “Truly,” said the knight, “you'll have no fight over this, God willing, yet I’ll do battle rather than? tell you.” When Sagremor heard this, he withdrew to the middle of the meadow and told the knight to be on his guard, that he would strike him forthwith. The knight behaved as if this mattered very little to him, but he laced on his helmet and 5 “rather than,” as in Sommer 279.11—12 and Kennedy 369.23— 24 (Micha has “rather than not tell you”). Lancelot, Part IT removed his shield, a white one with one black quarter, and hung it on the pine beside the other. Then he took the other and hung it round his neck by the guige, weeping and lamenting so bitterly that it seemed he must go mad. Then he took a lance, the very strongest he could find around the pine, and turned toward Sagremor, whom he saw approaching full ready to joust. They came together as fast as their horses could carry them. Sagremor struck the knight first and splintered his lance. Then the knight struck him so forcefully that he immediately bore him to the ground, after which he took his horse and led it beneath the pine. He took off the bridle and struck the horse upon the rump with the bridle itself, driving it [151] away. The horse ran off at great speed and dashed into the forest. And the knight threw down the bridle underneath the pine and resumed the display of sorrow and joy that was his wont. Then Sagremor jumped back to his feet, and when he saw that the knight had thus left him, he was sorrowful and ashamed at his misfortune. But this did not bother Kay the Seneschal, who said to Sir Gawain, “My lord, Sagremor shouldn't have been so hasty just now, for he could now still arrive in plenty of time.” Then he spurred his horse toward the knight, past Sagremor, to whom he said to go back, that he had done well. And Sagremor was deeply ashamed and found his companions very saddened and upset on his account. Sir Gawain said that a worthy knight must be very careful not to begin an act of folly, for he cannot be sure how it will turn out. At that point, Kay came up to the knight and spoke to him just as Sagremor had done. And when he saw that the knight would tell him nothing, he told him to be on his guard and that he would strike him. Then the knight jousted with Kay just as he had done with Sagremor, and in the same way he drove off his horse and put the bridle underneath the pine. At that point Girflet came to him and spoke to him as his two companions had done; but in the end the knight unhorsed him as he had done the other two. Then [152] Sir Gawain was greatly distressed and declared that the knight was very worthy who had unhorsed three of the king’s companions. “My lord,” said Sir Yvain, “the matter was foolishly begun. We can’t honorably abandon it now. Now /'ll go, for it’s better for the knight to unhorse me than for me not to go.” Then he departed and went to the knight, who had begun grieving again beside the spring; at length the two of them jousted together, and the knight unhorsed him just as he had the others. Then Sir Gawain was deeply saddened, for he dearly loved Sir Yvain; his sorrow was so great that tears ran down his face, and he said that the knight could rightly boast, since he had unhorsed four of the world’s most worthy knights; “now® I alone remain to be unhorsed, and, God willing, they’ll never have shame or injury in my presence without my sharing it.” 6«n ow,” as in Sommer 280.9 and Kennedy 370.34 (Micha has “for”). 1) Then he came forth from his place of concealment, riding slowly, his lance grasped by the middle. He looked toward the head of the valley and saw a fat and hunchbacked dwarf approaching on a very large horse with a gilded saddle; upon his shoulder the dwarf held a stout, freshly cut oak stick. The dwarf came spurring down the valley, straight for the knight who was grieving beside the spring. Seeing him, Girflet ran to seize Sir Gawain’s reins and said, “My lord, for God’s sake, wait until we see what this dwarf is going to do.” So he stopped to watch and saw the dwarf come up to the knight, who was intent upon his grieving. He stopped beside him, stood up in his stirrups, raised the stick with both hands, [153] and struck the knight with all his strength upon the noseguard of his helmet,’ so that he completely battered it in. The knight was immediately on his guard, but the dwarf raised the stick anew and struck great blows upon the knight’s shoulders, neck, and helmet, until his nose and face felt the effects of it; he struck and struck again as much as he pleased, and the knight never moved but kept® his head bowed because of the blows he had received upon his face. When the dwarf had so beaten him with the stick that he was quite worn out, he took him by the reins and led him back the way he had come, without any objection from the knight. When Sir Gawain and his companions saw this, they were quite astonished. “Upon my word,” said Sir Gawain, “this is one of the greatest wonders I’ve ever seen, for never was such a worthy knight as this one so shamefully treated by such a vile creature without ever making any objection. But I swear to God that I’ll never stop traveling until I learn who the knight is and why he wept and rejoiced so and why the dwarf beat him and led him away without any objection. If I could honorably attack him, he wouldn’t leave without unhorsing me or I him, but he is a prisoner, and whoever attacks a prisoner has truly lost all law and justice.” [154] “My lord,” said Kay, “I beg you to catch one of our horses, for otherwise we’ll be left here on foot, but we’ll follow you as soon as we are all mounted again.” And he gave him one of the bridles from beneath the pine. Then he hunted through the forest until he caught Sir Yvain’s horse; he brought it back and gave it to him, then immediately commended them to God and told them to follow him as soon as they could. They said they would do so, and thus all four remained. But now the story leaves off speaking of them, saying no more, and will instead speak at great length of Sir Gawain. 56. The Story of Hector; Segurade and the Lady of Roestoc.’ Now the story tells that Sir Gawain departed and followed the tracks of the knight and the dwarf, and he struck ... helmet,” as suggested by Lecoy, review, 383. (Micha adds the phrase “while he was looking” after “the knight”). 8“kept,” as in Kennedy 371.13 (Micha has “lay”). 1Corresponds to Micha VIII:LVIa; Sommer III:281-298; Kennedy 371-393. 156 rode all day without finding any adventure. That night he slept in the forest, and in the morning he arose and resumed following the horses’ tracks, and he spent the morning riding until the hour of tierce. Then he emerged from the forest and rode onto a wide prairie, in the middle of which he saw a beautiful and splendid pavilion. Sir Gawain continued in that direction until he came to the entrance to the pavilion, stuck his head in while still on horseback, and saw in the middle of the pavilion a bed decorated with great splendor. Upon that bed lay a young lady of great beauty, her beautiful hair loose upon her shoulders; behind her was a maiden who was combing her hair with a comb of gilded ivory, and in front of her was another who held a mirror and a crown of flowers. [155] When Sir Gawain saw the lady, he wished her good day, and she replied, “And God bless you, sir knight, if you’re not one of the cowardly knights, the recreants who saw the good knight beaten and treated shamefully without ever helping him.” When Sir Gawain heard this, he rode right into the pavilion and said, “Ah, my lady, whoever I may be, for God’s sake I beg you to tell me who the knight is and why he was both grieving and rejoicing.” “Oh!” she exclaimed, “be silent, for I know that you’re one of the craven cowards.” “My lady,” he said, “for the love of God, tell me, on the condition that I will be your knight all my life.” “T’ll say just this: may God grant you dishonor before you set foot outside this place.” As soon as she had said this, Sir Gawain’s horse started and twisted beneath him, so that one of the reins broke. He looked behind him and saw the dwarf who had beaten the knight, holding with both hands a blood-covered sword with which he had struck the horse in the flank. Sir Gawain jumped down, nearly mad with rage, seized the dwarf by the shoulders and then by the sides of the head, and raised him up [156] to strike him against the pole of the pavilion. The dwarf began to cry out and said, “Now what my mother predicted has come to pass.” “What was that?” asked Sir Gawain. “Truly,” he said, “she told me that evil dung would kill me, and I know well that the worst Christian in the world is holding me in his hands.” “Truly,” said Sir Gawain, “you are dead if you don’t tell me immediately who the knight is who was weeping and laughing beside the spring, and why he was both grieving and rejoicing and why you beat him and led him away without his defending himself.” ‘T’1l tell you,”2 said the dwarf, “on one condition: that you will fight against him or against a better knight,* provided you are in the right in the quarrel.” Sir Gawain thought a little and said that he who fights with right on his side has a great advantage; and since he had made this offer, he would fight, he said, before he learned what he had so long sought to find out, and he promised the dwarf what he had requested and announced. 2The dwarf uses the familiar (and disparaging) form of “you” (tu) to Gawain, who had addressed the dwarf with the formal vous. 3or against a better knight” supplied from Kennedy 373.1-2. Lancelot, Part IT “Now I’ll tell you what you ask,” said the dwarf, “and show you that the knight is one of the most handsome and the best you ever saw.” “Now do? so,” said Sir Gawain. Then the dwarf ordered the maiden holding the mirror and the crown of flowers to go get him; she raised the flap of the pavilion and entered an underground cave. [157] s Immediately the knight came forth. He was very handsome, noble, and blond, and he was still badly bruised from the mail of his hauberk; he was wearing his surcoat and looked deeply ashamed and embarrassed. Then the dwarf spoke to Sir Gawain, and said, “Do you see this knight? You will fight with him, or with a better one, if I wish. I can tell you that he’s one of the best in the world and that his name is Hector. That maiden you see there having her hair combed is my niece, the daughter of my brother, a very highborn nobleman who was my elder. It happened that my brother lay down in death’s bed, for he had been wounded in a war between the lady of this land and one of the best knights now alive. When my brother, a fine and handsome knight, saw that he was dying, he sent for me, for he had no other brothers. When I came before him, he entrusted to me this maiden, who was his daughter; he had no other children, and she was the living creature he most loved. He begged me, in the name of the love between us, to keep her as I would my own child, and vested in me all his land, which was both beautiful and rich. “My brother soon passed from life to death, and my niece came to love this knight above all others, and [158] she loves him still, and he her, above all women. But when I found out about this, I forbade my niece, as she valued my love and that of her father and her honor itself, to pursue this love except through me; if she didn’t obey, she would never possess anything of her father’s and would forever forfeit my love and my help. I made the same demand upon the knight, and then I said that if they obeyed I would assure their lifelong happiness together. And they both gave me their solemn pledge. “That lady, whose war I told you about, from which my brother died, had incurred the hatred of a neighbor, the best knight in the world and the boldest and the most feared; his name was Segurade. That hatred arose from the fact that he had sought to marry her, but she didn’t want him, for she was very highborn compared to him, and much younger. When he saw that she refused him, he was saddened and shamed and began to make war upon her, not by means of any lands or relatives that he had, but because he was a good and generous knight: all the young knights abandoned my lady for him, even those of her land, and they were very eager for her to accept him. “She had lost both her parents, and many of her kinsmen had died or been wounded because of her war and that of King Arthur, whose liegewoman she is. Many times people advised her to accept the knight, but she could never feel any love for him, and never was she as happy, if she heard tell of him, as she was sad. [159] 4Here Gawain exceptionally uses the informal pronoun ¢u to the dwarf (see note 2). Lancelot, Part IT “The knight made war upon my lady at great length, until, with the help of the men who had deserted her, he destroyed all her land and killed all her people. No one dared leave any fortress, and at last the commoners cried out to my lady with a single voice that if she did not accept him, they would flee or surrender to him and place themselves at his mercy. Overcome by grief, she said that she would take counsel in the matter. “When she had assembled her counsellors, she said that nothing could make her accept him. An aged uncle of hers said that, in light of what she had said, he would advise her and that thereafter she would need no other advice if she were willing to take his. She swore that she would do so. “Niece,’ he said, ‘since this marriage does not please you, it will not be, but you will nevertheless send a message to the knight that you have taken counsel and that you'll accept him provided he will give you a year’s respite. And so that no one will blame you for accepting him, since he’s not as highborn or as powerful as were your ancestors, you want him to prove himself worthy of you and your love by doing battle with any knight who, during that year, might try to win you from him. And if he is defeated by any one of them, you should insist that he and his land be at your mercy. Perhaps he’ll die or be defeated within this term, or on the other hand you may die. In this way you would be freed from one another, but if he defeats all the knights during this time, then you'll have to marry him or retire to an abbey.’ “The lady, [160] in whose service I am, accepted this advice. The oaths were sworn accordingly on both sides, and the knight declared that if he had married her he would still do this, for love of her, if she asked him to do so. “In this way peace was established between my lady and Segurade. And yet all his knights and men-at-arms guard all the passages around my lady’s land, so that no knight errant may enter. When these agreements were made, I saw my niece and this knight looking at one another, for they dared not speak together or exchange messages because of me. I went to them and said that they should both wait for a year, and then they could be sure that I would bring about their happiness together. “This delay was too long for them, and my niece asked Hector whether he would fight Segurade if she wished him to, and he said he would give an eye from his head to be already in the field against him. Then she made him promise that he wouldn’t fight him without her leave. “Yet the waiting period passed very slowly, and it weighed upon him more from day to day; often he begged my niece to allow him to fight for his joy, until she feared she would lose him. She had that black shield speckled with silver made for him, and ordered him, in the name of his love for her, whenever he offended her, to take care never to bear any other [161] shield until he was reconciled with her. The black signifies sorrow, and the drops of silver signify tears, for because of sorrow, people weep. “When this knight heard that he would be united with his beloved as soon as Segurade was defeated, he was so confident in love that, if he could find him, he would surely defeat him. And while he was in this frame of mind, it happened that one night he dreamt that he was at the pine by the spring, there where I took him prisoner yesterday. MDH He had come for a great tournament that was to take place there, where he thought to find Segurade, and he was very happy and joyful. But when he came beneath the pine, he looked up and saw a cloud full of dim little stars, and that cloud had such an effect on him that he could see only very little, and yet he completely carried the day in the tournament. “He was very happy about this dream; he told my niece, but she replied that it was only folly and that he should know that the knight had not yet been born by whom Segurade would be conquered. He was greatly saddened by this, since love gave him courage and boldness, and he told himself that he would soon test it. “The next day he arose early, when I had already gone to church. He took his armor and had it carried out of one of my castles where we were staying, so that I would know nothing of it. But my niece knew, and she came to me at the church and told me that Hector was going to the Spring of the Pine. I had no wish to miss Mass, for I never did, that I recall, so I had one of my servants mount one of my best horses and take the lances you saw and [162] the black shield, because I knew that when he saw the lances, he would stop, and when he saw the shield, he would go no farther. The servant reached the pine ahead of Hector, for he had put on his armor first, and he leaned the lances against the pine and hung the shield upon it. When Hector arrived and saw the shield, he knew that he had acted unwisely and that this was the black cloud he had dreamt of; he was immediately so dismayed that he didn’t know where he was, but he knew that he had incurred my niece’s anger and mine. “Then he began to grieve, as bitterly as you saw. And when he had grieved at length, he thought that anyone was very wicked to grieve so, for things would be much better as soon as he found Segurade, since he had no fear that he would defeat him in combat, and then he would obtain the joy that was promised him. So it seemed as if he had already defeated Segurade, since the joy that awaited him made him so happy, and for that reason he rejoiced—until he remembered his beloved was angry with him and that he had to bear the black shield, and this so filled him with anguish that he began to grieve anew. Then afterwards, he recalled that his beloved was so faithful, as was I, that he would never be deprived of what had been promised, and for that he rejoiced anew. “So he grieved and rejoiced, as you saw. And I, who would be deeply aggrieved if I lost such a [163] knight, mounted as soon as I had heard Mass; I found him in the way that you saw, and beat him—I could do as I wished with him, for I’m certain that he fears me above all men—and I led him away, without his putting up any resistance. “Now you have heard what his name is and why he laughed and wept and why I beat him and led him away without any objection, and why he bore the shield. And you have promised that you will fight with him or with a better knight than he, but I fear that you will run away, for I know full well that you are the worst man in the world.” Sir Gawain did not say a word, but he was deeply sorrowful because his horse had been killed. At that point, a servant came out of the cave and said that the meal was all prepared; the dwarf gave orders for Sir 158 Gawain’s armor to be removed, and then they sat down to eat. When they had eaten a little, the dwarf looked across the meadow and saw a maiden approaching rapidly, her palfrey all in a sweat; he said to his niece and to Hector that they would soon have some news. The maiden dismounted at once, and there were many to take charge of her palfrey. In the name of her lady she greeted the dwarf and his niece and gave him a letter. When he had read it, he began to laugh wickedly and curse the heart of woman and any who trusted in it. “My lord,” said his niece, “why do you say that?” “Listen to this,” he said: “my lady sends me word that the end of her term is approaching, and that I’m to ride full tilt to King Arthur’s court and bring her Sir Gawain to fight against Segurade! She believes that this [164] may be done as easily as she orders, but if I set out immediately I could scarcely be there within the length of time she has prescribed, and it’s no easy matter to find Sir Gawain, for in five years he has been at his uncle King Arthur’s court only two or three times, and is instead off seeking all the most difficult adventures, for he is the worthiest knight in the world. So in exchange for Sir Gawain I’ll bring her the worst knight who ever bore a shield, and that is this knight right here.” Sir Gawain did not say a word, nor was he at all concerned about anything the dwarf said, but Hector was deeply saddened by it. Then the dwarf had Hector’s armor brought and that of Sir Gawain, and ordered his niece to go along and the serving-maids as well, and he said to Sir Gawain, “Sir cowardly knight, you’d very much like to stay behind, because you have no horse, but you won’t do so, for Ill give you a better one than yours.” Thus the dwarf had him dressed in armor and had the horse brought to him; he mounted, as did Hector and his lady and the squires and the maidens; one bore Hector’s shield and another bore five strong and sturdy lances, and they all left the pavilion so that no one stayed behind. After they had ridden for a long time, the maiden called to Hector and said, “Hector, you must promise me faithfully as a faithful knight that you won’t fight without my leave; if you disobey, you may be sure that you'll have forfeited my love forevermore.” And he gave her his word on this. [165] Then Hector came to Sir Gawain and begged and requested him not to be concerned about anything the dwarf said to him, and he replied that he was not concerned at all. Then the dwarf called to the maiden who had brought the letter: he asked her where her lady was, and she replied that she was at a mighty castle of hers called Roestoc.° “Then we won’t spend the night in the fields,” he said to his niece. They rode all the day without finding any adventure mentioned in the story, until they came to their lodging. The next day they rose very early, and when they had heard Mass they set out again and rode until it was near the hour of tierce. They approached the borders between his 5“Roestoc,” as in Sommer 286.3 and Kennedy 377.38; cf. pp. [169-170] (Micha has “Roteschi”). Lancelot, Part IT lady’s lands and those of Segurade, and came to a passage through a hedge. The dwarf looked and saw two knights and three men-at-arms coming, and the knights were fully armed except that they had hats instead of helmets, and the squires had battle-axes, swords, and habergeons. Then the dwarf called to Hector and said to him, “Hector, these men are from the household of Segurade. Now defend us, for that’s what we need; we’ll never be defended by this knight, because he’s not worth a chambermaid.” “Have no fear,” said Hector, [166] “but ride on confidently.” Then he said to Sir Gawain, “My lord, don’t be angered by his words, but be patient, for you have much to do.” Then he asked his lady for her leave, and she granted it. He asked for his shield, and it was given to him; he hung it at his neck, took a lance from one of his squires, and positioned himself at the end of the hedge nearest the knights who were spurring toward him. Both of them splintered their lances upon his shield, but he struck one so forcefully that he bore both him and his horse backwards to the ground, splintering his lance. Then he drew his sword and rushed upon the others so speedily that they were quite dismayed. They abandoned the field to him; not one of them dared resist, but all four fled across the fields. He chased them a long way, until they plunged into the forest, and then he turned back. As soon as the one who had fallen could get up, he dragged himself into the woods to escape the danger. Then the dwarf proclaimed that Hector was a very worthy knight; when he had returned he said to him, “Hector, wasn’t I correct? Had you not been here, we would have been in a difficult situation, for this cowardly knight would never have defended us.” Sir Gawain kept silent, and Hector was very sorrowful and embarrassed, and esteemed him highly for keeping silent so nobly. So they rode on at length until they approached a causeway that ran between a palisade and a marsh. At the head of the road the dwarf saw three knights and five menat-arms, and the knights were armed just like the others. He said to Hector, “Hector, if you don’t defend us, we'll all [167] be captured, for these are Segurade’s men, and our knight will never strike a blow.” “My lord,” he said to the dwarf, “ride on and have no fear.” Then he returned to Sir Gawain and told him not to be concerned about the dwarf’s words; he replied that he was not. Then Hector again asked for his shield, took a lance from the squire who was carrying the others, and took leave of his beloved. He positioned himself at a narrow spot in the causeway, spurred his horse, and charged into the lot of them, striking one knight and knocking him to the ground. But another seized his bridle, while a third drew his sword and began to rain great blows upon his helmet, as did the men-at-arms, At once, Hector drew his sword and struck the one holding his bridle upon the hand, maiming him, then aimed at the third knight and struck him in the face, so that he sliced him to the ears and he fell to the ground. The others were routed by this blow, and they turned and fled. He pursued them a way, then returned to the road and removed his shield and helmet, for the weather was very Lancelot, Part IT warm. Sir Gawain looked at him and held him in as high esteem as he could any young man. So they rode on until late afternoon, when they approached a little bridge over a small river they had to cross. When they drew near, they saw an armed knight at the head of the bridge, [168] helmet on head, shield at neck, lance in hand, and with him as many as thirty men-atarms, clad in habergeons and armed with spears and swords, like men of lower rank. And the dwarf said to Hector, “Now we need you to deliver us or else we’ll all be captured, because we'll never get any help from this one: he’s the most recreant man alive.” Hector replied that they need have no fear. Then he told Sir Gawain not to be concerned about anything the dwarf said, “for if you were Sir Gawain you would have much to do, but I beg you to help me, if you see there is need.” Sir Gawain said that he would gladly do so. Then Hector took his helmet and laced it on, placed his shield at his neck, and took up a lance, the very stoutest he could find. When he was near the little bridge, he charged as quickly as his horse could carry him, and the men-at-arms, who were on foot in front, placed the butt ends of their spears to the ground and struck him so upon his shield that they completely covered it. He charged into the midst of them all, striking the knight so forcefully that he knocked him into the water beneath the bridge. But the foot-soldiers so attacked him with their spears that they bore both him and his horse to the ground in a heap. He jumped up again most speedily, let his horse go free, drew his sword, and ran upon them so fiercely that they could think of no solution but to flee, but he pursued them vigorously and thus wounded and maimed many. The knight who had been unhorsed had recovered his horse and remounted, and was now fleeing, [169] badly wounded in the arrn and in the breast. When he had routed them, Hector returned and found Sir Gawain holding his horse, and he said to him, “Many thanks.” “What?” exclaimed the dwarf. “Cursed be the hour when you were born, sir knight! Is this how the knights of your land get their booty, by holding the horses of knights who perform worthy and valorous deeds?” And Hector begged him not to be offended. After that, they rode on through the evening until they came to a castle belonging to the lady whom they were going to help, and there they spent the night. The next day, they rose early to hear Mass and then set out and rode without stopping until the hour of tierce. Then they found a lovely spring where they stopped to dine, after which the dwarf told the maiden who had brought the letter to ride ahead and tell her lady they were coming, and that instead of Sir Gawain he was bringing her the worst knight that ever was. After that, he told her in private, “Give my lady this message, that she should come to meet us and beg my niece to let Hector fight for her, for you’ve seen what a knight he is.” Then the maiden left; she rode until she came to Roestoc, where she found the seneschal at the entrance to the hall and asked him about his lady. 1? “Truly,” he said, “she hasn’t eaten since you left. But what news of Groadain the dwarf?” “Sir,” she replied, “he is coming here with his niece and Hector and a knight whom the dwarf [170] considers the worst in the world.” Then the seneschal led her to his lady. But when the lady saw her, she could not say a word, for fear of hearing bad news. “My lady,” said the maiden, “Groadain the dwarf greets you, as do his niece your cousin and Hector. He’s bringing you a knight instead of Sir Gawain; I don’t know who he is, but you will see for yourself.” “Alas!” she exclaimed, “I am done for!” “My lady,” said the maiden, “Groadain sends you this personal message, that you should come to meet them and beg your cousin to let Hector fight for you, for he is one of the best knights in the world.” And the seneschal advised this. Then the lady had her palfrey saddled, and mounted along with the seneschal and many other knights and menat-arms. They rode out of Roestoc to meet those who were coming, and they encountered them fully two English leagues from the castle. First they met the squires and then Sir Gawain, then rode on until they came to the dwarf and his niece, and all greeted one another with great joy. “My lady,” said the dwarf, “you ordered me to go in search of Sir Gawain, but this wasn’t something to be done quickly, for he is not often at court and the time was too short. But I bring you such a knight as I could get, the one who is riding with the squires.” Then the lady said to her cousin, “Fair cousin, I thank you warmly for coming, and I have great faith in you, for even if everyone else deserted me, you would still come to my aid.” “Indeed, fair lady,” she replied, “I'll help you all I can. But why do you say this?” “Because,” she said, “I beg you, for God’s sake, to allow Hector to fight for me.” “My lady,” she said, “don’t count on me for this, for so help me God, I would rather [171] renounce God than let him fight Segurade, even on condition that he were fully armed and Segurade were unarmed.” Thereupon, the lady jerked her reins, wrung her hands in grief, and said, “Alas! I am done for, since the person in whom I most trusted has failed me!” Then the seneschal took her reins and said to her, “My lady, that knight has come to help you, and I would advise you to go to him and thank him for having placed himself completely at your service. Then you’ll hear what he has to say.” Then the lady came to Sir Gawain, drew up beside him, and said, “My lord, I bid you welcome,” and he in turn wished God’s blessing upon her. “My lord, I thank you warmly for coming here to fight my battle.” “My lady,” he replied, “be assured that I would do this and more for you.” “Indeed, my lord,” she said, “you have clearly shown what you’d do for me, by coming to fight against the best knight in the world. But for God’s sake, what do you think about this?” “What, my lady” he asked. “Truly, I don’t know.” 160 “You don’t know? Alas!” Then she reined in her horse and began to grieve bitterly. The seneschal came galloping up and asked her what was wrong, and she replied that she was full of grief and anguish. “My lady,” he said, “what did the knight say?” “What?” she said. “He said he doesn’t know how to fight.” Then he asked her how this could be, and she told him how she had asked him what he thought and how he had said he did not know. “But my lady,” said [172] the seneschal, “do you expect him to tell you that he will defeat his opponent? The knight spoke like a sensible and valiant man, but you aren't sensible, despairing for no reason, for Our Lord is allpowerful and he won’t forget you.” In this way, the seneschal comforted and admonished her. They rode until they came to Roestoc; they dismounted below the hall, and both Hector and Sir Gawain removed their armor. Then they entered the hall, which was strewn with fresh reeds, and they found the lady lying on a couch, so stricken and so despondent that she could not speak a word. The seneschal sat at her feet and took great pains to comfort her. The dwarf and his niece were on the other side. Hector and Sir Gawain both sat down, and the more Hector looked at him the more he esteemed him, for never had he seen a knight display such fine or confident behavior; but he dared not question him about himself, lest that be considered an ignoble act. In such a way they stayed there a long time, until the meal was prepared; the tables were set and the lady and her guests sat down. While she sat at dinner, a squire came in, big and black and bristly; mounted on a large pack-horse, he rode right up to the table. When the lady saw him, she was sO overcome with fear that she could not even look at him. The squire spoke and said, “My lady, my lord sends me here, with the message that he has heard you have a knight who has come to contend for you; he bids me tell you that [173] he is fully prepared to do battle immediately, and he wishes to inform you, and these knights who are here, that he has given you until the day after tomorrow.” Then the seneschal spoke on behalf of his lady and said to the messenger, “Good sir, you may inform your lord that our knight is tired and weary from long days of travel and difficult undertakings, and is in need of rest, but your lord will find him ready to fight at the appointed time; let him have no fear, for the knight won’t flee, and he would be wrong to hurry, for, God willing, he can be there in plenty of time.” Sir Gawain was very glad for what the seneschal had said and was very grateful to him; he would have been just as glad to fight immediately as on the third day, but the seneschal’s last words gave him much pleasure. Then the squire said to the seneschal, “What, sir? Is your knight so tired and weary from defeating one or two or three of our knights?” “Good sir,” said the seneschal, “you may inform your lord that my lady sends him this message, that she is allowing her knight to rest comfortably and that she has Lancelot, Part IT sent for everyone she can get to see the battle, for such an important battle must not be concealed, and some who have wished for it may be able to arrive in time.” [174] Then the squire left, threatening the seneschal and the knight. They went on eating, and when they had finished, Sir Gawain rose and went to the end of the hall. There he saw at least sixty lances, and he took the one that seemed the very stoutest and sturdiest; he polished the head and the wood from end to end, in the sight of all those present, and then trimmed fully two feet from it. Next he went to his armor and verified that nothing was missing: not strap nor guige nor shield-strap nor anything else needed for his equipment. Hector and all the others esteemed him highly for this, and the seneschal was very pleased by what he did. So passed that day and the next. The more everyone observed him, the more he pleased them, but they never asked him about himself, for fear of displeasing him. When the third day arrived, Sir Gawain rose early and went to church. When the lady learned of this, she followed him and found him on his knees before the cross. Such fine behavior on his part made him more pleasing to her than he had ever been before. And the seneschal said to her, “My lady, you don’t know who this knight is, but he certainly looks like a man of quality. I would advise you to give him some token of your affection, and perhaps his courage will increase, for ladies have helped make many a worthy knight.” She readily agreed to this. Then she called to one of her maidens, and ordered her to bring a jewel box, and she took from it a belt of gold segments, most finely worked, along with a clasp of Arabian gold, upon which the stones were sapphires and emeralds. [175] Then she came to Sir Gawain and wished him good day. “My lady,” he replied, “may God grant you joy, and whatever may be true of other days, I know today that you would wish that good fortune befall me.” “Truly, I would wish so now and at other times,” she said, “for you have undertaken to do for me something I could never deserve. So I bring you a token of my affection, and I beg you to wear it in remembrance of me. Be assured that I’m completely yours. Now fight valiantly for your lady friend.” Then she gave him the belt and the clasp, and he girded on the belt and placed the clasp at his neck. Then the lady fell at his feet and begged him for his assistance, and he hastened to raise her up and told her to take heart and not to be afraid. When the dwarf heard this, he began to laugh and said, “If this knight isn’t drunk or a silly fool, then I’ve never seen a drunk or a fool.” At that point the Mass began, and they went to hear it. After Mass they returned to the court and met two aged knights riding palfreys, who said to the lady, “My lady, my lord awaits you out there this morning.” And the seneschal, who was very reasonable, said that they would go there directly. Then the two knights left, and Hector and the seneschal went to arm Sir Gawain. When he was completely covered with armor except for his head and his hands, he put on a rain cape over his armor. They brought him a Lancelot, Part IT palfrey and he mounted; squires were ready and brought him his shield and his lance and led his horse. Then the lady mounted with him, as did knights, [176] men-at-arms, ladies, and maidens, and they rode out of the city. Sir Gawain rode next to the lady, and the seneschal could not keep from looking at him; he could not get enough of doing so, for Sir Gawain behaved most confidently. The seneschal drew alongside his lady and said, “I didn’t believe this knight was such a worthy man; we all behaved very badly when we didn’t ask his name.” Sir Gawain heard this remark, but he rode forward a bit and behaved as though he had heard nothing. The lady said that she would ask him, before he had his helmet on his head. At that point they rode into the field of combat and saw a great many people on each side who had come to see the battle. Then the lady and her retinue halted, and Sir Gawain came to her and said, “My lady, I am liere prepared to fight in your service, with God’s help; I beg and request, in exchange for my services, that you grant me a favor that I'll ask of you, one that will cost you nothing.” And she gave him her word. “My lady,” he said, “you have granted me and I request that no one ask my name before a week has gone by.” And she granted him this. “I must tell you,” she said, “that that is the first thing I would ask you.” When the seneschal heard of the knight’s request, he was deeply saddened, and the lady herself was very disappointed. [177] At that point, they saw three men approaching on horseback. Two of them were dressed in rain capes, and the third rode in the middle, armed with greaves and hauberk, his ventail lowered, and wearing gauntlets; he wore a tunic emblazoned with bands of gold and azure, as many of one as of the other. The knight was tall, robust, and well built, with arclied feet and long, straight legs, a broad back, and slender flanks; his chest was tall and thick, his arms big and long and heavily boned. He had strong, heavy fists; broad, ample shoulders; a neck® well suited to his body, a large head with black hair mixed with white; his face was wrinkled and full of scars, and his teeth protruded. He rode toward where he saw the lady, and everyone said, “It’s Segurade!” People came crowding around the lady, to hear what he would say, and he spoke so loudly that many of the people heard him: “My lady, I want you, and all those present, to know that today is the end and the limit of our’ agreement, and as soon as I’ve defeated your knight, my conditions must be met.” The lady was so dismayed that she could not speak, so much did this upset her. Then Sir Gawain drew forward and said, “Good sir, we want this agreement restated before my lady and before these people who are in her service.” Segurade replied, “I have certainly not been summoned to appear in court, and I won’t repeat it now.” 6 neck,” as in Kennedy 385.26 (Micha has “color”). 7*our,” as in Sommer 291.39 and Kennedy 385.33 (Micha has “your”) . 161 “Upon my word,” said Sir Gawain, “then you’ll wrong her, if you don’t wish to restate it; and this will be known to those who [178] don’t know it now.” “God help me,” he replied, “you’ll never hear it. What business is it of yours?” “What?” said Sir Gawain. “I say you’ve got yourself a good arrangement, believing you can take by force one of the most beautiful maidens and one of the highest-born ladies in the world.” “Indeed,” he said, “even if you and all those of your land had sworn to it upon relics, I will still have my part of the bargain.” “By God,” said Sir Gawain, “in my land there are some who could harm you.” “And I accept them all as my enemies, even Gawain the son of King Lot, if he were there now.” When Sir Gawain heard that Segurade included him in his challenge, his face grew hot and his heart swelled; he stood in his stirrups and said to Segurade, so that many heard him, that he would never get his part of the bargain, no matter what he might do, for there were many who would defend it. When Segurade heard this, he turned away without another word, as did the knights who had come with him; they greatly threatened the knight who had issued the challenge, but it mattered little to him. Then the lady took leave of Sir Gawain and, weeping, begged him to save her land and her life. He took her in his arms and told her not to be afraid, that she would lose nothing that day because of any man she had seen. Then the lady withdrew far to one side with the other ladies. And the dwarf said, “By God, no one but this mad knight was ever happy at the approach of his own death.” Sir Gawain then put on his ventail and his gauntlets, Hector laced on his [179] helmet for him, the seneschal gave him his horse, and he mounted. Hector carried his shield and the seneschal his spear, until they came to the limits of the field where the combat was to take place. When they had been there a short while, they saw Segurade coming, his helmet laced on, holding his shield by the straps, like one who well knew how to fight, and galloping across the broad and beautiful heath, like a man who never thought to arrive in time. When he approached, Hector gave Sir Gawain his shield, and the seneschal gave him his spear, and Hector said to him, “We’ll go over there, for we can’t stay here any longer. There is Segurade, and for God’s sake, remember your honor and who you are.” And he replied, “Go, and don’t be concerned.” Then he embraced them both and commended them to God, and they both wondered who this man could be who behaved so confidently. Then Segurade approached, and Sir Gawain positioned his shield before his chest, placed his lance beneath his arm, and spurred his horse. Segurade did likewise: they came together as quickly as their horses could carry them, and struck each other so violently upon their shields that their lances flew to pieces. When their lances had shattered, they struck each other with body and head so violently that they saw stars, and [180] even the stronger of them gave way. Each bore the other to the ground, and 162 they lay there stunned so long that those on each side believed them dead; the lady would have preferred it so, in order to be delivered from her enemy. Sir Gawain jumped up first, drew his sword, and ran at Segurade where he expected to meet him, but he still lay upon the ground, stunned and wounded from the violent encounter he had had, the weight of his armor, and the shock of his fall to the ground, for he was one of the largest and most heavily built knights in the world. When he was able, he jumped up, drew his sword, and covered himself with his shield, for he was skilled in fighting, and he and Sir Gawain ran to attack each other. Then their swords hacked the shields above and below, broke and rent the shining hauberks, and dented the helmets again and again, wherever their swords struck; in many places they made each other’s blood spurt forth with the blows from their swords. The combat was so fierce and so savage that all those who saw it were dismayed. The battle was fierce, and both knights were of such great courage and force and so evenly matched that no one could rightly judge which had the better and which the worse, until it was long after the hour of tierce. Then each one’s strength greatly diminished, their arms and shoulders grew weary, they became short of breath, and neither was so strong [181] that he did not need to rest. Their armor was so damaged that through their hauberks their flesh appeared, broken and wounded where their swords had struck, and their helmets were in such condition that they could be of little value, for in many places the skull-piece and the circlet were battered, and the noseguards cut off, for their swords had many times gone all the way down to the skullcap. It was a wonder how they could last so long, under the great weight of blows they were dealing each other. There was not enough left of their shields to cover their faces, which were all bare and unprotected, for they had split and hacked them with their swordplay, both above and below, so that there was very little of them left around the central bosses. They often gave ground and then attacked each other anew as they regained breath and strength; neither was so brave that he was not fearful of losing his life and his honor forevermore. In this way they performed, now well and now poorly, until the hour of noon drew near. But then Segurade began to gain ground upon Sir Gawain: it seemed to people that Gawain had greatly declined from the great prowess he had shown all that day, so that all those on his side were filled with fear and sorrow, for it seemed to them that he was merely enduring. But such was his custom that his strength always ebbed at the hour of noon, and as soon as noon had passed, it came back doubled, and he regained courage and confidence and [182] strength.® Then this could be clearly seen, for as soon as noon had passed, all those who were watching saw him as strong and as quick as he had been at the beginning of the fight, and those who had been sorrowful were now glad. 8The origin of this peculiarity of Gawain’s is recounted in the Mort Artu, pp. [197-199]. It is frequently mentioned elsewhere in Arthurian literature, e.g. Merlin, chapter 10, pp. {129-130]. For other references see Micha IX:[161], Kennedy 2: 262, and G.D. West, An Index of Proper Names in French Arthurian Prose Romances (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1978), p. 134. Lancelot, Part IT He attacked Segurade anew, so quickly that all those of Segurade’s household who saw it were dismayed, for Sir Gawain had been in such a sorry state that Segurade believed he had brought him to the point of death or dishonor, but now he found him stronger and more confident than before, when he had been hale and hardy in body, with armor intact. Segurade had the impression that he was fighting, not against a mortal man, but rather with a phantom, for in all the world there was no knight so powerful that Segurade did not believe he would have conquered or killed him within so much time. He did not see how he could hold out henceforth, and yet he put everything at risk, body and soul, and stoutly defended himself to the extent that his greatly diminished strength could hold out; yet, his power was sustained by the reputation he had always had for prowess and the fear of losing the person he most desired, that is the lady of Roestoc, and the great courage that had never before failed him. These things helped him keep up his strength for a long time, until his body and limbs failed him. The great loss of blood and the [183] fierce heat of the sun were too much for him: he began to yield before the blows of Sir Gawain and to give ground against his will. And Sir Gawain pressed him so hard that he could not catch his breath or recover any ground, and it was already near the hour of nones. Then Sir Gawain ran at him and struck great blows with his sword upon his helmet; he covered him with blows, so that he could no longer remain on his feet, but staggered so that he had to brace himself with one of his hands against the earth. When he tried to get up again, Sir Gawain ran at him, striking him with body and shield as he was getting up, so that he stretched him out full length upon the ground; then he threw himself upon him, and without delay broke the laces of his helmet and tore it from his head, then struck great blows upon his face and forehead with the pommel of his sword, so that many links of mail penetrated his head. Segurade’s eyes were so full of blood that he could not see a thing; he realized that further defense was of no avail, and he cried for mercy. Sir Gawain replied that there would be no mercy unless he declared himself totally vanquished or defeated, “for otherwise I cannot grant mercy honorably.” “Ah, noble knight,” said Segurade, “you are indeed the worthiest knight alive. Who will show mercy, if the world’s worthiest knight does not? Don’t allow [184] me to say anything that might dishonor me, but for God’s sake and for pity, intercede for me with my lady, and you will have done much to help me.” He replied that he would gladly do so. Then the lady was summoned and she came, as joyful as could be. There she saw Sir Gawain and fell at his feet; she passionately kissed the links of the greaves on his legs and the spurs on his feet and said, “Ah, my lord, blessed be the hour when you were born, for you have given me back my great joy!” Then Sir Gawain led her forward and said to her, “My lady, this knight begs your mercy, you can see in what condition he is.” “My lord,” she replied, “you may do with him as you wish, for I have no use for him.” Lancelot, Part IT “My lady, I won’t, for the quarrel is not mine, but I’m your knight, and I intercede with you in his behalf. And you should know that this is one of the most worthy knights I ever saw: I beg you not to let him be dishonored before you.” “My lord,” she replied, “you must be his overlord, for you have earned that right, and never, God willing, will I interfere against your will, but I’ll abide by whatever you wish to do with him.” “My lady, if he wishes to place himself at your mercy, I advise you to accept without further ado.” She said that she would gladly do so. Segurade submitted completely to this, and Sir Gawain said, “My lady, don’t say that I haven’t fought as I should, for if it [185] is not to your liking, I’m ready to do more.” “Truly, my lord,” she replied, “you’ve done more than I could ever deserve, and I consider myself well served.” Then Sir Gawain arose, and Hector and the seneschal took Segurade and led him quickly to the castle. The lady immediately ran after them, so happy that she remembered none of the troubles she had had. Many of the people ran behind, to see what would be done with Segurade, and very few remained on the field with Sir Gawain. There stood a squire of that land, very handsome and worthy, holding Sir Gawain’s horse. He brought it to him and helped him to mount. When Sir Gawain saw that the lady and the other people were going on their way rejoicing, he realized they had forgotten him, and he turned and rode into the forest, which was less than two bowshots from the field. The squire said to him, “My lord, the others are over there.” And Sir Gawain replied, “Friend, wait for me here, for I have something to do in this wood, and I won’t return by any other path than this.” Then he left, and the squire waited for him, thinking he was going into the woods for some other need. But when he did not see him return, he spurred after him, following all the tracks he could find, until he had gone fully half a Welsh league. Then he looked down into a valley and saw Sir Gawain fighting with a knight in armor. He had so beaten him [186] with the knight’s own helmet that he was all covered with blood and was begging for mercy as if he could fight no more. Sir Gawain made him give his word that he would place himself at the mercy of the lady of Roestoc and declare himself her prisoner on Gawain’s behalf and tell her how he had been defeated. The knight gave his word and then took his helmet, sheathed his sword, and rode off at great speed. When the squire saw him coming, he dived into the woods, so that the other would not see him, and the defeated knight passed by and rode straight to Roestoc. Meanwhile, the lady, who was following her prisoner, had caught up with those who were escorting him, and Hector looked at her and said, “My lady, where is your knight?” She looked around but did not see him anywhere. “Alas,” she exclaimed, “I’m deeply ashamed, for I have forgotten such a worthy knight!” Then she turned back with great speed, along with many men-at-arms and knights. She met those who were 163 following and asked them for news of the knight who had fought for her; they told her that he had gone away. “Gone? Unhappy wretch!” she cried, and she wrung her hands and grieved as bitterly as ever she could. Then along came Hector and those who were escorting Segurade; she told them of her great anguish and said that she would never have any joy until she saw the knight again. Then Hector jumped onto a horse, as did men-at-arms and other knights, to go in search of Sir Gawain. When the defeated knight entered the court, his helmet in his hand, badly wounded, he dismounted, came before the lady, knelt down, and said, “My lady, I am your prisoner, sent by him who just now defeated my uncle Segurade.” [187] When Segurade heard this, he looked and saw that it was his nephew Canagues. Then Hector? asked him how he had been defeated. “Well,” he said, “the truth is that when I saw that he had defeated my uncle, I thought I’d go ahead of him into the forest and would easily defeat him, because he was tired and exhausted. So I attacked him: I broke my lance upon him, then drew my sword and ran at him. He did not even deign to draw his own, but pulled my helmet from my head and put me in the sorry state you see. He made me give my word that on his behalf I would declare myself my lady’s prisoner.” When the lady heard this, she crossed herself and said, “Alas, ’'m mortified, for to my great misfortune I’ve lost him who had restored joy and honor to me!” Canagues replied that it would not be at all easy to find him, for he had gone off with great speed. Meanwhile, Hector was spurring after him, along with more than sixty others. The squire who had followed Sir Gawain managed to catch up with him, and he said, “My lord, my lord, God grant you good night, for this day you’ve had much travail and more honor.” Sir Gawain returned his greeting and asked him who he was. “My lord,” he said, “I am the squire who gave you back your horse, a little while ago. Iam a native of this land, of a castle of mine that is ahead of us, which people call Channings. I beg you, for God’s sake and for your own comfort, to stay with me tonight and beyond, if you wish, until your wounds are healed. It seems to me that you have no wish to go [188] back where you have come from; I will give you lodging in the most private and the most comfortable place you ever saw; you have great need of rest.” “Friend,” said Sir Gawain, “many thanks, but it’s not yet time to seek lodging, for a man who has as much to do as I have; I have no wounds requiring rest, and my horse, thanks be to God, is strong and fresh: I can keep on riding for a long while yet.” “My lord,” said the squire, “the place where I’ll give you lodging is not near here; it will be darkest night before °The presence of Hector’s name at this point may be an error, but the other available texts (Sommer 296.3-20 and Kennedy 391.8-30) concur with Micha; Kennedy lists no relevant variants. 164 we get there. But I’ll lead you there as directly as if a line were drawn there, without following any road, and you’ll never be found on the road or in any lodging by any man who may follow you. And I beg you, my lord, to accompany me there, for I will gain great honor thereby, if such a worthy knight as you takes lodging with me.” Sir Gawain granted his request, provided they would get there at an hour when it was fitting to take lodging. So the squire escorted him through the woods and across the heath, for he knew the forests better than anyone else. They rode until, long after nightfall, they came to a fortified dwelling that was two leagues from Channings, on the River Severn; it was one of the best situated houses in the world, and so strong that no house could be better protected by wood and water. When they drew near, the squire said, “My lord, my house is near here; it is comfortable and far from [189] people, and it’s time to seek lodging for the night. And be assured that there is not a Christian man or woman who will ever know you’re there, as long as you wish to conceal yourself.” He replied that he believed him to be so reasonable and so courtly that he would stay the night. The squire, overjoyed, thanked him. Hector and his companions kept on riding until night drew near and they had lost the trail; then they returned, bringing no news, and found the lady as bitterly upset as she could possibly be. When she heard that they brought no news, she said that she would never have any joy that could make her forget this grief, until she could find out who this knight was. “Alas, I am undone, for I had the worthiest knight in the world, but I never gave him honor or companionship! Blessed Lord God, who can he be? Now I am very eager to know!” The lady kept on grieving over the knight, and the seneschal said to her, “Truly, my lady, you can readily see that he’s a man of quality, for he was never dismayed by anything he heard. Yet Groadain the dwarf said more base and insulting things to him than were ever said to any knight, as I was told by those who traveled in his company, and since he arose this morning I have heard him say plenty more.” “Oh,” said the lady, “that’s why I’ve lost him, but so help me God, I’ll avenge myself most cruelly. ”’ She immediately ordered the dwarf taken prisoner, and he was turned over to the seneschal, and all he had was placed at risk. The [190] next day, Segurade and all those who held land from him paid homage to the lady. Afterwards she said that she could not be happy if she did not learn the truth about the knight. She added that she had given the matter much thought and that she wished to go to King Arthur’s court to hear news of him, for that is where all good knights meet. “And you will come along,” she said to Segurade, “together with your doctor, for we will go only a short distance each day, and you,” she said to Hector, “and my seneschal, my cousin, and Groadain the dwarf. And be assured that I will avenge myself upon him for his insults to the knight: whenever I meet other people, and at the entry to any town I come to, I’ll have him bound with a halter to the tail of my palfrey, and I’ll drag him after me, and never will I reduce my pace on his account. And if I can learn Lancelot, Part IT nothing of the knight at King Arthur’s court, I will seek him in every land until I find him, and the dwarf will follow everywhere, just as I have said.” Thus the lady spoke of her intended journey. The dwarf was very much afraid, but the others did not care; they were eager for her to set out, for they were impatient to learn who the knight was, and Segurade was keener to see him than all the others. So the next day, without further delay, she set out with a great retinue, and asked for news of the knight wherever she went. But at this point the story leaves off speaking of her and of her retinue and returns to Sir Gawain. [191] 57. Gawain and Helain.' Now the story tells that Sir Gawain and the young man who was escorting him reached their place of lodging. The young man removed Sir Gawain’s armor and made him comfortable in every way appropriate for a weary and wounded knight. The man had a very beautiful sister, a maiden, who knew as much about healing wounds as any other in the world. She very gently examined Sir Gawain’s wounds and said that he had no wound that was not easy to heal, and she treated them so well and so skillfully that his discomfort was greatly relieved. After they had dined, his host spoke to Sir Gawain in these terms: “My lord, I’m delighted that God has brought you to take lodging here, for you are a finer knight than all the others; I’d like to ask you to advise me in a certain matter, for I am big and powerful, and my kinsmen blame me because I’m not yet a knight, as does my lady of Roestoc, whose liege I am. More than twelve years ago it happened that I was lying in my bed, and the most handsome knight in the world came before me; it seemed to me that he held me by the nose, and I said to him, ‘Ah, sir knight, what a great knightly deed you have done now, by attacking a child!’ Then he took me and said, ‘Now don’t be concerned, because truly I’ll make most honorable amends to you for this, for I will make you a knight.’ And I asked him, ‘Who are you, my lord, who would make me a knight?’ ‘I am Gawain,’ he replied, ‘the nephew of King [192] Arthur.’ ‘Ah, my lord,’ I said, ‘you are indeed welcome!’ “Then I awoke and told my mother of my dream; she was very glad, and made me promise that I would never become a knight unless he made me one. And since then I have gone at least five times to King Arthur’s court, but I’ve never found him; I returned from there not three days ago, and I was told that he was seeking a wondrous knight, in the company of nineteen others, and I can have no rest from my lady until I become a knight. So I beg you in God’s name to agree to make me a knight, for there’s no better man to whom I could state my complaint.” ; Sir Gawain replied that he would gladly do so. “But,” he added, “you are a very powerful man; I doubt that you'll want to be knighted in such great haste. There’s nothing that would make me stay here long enough to be discov- 1Corresponds to Micha VIII:LVIJa, Sommer III:298-300; Kennedy 393-396. Lancelot, Part IT ered, for I have undertaken too important a matter and must hasten on.” “My lord,” he said, “may God help me, I ask no other company than you, and we have everything here we need, the chapel and the chaplain, and I have armor all prepared. It will be a greater comfort to me that you have knighted me than if it were done by another? against my wishes, for anyone who was dubbed by you would have to be a worthy knight.” “Then so be it,” said Sir Gawain, “in God’s name, for in the morning I will have to go elsewhere.” Then he ordered the squire to go begin his vigil; this he did all night, for he was extremely joyful because of the honor that God had sent him so opportunely. That night [193] Sir Gawain was lodged in a manner that pleased him, for the worthy maiden took care of him until he fell asleep. When morning came, the pain of his injuries and wounds was so greatly diminished that he felt none of them unless he saw them; he rose as soon as he saw the light of day, and the maiden was ready and anointed him again with a precious ointment. Afterward, they went to hear Mass, and after that Sir Gawain knighted the squire, girding his sword on him and fastening on his right spur, as was the custom. But first he asked him his name, and he said it was Helain of Channings. When he had given him the order of knighthood, as custom required, and they had heard the service, Sir Gawain asked for his armor. The new-made knight asked him to stay until he was more fully rested, but this he was unwilling to grant. Then he begged him so insistently that he stayed until after the meal. But when they had eaten, further entreaties were of no avail, and he asked for his armor so that he could leave. The new-made knight came to him, and said, “My lord, my lord, you are leaving; I beg you for God’s sake to tell me your name, if it please you, so that I may tell my lady, when I see her, and others as well, who knighted me, [194] and then my heart will be more easy.” “You may confidently say to all who ask you that Gawain, the nephew of King Arthur, knighted you.” When Helain heard this he was overjoyed and said that God had granted all his wishes at once, and that now he had no fear that he might not be a worthy knight, since he had been dubbed by the finest knight in the world. Then he said, “My lord, I know I couldn’t easily keep you here any longer; this grieves me, but for God’s sake grant me the first boon I ask of you after my knighting: leave me the arms you bore at Roestoc, and take mine, they are fine and good. Yours will bear witness to the fact that you knighted me, and you could give me nothing else that I’d like as much.” Sir Gawain most willingly granted this request. Then Helain’s armor was brought. The hauberk was one of the best Sir Gawain had ever seen, and the shield was completely white as snow, since at that time it was the custom that a new-made knight bore a shield of just one color, for the first year of his knighthood. The helmet was also fine and good. Thus was Sir Gawain very well equipped with this armor, and it suited him very well. 2 “by another” supplied from note 2.b and Kennedy 394.32. 165 Then he took off the belt and the clasp that [195] the lady of Roestoc had given him, and he said to the maiden, “Here, take what my lady of Roestoc gave me in true affection, and in true affection I give it to you.” She took them and thanked him warmly. Then he asked for his horse, mounted it, commended them to God, and assured the maiden that he was her knight and would be so all his life, and she was overjoyed at that. Then a horse was readied, and Helain mounted to escort Sir Gawain. And when he had escorted him a long way, Sir Gawain crossed the River Severn to go into the land of North Wales, since Helain had told him that the direct route to Galehaut’s land lay that way. Then Helain and he parted, commending one another to God. Helain returned to his castle and sent for his friends and neighbors to celebrate his honor, and he told them how God had sent him every joy in the person of Sir Gawain. They spent two days together in great joy and celebration. On the third day Helain went to Roestoc, but he did not find the lady there; they told him she had set out two days before to go to King Arthur’s court. When he heard this, he returned to his castle at Channings. But now the story leaves off speaking of him for a while, and returns to the lady of Roestoc, who was going in search of the knight who had fought for her against Segurade; she had declared that she would never be happy until she had found him and learned his name. [196] 58. The Split Shield; Hector Sets Out in Quest of Gawain.’ Now the story briefly relates that the lady of Roestoc, with her retinue, set out for King Arthur’s court, and she rode until she found him at Quimper-Corentin. There the king and the queen welcomed her very joyfully and took great pains to honor her, for she was a very highborn woman. In the evening after dinner, the king and the queen were seated with the lady on a couch, and they asked her what need had moved her to come so far to court. She told them the truth: “My lord, that knight you see there was making war on me,” and she indicated Segurade and told of their compact. “The other day,” she continued, “Groadain the dwarf, that dwarf you see there, brought a knight to me, to whom he said all the most shameful things one could say to a man. That knight fought for me against Segurade until he defeated him, and for that reason I prevailed in our compact. When I saw him defeated, I was so filled with joy that I quite forgot the knight who had defeated him, and he went off so that neither I nor any of my men knew where he had gone. I’m sure that this was because of the shameful things the dwarf had said to him; I have come here to hear news of him, for all worthy knights meet here.” 1Corresponds to Micha VIJI:LVIIa, Sommer III:300—-308; Kennedy 396-407. 166 Then the queen asked her about the knight, his condition and his appearance, and when the lady had told her, she [197] said she did not know who he could be, if not Sir Gawain, for he had left there a long time before and was seeking one of the finest knights in the world, in the company of nineteen other knights. “God help me, my lady,” she said, “if he is Sir Gawain, then I’m dishonored, for I never showed him any honor, and I would as soon be dead because of the dishonor that would be mine.” Neither the king nor the queen could tell her any more, and they let the matter drop at that point. And the lady and her retinue went to their lodgings to rest, for she was very tired. Then Groadain the dwarf begged the seneschal, in whose custody he was, to accompany him before the queen, that he might speak with her. The seneschal did so, for he was a wise and worthy man. The two of them came before the queen, and the dwarf begged her for mercy, saying, “My lady, help me, for in you is all help and wisdom.” And the queen asked him in what matter she might help. “My lady,” said he, “Tam the dwarf who brought to the lady of Roestoc the knight who won her battle for her, but I was persuaded that he was the most cowardly knight in the world, and I derided him because he looked so much like a coward. Now my lady says she has lost him because of me, and she says she herself will go looking for him in every land until she finds him, and she says she will take me with her and [198] will show me off to everyone she meets, for I will have a halter attached to my neck and to the tail of her palfrey, and it will be that way in all the towns where she enters. That’s how she has led me, ever since she set out from her land, and I'd die if she led me any farther in this manner. So I beg you, my lady, for God’s sake, consider this matter, for I am a gentleman, however much I may be poor and wretched in body.” The queen said that she would do as he asked, “and don’t be concerned,” she said, “for if I can arrange it, you will be delivered before your lady departs from this land.” “My lady,” he said, “many thanks, in God’s name!” Then he and the seneschal returned to their lodgings. The next day the lady came back to see the king and the queen; they spoke together at length, and the queen asked her for a boon, and she granted it. “You have granted me and I ask that you forgive the dwarf for what has made you angry.” “My lady,” she replied, “I don’t hate the dwarf for himself, but he has a maiden niece who is my cousin, and I asked her in great need to allow that knight whom you see there, who is her lover, to fight for me, but she replied that she would rather renounce God. And I thought to dismay her so that she’d send her friend in quest of that knight in order to deliver her uncle, for I would gladly upset her concerning the person she most loves.” “By God,” said the queen, “if she fails her uncle in this, then everyone should hate her for it.” [199] Then the queen summoned the dwarf and said to him, “Dwarf, I have obtained your deliverance, if your niece is so willing to help you that she will send her lover to seek the knight who won the battle; I can find no other way to make peace.” Lancelot, Part IT “Truly, my lady,” he replied, “T don’t believe she’ll do it, but I will try nevertheless.” Then the dwarf came to his niece, and he said to her, “Dear niece, I’m dead if you don’t help me.” “How is that?” she asked. “If you don’t lend me Hector to go in search of the knight who defeated Segurade; unless you do, my lady will drag me after her, as she has begun to do, until she finds him.” But she said she hoped God might never help her if Hector left by her leave or on her advice.2 When the dwarf heard this, he was so afraid that he nearly fainted; he went back to the queen and said that he could get no help from his niece. “My lady,” said the lady of Roestoc, “I was sure of it; she’s the most disloyal creature that ever was born.” “Now do not be concerned,” said the queen, “for Vl make her pay for her wickedness.” Then she said to the lady in private, “You won’t set out tomorrow, and tonight tell your household that I have begged you to stay, and Ill easily catch her, as you will see.” [200] Then the lady went to her lodgings and that night spoke to her household as the queen had told her to do, “but I won’t stay,” she added. The next day she returned to court, and with all her people listening the queen begged her to stay, but she said that that could not be. Then all the ladies rose and went to see the king. The king rose to meet them, and took the lady of Roestoc by the hand; the queen took Hector’s lady, and said to her, “If you don’t help me trick your lady, I’ll never love you henceforth.” “My lady,” she said, “what do you mean?” “She has asked me,” said the queen, “not to intercede on behalf of the dwarf, but I will do so, and she’ll think I am begging her to stay; she has told me that she won’t stay unless you do. Now if I ask a boon of you, grant me it, and she will grant it afterwards, believing that I’m begging her to stay—but I will bring about the dwarf’s deliverance, you may be assured of that.” “Ah, my lady,” said the maiden, “what a good idea!” Then she left her, and the queen went to the lady of Roestoc and asked a boon of her, but she replied, “My lady, don’t ask me for anything that is impossible, for here is a maiden who has much to do in her land.” ‘Don’t worry,” she said, “for you don’t know what I wish to ask.” Then the lady said that she would grant it, if the maiden did so first. The queen had the maiden grant the boon, [201] and then she took the pledge of each. “Do you know,” she asked the lady, “what you have granted me? That the dwarf is freed from your anger and your hatred and from what you ask of him because of the knight who defeated Segurade. And you,” she said to the maiden, “have given your word that you will ask Hector to go in search of the knight until he finds him, and you’ll make sure that he does so.” When the maiden heard this, she was so astonished that for a long time she could not speak. All the others who heard it were happy, but the lady of Roestoc was happier than anyone else. When the maiden could speak, she said, 2«advice,” as in Kennedy 398.22 (Micha has “by her will”). Lancelot, Part IT “Ah, your majesty, truly there’s not as much good in you as people say, and you have gained very little by deceiving a maiden; but you haven’t deceived me at all, for, may God forsake me, I’ll never ask him to go there, and by the saints in that chapel, he will never be asked by me; I'd rather let myself be completely dismembered.” “Truly,” said the queen, “then I do believe that you couldn’t be the niece of the dwarf, if you weren't more wicked than any other woman. Be assured that by the power of my lord the king and this lady here present, you will never hold land until this compact is honored.” “My lady, I can’t help it; [202] then I will never hold land, for this matter will have to be settled on the day of judgment.” “Take care,” said the queen: “it would be better for you to do this without being forced, for, rest assured, you are going to do it, though it may grieve and vex you.” “Well,” she replied, “we shall see.” Then she rose, and the queen said to the lady of Roestoc that if she valued her life, the maiden was to have title to nothing that it was in the lady’s power to bestow, in the name of her loyalty and the oath she had sworn to King Arthur, whose liegewoman she was. She granted this, appearing angry, but in fact she was quite happy about it. Afterwards, the lady repeated this to the dwarf, who owed her fealty, and took his oath and said that if he broke it she would put him in such a sorry state that he would not have a furrow of land or any other possession. Then the maiden left the chamber, upset and weeping bitterly, and met Hector coming the other way. He asked her what was wrong, but she refused to utter a word except to say to herself as she went along, “Alas, how she has deceived me, she who deceives all!”—and Hector could get not another word out of her, no matter how he begged her, and he followed her in that fashion all the way to her lodgings. She lay down on a bed and grieved so bitterly that no one could get a word out of her. When Hector saw that she did not wish to explain the reason for her grief, he went to the dwarf and asked him what this was all about, and the dwarf toid him the truth of the matter and the oath she had made. “For God’s sake,” said Hector, “go to her and beg her to let me go, for I would go without being ordered, rather than let her lose her land, if I didn’t believe I would incur her hatred. I ask you, for your own benefit and for hers, to beg her, as I will do, to allow me to go with her blessing, since that’s what the queen wishes; and she will ask me to do so, since it is my wish, I do believe.” The dwarf said he was ready for them [203] both to fall at her feet, “but I know her to be so wicked that she’s unlikely to do it, since she is so obstinate.” “We will try,” said Hector. Then the two of them came to the maiden’s lodgings, and both knelt down before the bed where she lay so full of sorrow, and begged her for God’s sake to tell Hector to go on that quest. “Ah!” she replied to the dwarf, “was it for this that you made the queen deceive me? Truly, you'll never benefit from it, and, may God forsake me, Hector will never go because of me, either by my request or by my order. And if he went without my order, he may be assured that he would 167 never see me again, and if he did see me, he would never see me belong to him.” When they heard this, both were very distressed; the dwarf left and went to his lady in the presence of the queen, and told them of his niece’s bitter grief and said that Hector would never obtain her order or her request, and that if he left without her leave he would never see her again. When the queen heard this, her heart was filled with pity, and she knew the maiden was suffering from great fear. She sent the lady of Malehaut and two knights to fetch her, and begged the lady of Malehaut® [204] to advise her earnestly to let Hector go on the quest, for he would not be away long. “Truly, my lady,” said the dwarf, “he would go very willingly, if she had not forbidden it, but he loves and fears her above all things.” Then the lady of Malehaut went to speak to the maiden and brought her, full of anguish and sorrow, before the queen. She encouraged and advised her to let Hector go in search of the knight who had defeated Segurade, for he would not stay away long at all; the maiden neither agreed nor refused, but listened nevertheless. Thus they came to the court, and when the queen saw her she treated her with honor, because she knew much of her suffering; she took her in her arms and said, “Now my lady, don’t be distressed, but take heart, for, God willing, things will soon be better for you than you believe.” Then the maiden sat down, and the queen begged her, for her uncle's sake, to tell Hector to go on the quest, but she could not persuade her. At that point an armed knight entered, accompanied by a beautiful maiden bearing a shield slung upside-down around her neck. The knight could not carry it, for his arm was broken between the hand and the elbow. He had fastened it as well as he could with splints, but between them he was in such pain from the bones knocking together that he was near to fainting. The knight dismounted in the middle of the courtyard; many [205] helped him and the maiden. When he had dismounted, the knight asked where the queen was, and there were many who told him, for all gathered around them to see the wounded knight and the maiden with the shield. When he had come before the queen, he greeted her first, “in the name of the knight who bears you more love than you bear him, and who sends you the message that you rendered him half a service which you might have made whole.* For this reason he wishes you to know that he owes you but a half-repayment, and that he will give it to you at the first opportunity.” Then the queen began to think and asked the knight who this was who sent her this message; he replied that he did not know, “but he ordered me to tell you this and he said that you knew him well.” 3“and two knights... Malehaut” supplied from note 11.a and Kennedy 401.10-11. 4The knight is Gawain; the “half a service” is an allusion to chapter 54, p. [141], where Guenevere’s instructions are less complete than they might have been (Micha IX:[342] and Kennedy 2: 268). 168 And when the queen saw that he was injured, she asked him who had injured him. “Truly, my lady,” he said, “the knight of whom I spoke unhorsed me so violently that I fell and broke my arm in the way that you see.” Next, the maiden who bore the shield spoke and said to the queen, “My lady, I bring you greetings from the wisest lady now alive, and the most beautiful I know of; she asks that you keep this shield for the love of her and of another, whom you love even more, and she sends you this message: that she knows more about your thoughts and shares them more than anyone else in the world, for she loves the same person you do. And be assured that if you keep this shield, it will cure you of the greatest sorrow you ever had and will give you your greatest joy.” “God help me,” said the queen, “this shield is very much worth [206] keeping; may the lady who sends it enjoy good fortune, and welcome to you who brought it. But for God’s sake, who is that lady? Tell me, for I would be very glad to know her.” “My lady,” she said, “I'll tell you what I can: she is called the Lady of the Lake.” When the queen heard this, she immediately knew who the lady was; she jumped up to embrace the maiden who had brought the shield, and welcomed her as joyfully as she could. Then the queen herself removed the shield from the maiden’s neck, examined it closely, up and down, and saw that it was completely split, from the base right up to the top, and only the cross-piece of the boss, which was both rich and beautiful, kept the two parts from falling apart; they were so far from one another that one could stick one’s hand between them without touching either side. On one of the parts of the shield there was a knight, as richly armed as the artist’s skill could make him, except for his head; on the other half was the most beautiful lady ever portrayed. At the top they were so close that he had his arms around her neck, and they would have been® kissing, had it not been for the split in the shield, and below they were as far from one another as they could be. And the queen said to the maiden, “Truly, my lady, this shield would be very fine, were it not so badly split. [207] Now tell me, in the name of the one you love most, what does it mean that it is so split, for it appears quite new, and tell me the truth of the knight and the lady who are painted upon it.” And the maiden replied, “My lady, this is a knight, the best presently alive, who asked for a lady’s love, the worthiest presently alive,’ in my opinion. The knight was so successful, through both his love and his deeds, that the lady gave him her love. But so far there have been only kisses and embraces, as you see on this shield; when it comes to pass that their love is complete, then be assured 5 According to Micha’s index of proper names (IX:[117]), this is the only passage in which she is referred to as pucele (“maiden”) or la pucele del Lac (“the maiden of the Lake”); she is sometimes entitled damoisele (“damsel”), as in chapter 53, p. [131], but most often dame (“lady”). I have chosen to use “lady” consistently. 6“ ould have been,” as in Kennedy 402.39 (Micha has “were kissing”). “who asked ... alive” supplied from note 16.b and Kennedy 403.9. Lancelot, Part IT that this shield, which you see so broken apart, will be whole again, and the two parts will hold together. Then you will be freed from the greatest sorrow that ever befell you, and you will experience the greatest joy you have ever known. But this won’t happen until the best knight outside King Arthur’s court has joined his household. And if I said he was the best both outside and inside, I wouldn’t be lying, so much have I heard of him, for he has performed more feats of arms ina short time than any other.” The queen was delighted by this explanation, and she welcomed the maiden with much rejoicing, and in her heart she felt she knew who the knight might be. Next the knight spoke and took leave of the queen, for he still had far to travel, but she said that he was to stay until his arm was mended, for riding would [208] do him no good. He replied that he must go, for the knight who had defeated him had made him swear, as a faithful Christian and knight, that he would go to the lady of Roestoc, just as soon as he had been to the queen, “and I don’t know, my lady, where that is, and I have never been there.” When the lady of Roestoc heard this, she hurriedly came forward and asked him news of the knight and said that it was to her that the other had sent him. “My lady,” said the knight, “begging your pardon, I don’t believe it, but if my lady the queen confirmed it, I would readily believe it.” The queen was very eager to hear news of the knight, and she confirmed that this was the lady of Roestoc. “My lady,” he said, “it is entirely proper that I should believe you in this, and blessed be God, who has brought her so near to me.” Then he said, “My lady, the knight who fought for you against Segurade sends you this message: if now he arrived in your hour of need, he would forget about you just as you forgot about him, and he wouldn’t want you or anyone else to blame him, for you would have deserved it. Now I would be glad to see your seneschal and Hector.” They both hurried forward and asked for news of the knight; he told them what they wanted to hear and said to the seneschal, “Sir, the knight who fought against Segurade for that lady there greets you as his lord and friend, and sends me to be your prisoner, knowing that you could commit neither evil nor baseness.” And the seneschal received him joyfully and said that for the sake of that knight he would be most welcome. “Sir,” said the knight to Hector, “to you he sends his thanks for carrying his spear when he went into combat.”® Then the knight had them unbelt [209] a sword he had girded on along with his own; he handed it to Hector and said that the knight sent it to him,? because he believed it would be put to good use, “and be assured that he sends it to you because it is fitting for you and because he has tested it, for otherwise he would never send it to you. And he ordered me to tell you that to a worthy vavasor one should send prisoners, and to a worthy young knight errant one should send arms.” The seneschal and Hector were both very glad, the one because of his prisoner and the other because of his sword, 8In fact, it was the seneschal who carried Gawain’s spear going into the combat with Segurade (chapter 56, p. [179]). °The origin of this sword is related in chapter 60, p. [235]. Lancelot, Part I but they did not know who it was who had sent them. “Now,” said the queen to the knight, “what has he sent to the lady of Roestoc?” “Upon my word,” said the knight, “he told me he had sent her two knights, Segurade and his nephew, just as she had given him two gifts, a belt and a clasp.!° And because he doesn’t want her to feel he has wronged her, he instructs me to tell her that he no longer has her tokens of affection; he has given them to one of the most worthy maidens he has ever seen, for he had accepted them only as reminders of her, and he feels he has done nothing wrong by forgetting her, for she forgot him first.” When the lady heard this, she fainted, for that knight was the person she had most loved in all the world, and she knew full well that now she had lost him forever. [210] At once the queen and many other ladies and maidens went to her and drew her into a chamber, so that no one would see her. When she had recovered from her faint, the queen drew her aside and asked her secretly,!! for she knew what was right, not to lie to her concerning whether she loved the knight. “My lady,” she said, “I won’t conceal it from you, but as long as I saw him I never valued his love; now that I’ve lost him, such a great love has been born in my heart that I couldn’t describe it to you, and every day it grows and becomes stronger. I tell you that never in all my life will I be happy until I see him. And I beg you, for God’s sake, as my liege-lady, to use your power so that Hector will go in quest of him, if you want to save my life.” Then she let herself fall at the queen’s feet and wept most tenderly. The queen raised her up again, and, deep in thought, came back out of the chamber. She summoned the dwarf’s niece and said that she must make Hector go on that quest and ask him to do so, but the niece answered that she hoped God might never help her if she ever begged or ordered him to go. Then the queen, in order to save the maiden from breaking the oath that she had sworn, said that she need not beg or order him, “just allow and permit him to go.” But failing this, she could be sure that she had utterly lost her land and that she would be deprived of her freedom. When the maiden saw that she must obey, [211] she said that, God willing, Hector would never at her request or by her order go where he would be in mortal peril, but that if he wanted to go, she would grant it. Hector was very glad at this and said he would gladly go. “God help me,” she said to Hector, “then I will certainly not be in her bondage, and since you have agreed to the quest, I have fulfilled my obligation. Haven't I, my lady?” she said to the queen. “Yes, indeed,” she replied, “once he has sworn to it.” “God help me,” she said, “it’s not the swearing that will postpone the thing, and let him be assured that he won't go alone, for I will set out with him.” All the ladies laughed at her and considered her mad and admonished her, but their warnings were to no avail, for she still wanted to go with him. The queen and the lady 10See chapter 56, pp. [174-175], and chapter 57, pp. [194- 195]. M«secretly,” as in Kennedy 405.4 (Micha has “first”). 169 of Malehaut drew her aside, and they said she would be disgraced and would never again be joyful, if some misfortune befell Hector, “for if it happened,” said the queen, “that another knight defeated Hector, he would take you and do with you as he wished. It would be better for you to have your beloved either healthy or wounded, for valiant knights have been defeated who were still honored and worthy knights.” She replied that after the death of her lover she would have no wish to go on living. But at length she fell silent, and the queen led her away, bitterly sorrowful and upset. Hector’s arms had already been brought to him, and they armed him completely except for his hands and his head. [212] Then the queen ordered the relics to be brought; the matter was taken before the king, and the queen told him in complete detail how Hector was leaving on the quest, and why. Afterwards, by order of the king, Hector knelt down before the relics, and swore in accordance with the king’s instructions, as was the custom at that time: that he would do everything in his power to seek the knight for as long as a quest might last, that is one year, and that he would not return without him or without accurate news of him, whereby people could be sure that he had found him, and that he would not lie concerning anything that happened to him on his quest, either to cover his shame or to further his honor. All who went on quests swore such an oath, at that time when the marvelous adventures were happening in the kingdom of Logres, as you have heard another time in this story.!? When Hector had sworn his oath, he finished arming his head and his hands and laced on his helmet. The maiden who was his beloved grieved so bitterly that nothing could console her, and the lady of Malehaut shut her in a chamber, so that the common people would not see her lamenting. Then Hector took leave of the king and came before the queen. He commended her to God, in full armor and wearing his helmet, so that she and the others would not see the tears that were falling from his eyes, and he knelt before her and begged her mercy for his maiden. The queen saw his distress and said in order to encourage him that he should not worry, for if he did well on this quest she promised him the company of the peers of the king’s household, “and in the meantime,” she added, “I retain you in my service.” Such [213] was the custom of King Arthur’s court, that no knight, however worthy, became one of the companions of his household until his prowess was made known by the companions themselves or by the king. And it often happened that when a knight’s prowess was attested to by strangers and his company was pleasing to the queen, she would retain him as part of her household until he had been proven to be of superior prowess. In this way was Sir Sagremor the Unruly retained when he first came to court. Hector was very pleased to be retained by the queen, and she herself led him to the knight with the broken arm, in order to learn where he had found the knight. He said he had found him beyond the River Severn, in the heaths of Breckham, which is the forest that lies between the 12See chapter 51, p. [37]. 170 duchy of Cambenic and the kingdom of North Wales. When Hector heard this, he knew well enough where that was, for he had heard of it many times, though he had never been there. Then he left the court, on a Tuesday between the hours of nones and vespers, and went as directly as he could toward the land of North Wales. Now the story leaves off speaking of him and his deeds and returns to speak of the queen and her company. 59. The Lady of Roestoc Learns the Identity of Her Champion.’ At this point the story relates that after Hector had left the court, the queen came back to the wounded knight and had his armor very carefully removed. This was very painful for him, for he fainted twice before the hauberk was taken from his back. The queen [214] did all she could to make him comfortable. She had the shield that the maiden had brought hung in her chamber so that she saw it every day, for she greatly delighted in seeing it, and she never went anywhere without its being borne before her and hung in her chamber at all times, until it was again made whole through the adventure which this story will recount later.” And then the maiden who had brought it left, for the queen could retain her no longer. Next the queen went to see Hector’s lady, in order to comfort her, and as soon as the maiden saw the queen she said to her that she wished that she, the queen, might be as joyful because of the person she most loved, before she died, as she herself was because of him whom she loved more than any other living being. The queen was badly frightened by this, and later there came a time when the maiden would have given anything not to have said what she did, for not long thereafter she was as distressed as she had been joyful, or even more so.? The day after Hector’s departure, at the hour of tierce, the lady of Roestoc was ready to return to her land and had come to take leave of the king and the queen. At the queen’s request the seneschal had left the wounded knight in her care, until he recovered, on condition that the knight would return to him after his recovery. The king ‘and the queen had tried to retain the lady a while longer, but that could not be, for her sorrow was too great, and it distressed her to see more people. [215] Thus she took leave of the king and the queen, but the queen and the lady of Malehaut persuaded the dwarf’s niece to remain with them so that she would hear news of Hector, for news and tales of adventures reached the court every day, and she would find more solace and company there than elsewhere. While the lady was taking her leave of the queen, there entered a squire, carrying a shield that was not completely whole, for both above and below the boss there were great 'Corresponds to Micha VIII:LIXa, Sommer III:308-309; Kennedy 407-409. *See chapter 70, p. [444]. 3This may be an announcement of the queen’s despair, when Lancelot is taken prisoner by the Saxons (chapter 70, p. [448]) and when he goes mad (chapter 71, pp. [455-456]). See Micha IX:[342-343] and Kennedy 2: 271. Lancelot, Part IT holes made by lances, and at both top and bottom it had been cut and sliced and broken apart until there was not a third of it left, and yet enough of the colors remained that it was still clearly recognizable, and it was a golden field with a red lion. The squire asked for news of the lady of Roestoc; she and the queen were pointed out to him, and he dismounted and came to the chamber. When the dwarf and the seneschal saw him enter, they said, “Look, my lady: upon my word, here is the shield of your knight, whom Hector has gone seeking.” When she saw it, all her blood drained away and she sat down, unable to remain standing. When the squire approached, there was not a member of the household who did not recognize him, and they ran to meet him and joyfully welcomed him. Then he asked which was the queen, and she was pointed out to him. The squire came before her, removed the shield, and knelt down. And the queen said, “Why, I believe I would be sure to recognize this shield,4 were it not in such poor condition.” “My lady,” said the squire, “I bring you very good news of [216] Sir Gawain, that he is hale and hearty.” Then the queen would let him say no more, but took the shield and embraced and kissed it and rejoiced over it as she would have done over the knight who had borne it. And the squire said to the lady of Roestoc, “My lady, Sir Helain of Channings greets you and informs you that you so urged him to become a knight that now he has done so by the hand of Sir Gawain, and that is who did battle for you against Segurade.” When she heard that her champion had been Sir Gawain, there was no sorrow greater than hers, and she said that she was certain she would never have any joy. Then she asked the squire how that had come about, and he told her the truth. “And here,” he said, “is his shield, and he left all his arms with my lord, and he took my lord’s arms in exchange.” At length the king heard what had happened and hurried there himself to hear the news, along with a great company of knights. You may be sure that the squire was as honored as he could possibly be. The king inquired about his nephew, and the squire told him that he was healthy and recovered from the wounds Segurade had given him, “for my lady,” he said, “who is very knowledgeable about wounds, healed him. And you,” he added, “my lady of Roestoc, will see as proof the tokens you gave him, for he gave them to my lady and became her knight because she had healed his wounds.” No one could tell you of the sorrow the lady felt in her heart, and she took her leave in great distress; the squire also took his leave. The king and the queen would gladly have [217] retained Sir Gawain’s shield, but the squire said that his lord had made him swear he would do everything in his power to bring it back, and if he did not he should take care never to return to him, for he would put him to death. For this reason the king let him take it away. The squire set out along with the lady, but she had the shield taken from him by force and said that Helain himself would 4teand they ran... 408.16—20. this shield” supplied from Kennedy Lancelot, Part IT pay for it, for he had hidden Sir Gawain from her, and he should not have done so, for he was her liegeman. And because of the shield and for other reasons, such quarrels later arose which gave rise to many evils. But now the story speaks no more of them and returns to Sir Gawain, about whom it has long been silent. 60. Gawain Helps to Heal His Brother Agravain. At this point the story tells us that when Sir Gawain had left the place where he had knighted Helain, he rode all day without finding any adventure worth recounting. That night, chance brought him to a monastery situated beside a small river at the edge of a small wood, and the place was called the Good Deed. That establishment had been a very ancient hermitage, and the Duke Escan of Cambenic had so greatly enlarged and improved it that at that time there was a convent of monks in regular habits, but they were not black monks, for at that time the black religion was not at all widespread in Great [218] Britain; rather at that time all who lived? according to religious rule were called “abstinents.” Sir Gawain spent the night in that establishment; he rose very early the next morning and rode® until chance brought him to a broad and beautiful heath. He looked to his right and saw a rich and beautiful city; it was called Cambenic, and straight ahead of him he saw the forest of which the story spoke previously,* which was named Breckham. That forest was fully sixty English leagues in length, and even where it was least wide it measured more than thirty, and it stretched from three leagues from Cambenic to the border of the kingdom of North Wales. In the middle of this forest there ran a very small and very deep river; it was the one beside which the Good Deed was situated, and that water separated two domains that were in that forest, that of the king of North Wales and that of the duke of Cambenic. The forest belonged completely to the king of North Wales, on” the side of his lands as far as the water, and on the side of Cambenic it all belonged to the duke, up to the water itself. As Sir Gawain was riding pensively along upon the heath, a little to his right he heard a woman’s voice, singing loudly and clearly. Sir Gawain turned in that direction and saw below him in a vale a maiden of great beauty; hanging from her neck she bore a sword, the scabbard of which was splendid and beautiful. He greeted her, and she replied as she went along, “God bless you, sir knight, if you have deserved it.” >Nothing in the remainder of the romance corresponds to this apparent announcement of things to come (Micha’s note, 217). 1Corresponds to Micha VIII:LXa; Sommer II:309-321; Kennedy 409-425. 2”hived,” as in note 1.a, Sommer 310.6, and Kennedy 409.30 (Micha has “came to religious rule”). 3”and rode” supplied from Kennedy 2: 273, variants. 4See chapter 58, p. [213]. 5Micha’s text contains a superfluous et, “and,” at this point. Had “I, my lady, how do you mean?” “Because,” she explained, “a maiden should not greet a knight, if he failed to help a maiden, yet came at a time and place [219] when she needed help.” “My lady, I won’t lose your greeting because of that, for I believe I have earned it.” “Then may God give you good fortune,” she said. Then the maiden fell silent, but kept on going. And Sir Gawain spoke to her as best he could, wishing to make her stop, and said, “I say, my lady, wait for me, for I wish to speak to you.” “I won’t, sir knight, for it would be a great outrage if I stopped to speak with you.” “And why is that?” he asked. “In truth,” she replied, “I’m going to the best knight alive, apart from one I know, and if I stopped to speak with you, for your sake I would be interrupting my quest for that good knight, and I don’t know what you are worth.” “My lady, by the devotion you owe the person you most love, who are these two worthy knights? Please tell me.” The maiden hesitated before speaking. “Tell me, if God is to grant you success in what you seek.” “You have asked me too insistently,” she said, “so I will tell you, if you dare to hear it.” “If I dare? I would dare little indeed, if I didn’t dare to hear what I very much want to hear.” “In God’s name,” she said, “it will soon be known. Follow me.” “Gladly,” he replied. She went on ahead and he behind, and they left the main road, followed a narrow path, and entered a thick, low forest; they kept on through that forest until they saw a great [220] tower and beside it a large house with a groundlevel entrance, and both the house and the tower were enclosed by a tall, thick bailey. And he asked the maiden when she would tell him who the two knights were. “You will find out,” she replied, “in that house there.” “And that sword, to whom are you carrying it?” “I’m carrying it to the knight I seek.” Then they approached the tower, and when they reached the gate, the maiden entered first and he followed. When he had passed through the gate, he saw an armored knight in the courtyard who cried out to him and said it was to his misfortune that he had entered there. Then he charged him, and Sir Gawain did likewise; they struck each other upon their shields. The knight’s lance splintered, and Sir Gawain struck him so hard that he bore him to the ground. When Sir Gawain turned to follow the maiden, who was heading toward the main hall, the knight was on his feet again, and was coming at great speed, sword in hand. He was so impatient to strike that he could not reach Sir Gawain, and the blow fell upon the horse’s neck, so that he cut right through it, and cut off a bit of the saddlebow, along with the base of the shield on the left side. The horse fell, and Sir Gawain was left standing straight on his two feet. He drew his sword and ran at the knight, saying to the maiden who was leaving, “My lady, tell me where I should follow you, for I won't stay here.” eZ Then the maiden said to him, “You will follow me to the most beautiful chamber, [221] the most splendid one can find, if you dare follow me there.” Then he turned toward the knight and struck him a mighty blow upon the top of his helmet, like a strong man who was sorrowful because he saw his horse lying dead. He so belabored him with his blows that the knight had to brace himself with one hand against the ground. When he tried to get up, Sir Gawain struck him again on the temple with the pommel of his sword, so that he stretched him out full length upon the ground. Then he tore off his helmet and threatened to cut off his head, saying that it was to the knight’s misfortune that he had made him so sorrowful. When Sir Gawain was about to cut off his head, he heard a maiden crying out; he looked up to a window and saw a maiden of great beauty, who said to him, “Sir knight, I will take charge of him.” “In that case, my lady, he need not be concerned, though he has bitterly upset and grievously wronged me.” Then he left the knight and went where he saw the other maiden going. When he was in the main hall, he saw another knight, larger than the first had been, fully armed and on foot. The knight lowered his lance, rushed with all speed, and struck Sir Gawain upon his shield so that the head and the shaft pierced it, but the blow went only as far as the hauberk. Then Sir Gawain struck with his sword and broke the lance, and came toward [222] the knight, who removed the guige from his neck and covered himself as best he could. But Sir Gawain struck him upon the left arm, between his body and his shield, wounding him so that he nearly cut his arm off. The knight dropped his shield and, not waiting for another blow, turned and fled toward another room, his arm dangling where it was cut halfway through. Sir Gawain followed him no farther, but, with the stump of the lance still sticking through his shield, went on to another room where it seemed to him he heard the maiden with the sword. But as soon as he entered there, two knights attacked him. He looked around and saw the maiden with the sword® and another beautiful maiden who cried out to him, “Ah, sir knight, win me!” “I will,” he replied, “most gladly.” Then he charged full speed at the knights and gave them a good fight: he struck the first upon the top of the helmet, for he was very ashamed to delay so long. He struck him so heavily that the skull cap’ was ruptured, and the blow struck the coif with such force that many of the links were driven into his head; the knight was so stunned and so exhausted that he staggered off against a wall. Then Sir Gawain went straight toward the beautiful maiden, who was seated in a chair. The other knight, meanwhile, kept striking him from behind, but Sir Gawain did not turn around at all, for he enjoyed looking at the maiden. But the knight struck and wounded him, and then Sir Gawain looked at him, and with his sword he struck him S«But ... attacked him” repositioned as in Kennedy 412.1920 (in Micha this sentence follows Gawain’s next reply, below); “He looked ... with the sword” supplied from Kennedy 412.20-21. 7The technical term is cervelliere; also called basinet, it was a small hemispherical skull cap (Broughton, helmet). Lancelot, Part IT backhand upon the noseguard so that he cut it completely off and fully half his nose, and knocked him to the ground, stunned. And he said to the maiden in [223] the chair, “My lady, how can I win you?” “How?” she asked. “God help me, you have already won me a little, I believe.” “Do not believe it,” he replied, “for if I haven’t yet done enough, I’ll do as much more as you wish, though I’ll do no more to these two, here, for they have no more need of my sword. My lady,” he said to the maiden with the sword, “you promised me that in this chamber I would learn the name of the good knight you seek and of the other who is better than he.” “Upon my word,” she said, “you are not in the most beautiful chamber of this house; it’s thereI am to tell you.” “My lady,” he said, “then go forward and I will follow you, wherever you may go, in order to learn the names of the two best knights in the world, but I would very much like to know whether I have won my lady here.” “Indeed,” replied the maiden with the sword, “you have not, but when you have been in the splendid chamber, then you will have won her.” Then the maiden turned and led the way and he followed, and they entered a beautiful great hall freshly strewn with reeds. In the middle of that hall was a bed completely covered with a splendid coverlet, and around it were as many as ten knights standing guard, completely armored except for their heads. As soon as they saw Sir Gawain, they all laced on their helmets, took up their swords and shields, and jumped up, for they had been seated. Sir Gawain prepared to defend himself and followed the maiden, who went straight to the bed and sat down on the floor in front of it. Then all the knights ran in front of Sir Gawain and cried out to him: [224] “Stop, sir knight: you won’t go there until you know how you should do so.” “How must I go there?” he asked. And the tallest of them all said that if he would do battle with all of them upon his return, he could go see what was beneath the coverlet, but he could not do so otherwise. “My lady,” said Sir Gawain, “when will I learn what I wish to know?” “You'll learn it when you have left here with honor.” ‘How is that to be done?” “No knight errant who enters here can leave with honor unless he has first seen what is beneath that coverlet.” “Upon my word,” he replied, “then I will see it.” Then the knights withdrew, and Sir Gawain went to the bed and lifted up the coverlet; beneath it he saw one of the most handsome and best proportioned knights in the world, but he had suffered so much that he could no longer speak, and could only lie on his back, for his left arm was so swollen and full of open wounds, and his right leg likewise, that he could not move in the slightest, and he stank so badly from the wounds that one could barely stand to remain in the room, when the coverlet was drawn back. “Oh, my God!” cried Sir Gawain, “what a misfortune for such a handsome knight as this one is, for I have never seen one better formed in every way.” Lancelot, Pari I “You would truly say® it was a misfortune,” said the maiden, “if you knew how great his prowess was.” Then she covered him up again, and the tall knight who had told Sir Gawain to go no farther said that he must do battle with all ten of the knights. “No, you will not,” said the maiden with the sword, “but [225] choose instead the tribute that the others pay.” “What payment, my lady?” “A helmet full of your blood.” “Cursed be whoever asked for the blood of a knight or a maiden,” he said, “for a knight owes no payment. I’d sooner fight, by God, with four times as many knights as there are here!” Then they all charged together, and he defended himself most valiantly. And the knight in the bed who had been sleeping awoke and, seeing before him the lady with the sword, said to her, “Ah, my lady, I had begged you to go where I told you, and you have returned.” “Indeed,” she replied, “for on the way I found a very valiant knight and brought him here, as I was instructed to do, and there he is, fighting.” Then he raised his head as much as he could bear and saw that Sir Gawain was giving them a marvelously good fight. They were fiercely attacking him, but he had killed one and wounded two others. But when he saw that he could not easily hold out, he feared an attack from behind. Then he withdrew backward toward a closed door, thinking that if he could get his back against it, he would have nothing to fear from the front, even if they were more numerous than they in fact were. When he had his back against the closed door, he defended himself so valiantly that the knight who was in the bed, though he could scarcely [226] speak, began to laugh. And the maiden with the sword asked him why he was laughing, and he replied, “Do you not see the wonder of those cowardly scoundrels who cannot defeat a single knight? Oh, God, what a misfortune!” Then he fell back upon the bed and began to weep. When Sir Gawain thought he was safe from attack from behind, a maiden—the one he had seen seated in the chair—opened the door. And when the knights saw this, they all leapt at him just as before. She seized Sir Gawain by the right hand and tried to take away his sword; he said to her, “My lady, let go my sword, for you see I am in mortal danger here.” “You let go your sword,” she said, “for I wish to have it.” Then she made it look to the knights as if he were giving her the sword, and they rushed upon Sir Gawain and struck him anew upon the helmet and shoulders, yet they were careful not to strike the maiden. She kept hold of Sir Gawain’s hand and refused to let go, no matter what he said, and he did not wish to hurt her. He felt that the knights were injuring him, so he abandoned the sword to the maiden and exerted all his effort; he struck one of them with arm and body so hard that he bore him to the ground and the sword flew from his hand. He grabbed it and ran at all the others, and it seemed to them that he was stronger and more vigorous than he had been at the 8"You would say” supplied from Kennedy 414.11. °Translation suggested by Kennedy 2: 275. 17 beginning, and yet they had greatly injured and wounded him. Then the maiden returned and again took him by the arm in order to take away his sword, and he said, “Ah, my lady, I certainly didn’t win [227] much of an advantage in you, I believe!” Nevertheless, he abandoned his sword to her and went toward the knights.!° He took the shield by the straps in his right hand and struck the largest and strongest of the knights, who held the finest sword, full in the face; he knocked him to the ground and the knight lost consciousness, for he had completely crushed the noseguard and driven it into his face. He tore the sword from his hand and said to the maiden, “My lady, for God’s sake let me keep this one, and I will very soon give you all of theirs, if you wish to have them.” Then she began to laugh.!! “Stop, sir knight,” she said, “you are my prisoner.” Then she seized his hand and told the knights to withdraw. “For God's sake,” he cried, “let me go! You can see for yourself that only four of them are still fit to fight.” But she led him away to the chamber from which she had come, and told him he would have to free himself by payment of ransom. And he said, “What is to be the payment?” “That which the knights asked of you.” “The blood?” “Precisely.” “God help me if I don’t prefer to die,” he exclaimed, “for that payment would forever be held against me.” “Then you will never leave my prison,” she replied. “Upon my word, I don’t know what I will do, but I’ll never leave by means of that ransom.” “God help me,” she said, “I’ll never hold you in prison for this, for you are too fine a knight, rather, I release you from this imprisonment, and I’ll tell you why they ask for the blood. That knight is gravely ill, as you have seen, and he will never be healed until the best knight save one has anointed his leg with his blood, and the [228] other who is better has anointed his arm, and then he will be completely hale and hearty. And it would be a great honor for you, if he were healed by your blood, for you would have both honor and charity: honor because you would be the best knight in the world, and charity because he would be healed by!? you, and he would be forever indebted to you for his life.” “I would be glad if this were true and it were already done,” replied Sir Gawain, “but I know very well that I’m not the best knight in the world and that there are many better ones. But since you have put me to the test, I am willing, for the knight’s recovery won’t be delayed by me.” Then the maiden stood up, and squires and servingmaidens came and took off his helmet and unlaced one of his chausses, the right one, as the maiden instructed them. She gave him the sword,!3 and he struck himself in the 10>, nights,” as in Kennedy 415.27 (Micha has “knight”). Waugh: as in Kennedy 415.34 (Micha has “say”). Leb as in Sommer 315.2 and Kennedy 416.21 (Micha has “for”). 13Presumably the third sword used by Gawain in his battle against the ten knights, taken from the largest and strongest of his adversaries (Micha IX:[343]). IE: thigh so that the blood gushed out abundantly, until the maiden said, “That is enough.” Then the maiden with the sword came in, and he asked her to keep her part of their compact; she replied that he would soon learn the answer, provided the knight was anointed with his blood. Then came a very young squire, very handsome; when he heard Sir Gawain speak, he thought he had seen him on another occasion, but he did not recognize him, since there was only one window open in the chamber, and it was very dim. [229] Then the squire ran to open all the others. Sir Gawain looked, and saw that it was the most beautiful and the most splendid chamber he had ever been in and that the maiden who had brought him there was far more beautiful than he had thought. The maiden'* then had Sir Gawain’s armor completely removed, in order to éxamine his wounds, for he was badly injured. When the youth saw his wounds, he turned away, grieving as bitterly as any man could ever grieve; he continued thus until he came before the knight who was lying in the bed: they were anointing his leg with blood while he slept. When the youth entered, they motioned him to go away, for the knight was resting. He went to another chamber and fell down upon a bed and wept and cried and wrung his hands and tore all his clothes. The maiden of the chair most gently examined Sir Gawain’s wounds, and after some time the knight awoke and heaved a great sigh. And when he heard the youth weeping in the other room, he was frightened and deeply concerned about what might be wrong. He tried to get out of bed and felt that his leg was completely healed; he exclaimed, “Thank God, my leg is completely healed!” He rose and went to the chamber where the youth was weeping, his arm held against his chest, and found the youth tearing his hair and his clothing. And when the youth saw his lord before him, he neither moved nor left off his grieving. “What is this, you bastard,” said the lord, “what are you grieving about? Don’t you see [230] that I have been healed?” “Indeed,” he replied, “I don’t care, because for that good I see a greater ill.” “And what is that?” asked the knight. “Ah, noble man,” he replied, “in there they have mortally wounded Sir Gawain, your brother and mine.” “Gawain?” he exclaimed. And thereupon his grief was so great that he fainted. His people quickly gathered around him and helped him up. The maiden of the chair had come running to him, because she had heard that he was healed. But when she saw him unconscious, she was very distressed, for she loved no one else as much as she loved him, and she took him in her arms. When he regained consciousness, he asked who had mortally wounded his brother. And she asked who this brother was, and he replied, “Gawain.” “What?” she exclaimed. “Is he here?” “Yes, Mordred said so.” \ M4This is the maiden who originally appeared seated in the chair, p. [222] (Micha’s note, p. [229]). Lancelot, Part IT “Alas! I suspected as much. Truly he is the finest knight in the world, and you have been healed by him.” And she told him how. “But,” she added, “he has no mortal wound; he should get well.” “Take me quickly where he is."!5 They were about to help him stand, as they were used to doing. “Leave me alone,” he said, “for I am completely healed.” Then he headed for the chainber where Sir Gawain lay. When Sir Gawain saw him, he rose to meet him and saw that this was the knight who had been in the bed, but he did not recognize him as Agravain, for he was thin and pale. Agravain threw his good arm around him and said, “Ah, my dear brother, you are welcome, you who have healed my leg.” Then Sir Gawain recognized him by his speech and kissed him, and they so rejoiced and sorrowed over one another [231] that they both fainted, and Sir Gawain nearly died!® from grief and joy. ‘Dear brother,” said Sir Gawain, “where did you get this injury?” ‘T’ll tell you,” said Agravain. “It so happened that you had left the last gathering where the peace was made between my lord King Arthur and Galehaut, and I had left you at Carduel, ill.!” I set out for this land, to see this lady here,” he said, speaking of!8 the maiden of the chair, “for I love her more than any other being. As I set out on my way, I met a knight who was urgently coming in search of me, with the message from my lady that, in the name of my love for her, I should come to her rescue, for her father Tradelmant, the king of North Wales, had given her toa knight whom she did not wish to have. So I came and managed to win her for myself. “Shortly after that, I was in a forest near here; I had been hunting all day until it was close to midday, and I was very hot. I had taken two large roe deer and had sent them on ahead with my brother Mordred and one of my squires, !9 and I had lain down in my under-tunic in the shade of a sycamore, on the grass beside [232] a spring. August had already begun and it was very hot; I had with me just a single squire who held my horse, and he had lain down beside a bush nearby. I fell asleep because of the heat and my fatigue. And while I slept, two maidens came riding on two palfreys, and each of them held a box in her hand, as the squire who saw them told me; he thought it was my lady and one of her maidens. “The maidens rode up to me and dismounted, and one of them put a pillow beneath my head which kept me 15“he should ... where he is” supplied from note 19.a and Kennedy 418.3—4. 16This hyperbolic usage is explained by Micha (IX: [343]) as “expressing Gawain’s state of exaltation.” Cf. Kennedy, Glossary: “despair, grieve bitterly, be overcome.” I/This would seem to refer to chapter 54, pp. [133] and following: the king is at Carduel and Gawain is described as largely recovered from his wounds. Agravain’s departure is not mentioned. 18«he said, speaking of,” as in note 20.c and Kennedy 418.20— 21 (Micha has “and that is she of the chair”). «and had sent... squires,” as in note 21.b and Kennedy 418.30-31 (Micha has “and I was coming from there before my brother Mordred”). Lancelot, Part IT asleep; then she anointed my leg—I don’t know with what—and the other my left arm. And when they left, passing by the bush where my squire was, they said: ‘Oh, our vengeance is too cruel,”° since we haven’t provided for his possible cure.’ ‘God help me,’ said the other, ‘I stipulate that for his arm he will suffer until he is anointed with the blood of the best knight presently alive.’ ‘And I,’ said the other, ‘have decided that he won’t be cured until he has washed his leg with the blood of the second best knight. You may be sure that he will have long to wait, for there are few people now in the world who could choose the two best.’ “Then they rode quickly into the wood; my squire heard no more of them, and he was certain they were from some other land. He came to me very frightened and tried to wake me up, but I would never have awakened if that pillow had stayed beneath my head. He paid it no attention, but shoved me so that my head fell from the pillow. [233] I awoke, and my leg and my arm felt just as they did this morning. For all the world I could not have mounted my horse: my squire had to come back here and get a litter on which I was brought back. And as I was coming, with my head resting on the pillow, a fully-armed knight came along, drew alongside the litter, and snatched the pillow from under my head so violently that he injured me. Thus I returned, ill. Now I’ve told you all about my illness.” “My lord, my lord,” said the maiden, “didn’t I tell you to send for your brother Sir Gawain? For he is the worthiest knight in the world, but you said there were many who were more worthy than he. It is no thanks to you that you didn’t lose your leg, because you thought the squire had told you a lie.” Agravain spoke not a word and was deeply ashamed, for it seemed to him that he had scorned his brother. “And this house,” said Sir Gawain, “whose is it?” “It is mine,” replied Agravain; “the duke of Cambenic gave it to me. He recently conquered it from the king of North Wales, who had established it as a fortress in this land.”*! [234] Then the maiden began to smile, and Sir Gawain asked and adjured her, in the name of the thing she most loved in this world, to tell him why she was smiling. “I’m smiling,” she said, “because of the follies of the world. I have a younger sister?* who has sworn that she would surrender her virginity to no one but you. My father has no other children than us two, and he has kept her so close out of fear of you that no one can see her.” “God help me,” said Sir Gawain, “he keeps her far away, and I have much else to do. And yet if I could find the occasion, I would very much like to see her, if that were possible. My lady,” he said to the maiden with the sword, “tell me who the two knights are whom you promised to name for me in this chamber.” “My lord,” she replied, “it is clear that you are one of them “And the other,” said Sir Gawain, “who is he?” 20«cruel,” as in note 22.a and Kennedy 419.5 (Micha has “we have avenged ourselves too hastily”). 2lThe origins of this war are recounted in chapter 63, p. [330]. 22Foreshadowing of chapter 64, pp. [379-382]. 1s And she said that it was he who carried the day in the battle between King Arthur and Galehaut, “but I don’t know his name. And my lord?? sent the sword I carried to you first of all, for I was on my way to court to see you when I met you and brought you here, because my heart told me it would be wise to do so.” Then the maiden gave him the sword; he took it and drew it and found that it was very beautiful. And Agravain said to him, “My lord, if the sword is as the writings [235] attest,24 it is good for a young knight who is not yet tested, but is not nearly so good for a proven knight. That is what the writings say: it will only become less good, yet he who wears it will improve. When it was sent to me and I learned its nature, I thought that no one would make better use of it than you, and I sent it to you.” “Indeed,” said Sir Gawain, “and I believe I can make good use of it by giving it to a lively young knight whose improvement I would very much like.” “My lord,” said Agravain’s lady, “place it with care, for it comes from a good source, that is from my sister who sent it to your brother, so that he might recommend it to you.” “Indeed, I will do so. And concerning the knight who triumphed in the tournament, I tell you truly and without any doubt that he is the best knight I ever saw, and I set out in search of him over a month ago, as part of a group of twenty knights.” And he named them for Agravain. “Ah, my lord,” said Agravain, “where do you think he is?” ‘I know where he is,” he replied, “but I can’t reveal it without perjuring myself.*° If I can find him, I’ll bring him here. Know that he is Lancelot of the Lake, the son of King Ban of Benoic.” Great was the rejoicing of the two brothers; they spent all day talking until night had fallen, and then they went to bed. In the morning Sir Gawain arose very early. When he had put on his armor, he went to take his leave, and Agravain ordered a good charger to be brought to him [236] to replace his, which had been killed. When he was about to leave, Sir Gawain asked him why he was guarded by so many knights and where they all were from. He replied that they were in the service of his lady, for when her father had wanted to marry her off he had shared his land with her and had ordered the knights he had assigned to her land to pay homage. They had come to her to swear their oaths, “and they had the idea,” he went on, “that they would have a spy on that main road up there, to bring knights here, until some exceptional knight came along through whom I might be healed. And it happened that you are the first one who ever did.” “And those who inflicted the malady upon you,” said Sir Gawain, “do you have any idea who they were?” “Indeed I don’t, except that I fought against a knight and wounded him in one arm. And a maiden arrived who was, I believe, his lady, and she told me that if I lived another year I would never joke about it. 23«my lord” refers to Agravain (Micha IX:[344]). 24Punctuated as in Kennedy 420.19 (Micha places a colon here). 25See chapter 54, p. [141]. 176 ‘T’ll tell you who I think the other was. This year I was wandering in search of adventure in the forest of Fair Heath, and met a maiden of great beauty and a knight who was following her. I took her by the reins and was about to lead her away, as soon as I saw that she had an escort. The knight tried to take her away from me, so we fought together, and in the end I defeated him. “Then I took the maiden and led her far away, until I came to a large thicket; I dismounted, said I wanted to have her, and set her down from her palfrey. She tried to defend herself, but I sat down beside her, took off my helmet, and despite her efforts uncovered her right leg up to the thigh. She complained bitterly [237] and defended herself as well as she could. But when I was about to take her, I saw that her leg, up to the thick part of the thigh, was so badly covered with scabs that I doubt anyone ever saw a worse case. “I told her that she would be sorry she had rebuffed me, and that even if I were crippled I would no more touch her than I would a leper. Then I turned away and wished dishonor on any knight who lay with her, and she said that if I lived a year I would be willing to give anything not to have my leg uglier or worse infected than hers. So I tell you that I believe I can only have acquired this infirmity from those two.” Sir Gawain replied that that could well be and that it was a very ugly thing for a knight to be haughty and illtempered, for every evil comes from that, and Agravain was one of the most haughty and the least compassionate knights of his time. When his horse was brought to him, Sir Gawain took his leave, mounted, hung from the saddlebow the sword which the maiden was to have brought him, and set out on his way. The maiden who had brought him there also mounted and escorted him back to the spot from which she had brought him; she commended him to God, that He might protect him from evil, and he in turn commended her to God. Then Sir Gawain went on, and rode all morning until the hour of tierce. Then he entered the deepest part of the forest of Breckham and followed the [238] main road until he came upon a large, broad heath. In the middle he saw before him two newly planted stakes covered top to bottom with pegs to form a lance-rack, and they were completely laden with sturdy lances; nearby there hung a red shield. When he drew near he saw a knight seated beneath one of the posts, completely armed except for his helmet. As he watched, beneath a tree, he saw someone blowing a horn; immediately the knight leapt up, laced on his helmet, and hung the red shield around his neck; he mounted a large horse and, bearing his arms most becomingly, he charged full speed at Sir Gawain. Sir Gawain did likewise: they struck each other’s shield with all the speed their horses could manage, so that their lances flew to pieces. Sir Gawain drew his sword and was about to attack, but the knight said, “Sir knight, we will take up our swords in good time, but there was never a better means than jousting to demonstrate one’s prowess. By the allegiance you owe the person you most love, let’s joust with the lances you see there until one of us falls or they are all broken.” Lancelot, Part IT Sir Gawain replied that he would be too long delayed and that he had elsewhere to go. “By the faith you owe to God, do it!” And he accepted. [239] Then both of them went to the post, and each took a lance to his liking. They charged each other and splintered their lances one after another, and each time the knight tried to strike Sir Gawain in the throat. Then they came to the fifth joust. Sir Gawain rode off a stone’s throw across the heath. He struck his spurs, and his horse° came on so fast that it made a noise like thunder. The speed of their horses and their own strength brought them together with such violence that their lances splintered and shattered right up to their hands. And as they went onward, Sir Gawain struck his opponent with his body, his shield, and his helmet, so violently that it seemed to him his eyes would leap from his head. Gawain tore him from the saddle and knocked him over the horse’s rump to the ground so that both reins remained in his left hand, and in his fall the knight’s arm was shattered inside his shield and he lost consciousness. Then Sir Gawain dismounted, drew his sword, and ran at his opponent. But the man made no effort to get up, and lay unconscious a long time. When he finally regained consciousness, he complained bitterly [240] and got to his feet. And Sir Gawain came at him again and told him that he would strike him if he did not defend himself; the man told him to go ahead, for he had no strength to defend himself. “You won’t go free in this way,” said Sir Gawain, “for ll kill you, unless you declare yourself defeated.” The other did so, for he had no choice. “Now give me your word,” said Sir Gawain, “that you will constitute yourself a prisoner, wherever I wish.” And he gave his word. Then Sir Gawain told him that on his honor he must go, first of all and without delay, to King Arthur’s court, “and greet the queen in the name of a knight to whom she rendered half a service,?’ though it might have been a whole one, had she wished. And tell her,” he added, “that if I had the chance, I’d give her half a repayment. And take care, on your word of honor, not to ask my name, for I don’t want you to know anything more. But when you have delivered my message, then go to the seneschal of Roestoc to constitute yourself a prisoner, and tell the lady of Roestoc that if I forgot her in a time of need as she forgot me, neither she nor anyone else should blame me for it. And tell her that Iam he who defeated Segurade.” Then he took the sword that hung from the saddlebow, held it out to the knight, and told him to give it to Hector on his behalf and to tell him that he was deeply grateful to the seneschal and to him for having served as his squires in the battle. This was the knight who spoke to the queen and to the lady of Roestoc together at QuimperCorentin, [241] the day Hector set out in search of Sir 26his horse,” as in note 32.b and Kennedy 423.4 (Micha has “he”) , 27This is a second reference to chapter 54, p. [141]; the first was in chapter 58, p. [205]. Lancelot, Part IT Gawain. And he entrusted him with a message, just as the story related in the passage where he spoke to the queen.”® Next Sir Gawain had him bind the sword to his arm, as a splint, for he knew more of such things than anyone else, having often dressed wounds, sometimes his own and sometimes those of others. He bound his arm and treated him most gently. When he had taken care of him, he asked him why he had placed those posts there and brought those lances, and he replied, “My lord, I am in love with a highborn lady of this land and had often sought her love while I was a squire. But she said that never in her life would she love a squire, for she was a lady and would lose her position. So I immediately got myself knighted, less than a year ago. Then I again begged her for her love, and she told me she didn’t yet know I was a knight, but once she had heard from other knights that I had accomplished knightly deeds, then it would be quite right for her to love me. So I endeavored to prove myself until I might please her, and I was so successful that she was much kinder toward me than she had been before and warmly welcomed me. “Then I sought her love and she said she would give me her love provided that for one month I would guard the Heath of the Seven Roads, which is this heath, and do battle with all the knights who passed; when I had [242] guarded it for a month without being defeated, she would be mine just as I wished. That’s why I had set up these posts here and brought these lances, for I was considered the best jouster in this land. Now you know why.” “What?” exclaimed Sir Gawain, “is this then the Heath of the Seven Roads?” “Yes, my lord, without a doubt. Here is the entrance to all the wonders of this forest, at the edge of this heath.” “And could you set me on the road to North Wales?” “Yes, my lord,” said the knight, “most readily.” Then Sir Gawain helped him to mount, and the knight led him to the Crossing of the Seven Roads; when they reached the crossing they met the maiden who was going to King Arthur’s court with the split shield.?9 Sir Gawain asked her where she was going, and she replied she was going to Queen Guenevere. “To her, my lady?” asked the wounded knight. “I’m going there too and will keep you company, if you wish; I myself would have great need of company and solace.” And she replied that his company was very pleasing to her. Then Sir Gawain asked the maiden about the meaning of this shield and why she was carrying it, and she said that it could not matter to him, for it was no business of his, “for if it were, and you had to follow the adventure of the shield, you wouldn’t bear it for all of Britain.” “My lady,” he replied, “that may well be, but nevertheless I’d like to know the answer, by your leave: I beg you to tell me.” “You won’t learn it for [243] a long time,” she replied, “unless you come to hear it at King Arthur’s court.” “I wouldn’t willingly return there,” said Sir Gawain, “so I must endure not knowing.” 28Sce chapter 58, the action of which takes place at QuimperCorentin. 2 See chapter 58, pp. [204] and following. 177 Then he set out on the road that the knight had indicated, and the wounded knight went on his way, accompanied by the maiden with the shield. But now the story speaks no more of Sir Gawain or of them, and returns to speak of Hector, who had set out in quest of Sir Gawain. 61. Hector’s Adventures During His Quest for Gawain’ At this point the story relates that Hector rode along without finding any adventure worth recounting, until he crossed the River Severn and rode straight on toward the Heath of the Crossroads, for he had once been squire at a great tournament there. But before he arrived there, it happened that he was riding along through the forest, lost in thought. It was already around the hour of tierce and a very beautiful morning, and all the while he was in a reverie like that of a man in love with a lady, when he came upon a maiden who had dismounted from her palfrey beneath an oak. She was lamenting, and upon her lap she held a knight,* badly wounded in both thighs by a long-bladed sword and by blows to the head and to the left shoulder. With them was a squire who was holding the stump of a lance; the maiden and the squire were grieving most bitterly, for they believed the knight was dying. Hector was riding along deep in thought, and they were right in the road; his horse came so close to them that it nearly [244] stepped on the wounded knight. “Ah, sir knight,” said the maiden, “you’re not as courtly as you should be, for you nearly trampled this knight, who may be as noble as you or more so.” But Hector did not hear her, and the squire said, “He is asleep, God forsake him!” and he swore that if his lord were not injured he would knock him off his horse. Then he raised the stump of the lance he was holding and struck Hector’s horse in the middle of the forehead so that the lance flew to bits; then he seized the reins and pulled back so that the knight nearly fell to the ground. Then Hector came out of his reverie, saw the wickedlooking squire, and said to himself that he was sorry his neck was not broken. “And why did you do that, good sir?” Hector asked. “Why?” said the squire, and he began to swear wildly. “The living devils had put you to sleep, so that you nearly crushed a dying knight here, and with him that maiden who is holding him. The devils make you go about like a knight, and all you do is sleep!” When he heard this, he felt he had behaved most ignobly; he went over to the maiden and begged her to forgive him, “because,” he said, “I was thinking of the [245] creature I most love in all the world, and I am impatient to see her again. I beg you to forgive my action, on condition that I may be your knight the first time you need one.” Hearing what she wished to hear, she told him she would gladly forgive him on such a condition, if he gave his 1Corresponds to Micha VIIJ:LXIa; Sommer III:321-357; Kennedy 425-472. 2He will be identified only much later in this chapter, as Ladomas, p. [317]. 178 solemn pledge to keep the bargain. So he swore to it on his honor as a knight. Then the maiden asked him where he was going, and he replied that he wished to reach the Heath of the Crossroads of the forest of Breckham, as he had promised,® “but I don’t know the way,” he said, “for I was there only once* and have not been there for a long time, and I must follow a most unpleasant path to get there.” “Ah,” said the maiden, “I could certainly lead you there, if you dared escort me, for I would have much to do there.” “If I should dare?” he replied. “There is nowhere under heaven where I would not dare lead you, so that I would be with you in every difficulty, and that’s how I will escort you, if you wish.” “Many thanks,” said the maiden. “In that case I’ll go with you.” Then she summoned the squire, laid the knight upon his lap, and whispered in his ear, but Hector did not hear what she said. Then he helped her mount her palfrey and he mounted as well. They went off together and rode all day until the hour of nones, when they came to the river that divides the forest of Breckham, as the story related heretofore.> Then Hector was astonished that they were already so far, when he thought they were still far from the water and did not [246] expect to pass that way at all. It seemed to him that the maiden was causing him to deviate from his direct route, and so she was, without a doubt; at last he told her so, but she swore she would take him to his destination and told him not to worry. “My lady,” he said, “I don’t know what you have in mind, but don’t throw me off my direct route in order to avoid some adventure, for I wouldn’t be grateful to you if you did.” “I won’t,” the maiden replied; “have no fear.” At that point they entered a lovely meadow, and Hector asked the maiden who it was who had wounded the knight she had been holding, and she told him. “My lord,” she said, “there is near here a most cruel and wicked knight,® who believes he is one of the best knights in the world, so arrogant is he. The knight I was holding is his cousin and my beloved, for he is the creature I most love in all the world. One day it happened that this knight I mentioned, who is so evil, had gone into the woods fully armed, for he dared not go there otherwise, because he had been in the war between the king of North Wales and the duke of Cambenic. “My beloved came to the pavilion where this knight’s lady was asleep, and he lay down beside her, intending no harm. Shortly thereafter, her beloved arrived and said that he had been told another time that my beloved had lain with his lady—though he had never thought of doing such 3Cf. Hector’s oath, chapter 58, p. [212]. 4This statement is at variance with what was said on the subject in chapter 58, p. [213], that he knew where it was but that he had never been there. >See chapter 60, p. [218]. 5He will be identified as Guinas on p. [255]. Lancelot, Part IT a thing.’ But when he found him with [247] his lady, he wounded him just as you saw, without issuing any challenge.” “Truly,” said Hector, “he wounded him evilly and treacherously.” So they rode along until they saw a beautiful pavilion. When they approached, they saw before it a knight whose iron chausses were being laced on; inside, a maiden was wailing so loudly that she could be heard from far away. The maiden said to Hector, “My lord, there is the knight who wounded my beloved, and I’m sure he will want to cause me grief. I’ll turn back, unless your company can protect me.” “Are you afraid of anyone other than him?” “No, my lord, for I’m sure none of his companions hates me.” “Then have no fear, for with God’s help I believe I can protect you from him.” “My lord, many thanks.” “Now ride on,” he said, “for I would gladly find an opportunity to attack him. But who can that be who is wailing so loudly?” “My lord, I believe it is his beloved, one of the most beautiful and most worthy maidens in the world, but I wonder why she is wailing so.” Then they rode up to the knight who was being armed, and Hector, without greeting him, asked him why the maiden was weeping. “What business is it of yours?” asked [248] the knight. “I would like to find out,” said Hector. “Well, you won’t find out anything,” he replied. “Oh, sir,” said Hector, “tell me out of generosity.” “God help me, that’s just what you've found!® You will certainly not learn the answer today, whatever power you may have, you and the slut you've brought along with you.” “Come now, sir knight,” said Hector, “you insult me and do yourself no honor, for when a knight speaks ill of a strange knight who comes upon him, he harms himself more than the stranger, and I am more grieved for this maiden of whom you speak ill than I am for myself.” “By God, I speak the truth.” “On the contrary,” said the maiden, “you are lying. # When he heard her contradict him, he was angry and turned all red; he jumped up from the stool on which he sat and was about to throw himself at the maiden. But Hector stepped between them and said that the maiden was in his company, “and you would have too little esteem for me if you beat her in front of me, when I am fully armed. You have armed only your legs: you would be able to avenge yourself much better if you were fully armed.” “Hal” he cried, “why should I arm myself for you? Indeed, if I had only my shield at my neck, I’d throw her into a latrine and hang her up by the hair in one of those oaks, and I wouldn’t desist for you any more than for a boy.” [249] 7“never ... sucha thing,” as in note 6.a and Kennedy 427.25 (Micha has “never thought any good of it”). 8An ironic comment, according to both Micha IX:[345] and Kennedy 2: 283. I have followed Kennedy 428.16 in attributing it to the other knight, rather than to Hector. Lancelot, Part IT “She’s no longer afraid of you,” said Hector. “Are you, my lady?” “Certainly not,” she replied. “I have no esteem or love for him, but would wish him to be disgraced, for he has fully deserved it from both God and man, because he is the most treacherous and disloyal knight you ever saw.” When the knight heard this, he was furious and threw himself right past Hector to seize her by the hair. “Alas!” said the maiden to Hector, “I believe you will be but poor protection for me today!” But Hector stuck his horse with his spurs, and struck the knight with the horse’s chest so that he laid him out full length upon the ground, rode over him, and said that if there were no dishonor, he could be sure that he would see that the knight would never touch another woman without remembering both this maiden and also her beloved, on whose account he had caused her much anguish. When the knight got up, he was furious and said that Hector would be sorry he ever thought so, that Hector would never lie in a bed as long as his opponent lived, and that he would hang the maiden. “Now go put on your armor,” said Hector, “and if the maiden has wronged you in any way, take your revenge on me, for you can have it, if you can win it from me.” “God help me, that I should deign to put on armor for you. "9 [250] Then he ordered one of his squires to bring him his horse and his helmet, and the squire, who feared him more than death itself, gave them to him. When he had laced on his helmet, he jumped onto his horse, took up one of his shields, and girded on a sword, then took a lance and rode off across the field, as did Hector, most eager for the joust. They charged each other as fast as their horses could go and struck each other upon their shields. The knight's lance shattered, and Hector struck him so violently that he made his own lance bend back upon the cross-bars of the boss; it did not shatter, but bore his opponent to the ground. And this was with the butt end: he did not wish to turn the point upon him, because the knight wore no armor, and Hector was afraid of incurring dishonor if he wounded or killed him in that condition. When the knight tried to get up again, Hector took aim at his helmet and struck him with the flat of his sword so that he laid him out again, and he struck the top of his shield so that he split it for at least half a foot and nearly cut off his left arm. Then the knight withdrew his arm from the straps, leaving Hector’s sword lodged in the shield, drew his sword, and struck Hector a two-handed blow. Since Hector could not use his own sword, he jumped to the ground; as soon as the knight saw this, he ran into the pavilion. Hector tore his sword from the other’s shield, ran after him, and told him he was a dead man. The knight removed his helmet and sword and flung them down, but Hector said that that would not avail him and that he would kill him, if he did not declare himself defeated. 9At this point, the discourteous knight begins using tu, the familiar form of the personal pronoun, in addressing Hector. Hector begins using the same form of address in his first speech on p. [251]. The knight reverts to formal usage at the top of p. [253] and Hector does likewise in his first speech on p. [255]. di/9 The unarmed knight, fearing death, said, “I declare it like a man unarmed, and you'll have whatever honor you deserve thereby. But if you would let me arm and agree to wait for me and to fight [251] me, then I'd say you are a knight and then the honor would be yours, if you defeated me.” “I will do so,” said Hector, “provided you first tell me why that maiden is weeping.” ‘T’ll tell you,” he said. “It is because from this day on, I will never enter any place where she may be, for I have found her guilty of improper conduct.” “Then is that why you wounded the knight without a challenge, the knight who was your cousin and the beloved of that maiden there?” “That is she, without a doubt, but I didn’t wound him without a challenge, for he was challenged right where he wronged me. And is he still alive?” “Yes,” replied Hector. “That truly grieves me, for he betrayed me.” Then the knight asked for his armor and it was brought to him. And Hector came to the maiden, who was very sorrowful that he was allowing the other to arm, “Truly,” she said, “if he got the better of you as you did of him, he would kill you and would show no mercy.” “Now don’t worry, for with God’s help I’ll be as well off tonight as I was today, and with greater honor: I couldn’t kill or defeat him here and now, except to my dishonor, and an armed knight who kills an unarmed one has lost all law and justice and is dishonored in every court, unless he does so in self-defense.” While Hector and the maiden were speaking, the knight came out, fully armed and behaving most arrogantly, and he threatened Hector and the maiden. Hector advanced and said that if he wanted to make amends for the injury he had done to the knight and to the maiden whom he, Hector, had [252] brought there, he would forgo the battle; but the knight replied that if Hector was willing to renounce it, he himself was not, for never in his life would he be happy until he had avenged himself upon Hector, and he told him to be on his guard, since now he was fully armed. Then Hector mounted his horse and took a stout lance, and the two resumed their jousting. And Hector unhorsed the other knight again, just as easily as he had done before; then he dismounted, for it was shameful for him to pursue on horseback a man who was on foot. So they went back to fighting with their swords, and the combat was fierce. The maiden who had guided Hector rode back into the thickest part of the woods, so that she could flee if things went badly for Hector; if he defeated the knight, she would speedily return. Hector and the knight fought long and fiercely, until at last Hector brought him to defeat and he could hold out no longer. Hector tore off the knight’s helmet and threatened to cut off his head. Then the maiden who had charged into the wood came back as fast as her palfrey could go, and cried to Hector to cut off the knight’s head. The knight, on the other hand, was begging for mercy, but Hector told him he 180 would have no mercy but whatever the maiden was willing to grant, for he was her knight. “Alas,” he cried, “then Ill die, for she hates me because of her beloved, and I do believe [253] I was mistaken about him and that he was not guilty of what I suspected him of because of my lady. And I believe it is for that reason that things have gone badly for me, and I am ready to do whatever you wish and I beg your mercy; I never wronged you so greatly that you should not show me mercy. Take my sword.” The maiden told him not to take it, and Hector repeated that he would do nothing but what the maiden wanted. When the knight heard this, he feared for his life, and he fell at Hector’s feet. The maiden of the pavilion, when she saw her lover in such peril, did not know what to do, for she loved him above all men; if her sorrow had been great, now it grew worse. The knight was still on his knees before Hector; Hector asked the maiden what he was to do with him, and she replied, “My lord, do with him as you please, but as you have solemnly promised me, avenge the dishonor of my beloved.” Then Hector said that he would cut off the knight’s head. “In God’s name,” said the knight, “do so!” Then Hector turned down the knight’s ventail, and the maiden of the pavilion rushed out, fell at Hector’s feet, and begged him not to kill her lover. So Hector told them to go beg the maiden’s mercy, and they immediately did so. When she saw them, she began to weep because of the other maiden, whom she dearly loved, and said to Hector, “My lord, do as you will in this; I grant it, for you have fought very well.” Then Hector said the knight would have to constitute himself a prisoner wherever he, Hector, wished, and the other did so, on his honor as a knight. Then Hector told him that on his honor he was to go to the knight he had wounded and do absolutely whatever he was told, [254] and to abandon his wrath toward his lady. The knight said he would do so and that he loved no one else as much as her. Then Hector mounted, for he still had much to do, and told the knight to do likewise, for he wanted the knight to accompany him as far as a church or a chapel where he would swear to keep his agreement. So he mounted, and rode with Hector and the wounded knight’s lady and two squires, until they came to a hermitage. Hector said to the maiden whom he had accompanied, “My lady, take me straight to the Heath of the Crossroads.” “Upon my word,” said the knight, “you certainly didn’t come by a direct route.” ‘Don’t be concerned,” said the maiden, “T’ll certainly take you there.” At the hermit’s chapel, Hector had the knight swear upon relics that, without fail and without hesitation, he would do whatever he was asked by the knight he had wounded. After the man had sworn that, they put Hector Lancelot, Part II upon the most direct road to the Heath of the Crossroads. Then he told them all to go back.!? “My lord,” said the knight, [255] ‘lll go there with you, for in this land there are many people, and you might come upon one who, for your armor or for your horse, would maim you or cause you much grief.” “No, you won’t go there,” said Hector; “turn back and say no more of this, and I’ll go wherever God leads me.” “My lord,” said one of the squires to his master, “ask him to allow me to escort him to the Crossroads, and he will spend the night in my father’s house.” “Aha,” said the knight, “now you have spoken well!” He proposed this to Hector and he accepted, for he feared he would lose his way on account of the large number of roads. Then the knight asked him his name, and he told him it was Hector. “And yours?” “My lord,” he said, “my name is Guinas of Blakestan.” Then they commended one another to God, and the knight and the maiden went off in one direction and Hector and the squire in another. The squire carried his shield for him, and his spear and his richly plumed helmet, and Hector cooled off and refreshed himself in the evening air. It was getting well along toward night, and they rode purposefully onward. Then they came into a great valley, and when they had crossed it they climbed a hill and saw before them fully armed knights and men-at-arms equipped as for war, and there were easily one hundred forty of them. [256] Hector asked for his helmet and lance and for his shield, which he placed at his neck. But the squire recognized them and said, “They are our men; you need not fear them.” Nevertheless Hector did not delay in arming himself. The squire ran toward them, and they exchanged greetings, for there were many who recognized him, and they asked him, “Is that your master?” “No,” he answered, “he is a stranger, a very bold and valiant knight.” Then the squire looked and saw that the leader of the knights!! was the lord of Falerne: that was a castle in the marches of the king of North Wales and the duke of Cambenic, the fortress being in the duke’s land and part of his fief, but all its land belonged to the king of North Wales. The lord was the liegeman of the duke of Cambenic, and for that reason he himself was loyal to the duke, but some of his knights were loyal to the king of North Wales. They asked the squire where this knight was from. “Truly,” he replied, “I don’t know, but his name is Hector.” There was a valiant young knight there, the duke’s nephew, and he was most eager to joust; he summoned a squire and told him to go to the knight and tell him he had to joust with one of them. The squire did so, and Hector replied that he would sooner joust than have to do something worse. The squire came back and spoke to the 10This paragraph in the original is contorted and contains much repetition; we have removed and rearranged some material in order to make it more readable. The phrase “the leader of the knights” is added for greater clarity. Lancelot, Part I knight, who then came, [257] charging full speed. Hector did likewise and, when he saw the other knight coming, aimed to hit him beneath his throat, and struck him skillfully, knocking him to the ground. The youth lost consciousness, for his throat was nearly ruptured. Then another knight, companion to the first, spurred his horse to joust with Hector. They struck each other, but Hector unhorsed him as easily as he had the other. Then came another to joust with him, the brother of the lord of Falerne, but when the lord saw this he swore an oath that neither his brother nor anyone else would set foot upon the field henceforth, for the knight had acquitted himself well, “and this,” he said, “is a joyous thing, for they can readily see that the knight has been in combat and his arms tell the tale; if things have fallen out badly for them, that is entirely proper, and I’m very glad.” Then he himself came to meet the knight, without lance or helmet; they greeted each other, and he said, “My lord, you need no longer be concerned about any of the others.” “My lord,” said Hector, “I am sure of that.” “I want you to know,” said the lord, “that—may God truly help me—it pleases me greatly that honor has come to you from this, for they are foolish and childish.” At that point the others came to the duke’s nephew and found him unconscious. When he regained consciousness he could barely speak, for he was badly wounded in the throat, and they raised him up, deeply ashamed. [258] The lord of Falerne and Hector galloped along together, and he asked Hector where he was from. He told him he was from the kingdom of Logres and was one of Queen Guenevere’s knights. “And where are you going?” he asked. “In truth,” said Hector, “I’m seeking a knight I have never met, and I’d like to reach the Heath of the Crossroads.” “First,” said the lord, “you will come back with us toa castle near here belonging to the duke of Cambenic, for near here you won’t find any!* good lodgings to make yourself comfortable. You are in need of this, for it seems to me that you have been in combat.” “My lord, I haven’t fought so much that I need to rest; rather I’ll have to travel far tonight, until I hear news of him whom I seek.” Then the lord asked him where he intended to go after the heath, and he replied that he did not know, but wherever he might hear news of the knight. “Upon my word,” he said, “a knight has recently been in this land, and I believe you will hear of him if you go theres “My lord,” replied Hector, “I know that he was on the heath.” And he told him how he knew that. After that he commended him to God, and he and the squire rode off to the right. The lord of Falerne rode off with his men, and they told their lord that the squire had told them that this knight had defeated his master. They 12Helonging to... find any” supplied from Kennedy 434.1617. 181 were very puzzled as to who he was, and it grieved them that they had not inquired further about him. Hector and his squire rode on until well into the night, and they were drawing near his father’s house. Hector asked him if there was any house or town or refuge nearby where they might take lodging, and the squire replied that his father’s house, [259] where they would be very well received and comfortably lodged, was quite near. Hector was very glad of this. They rode on until they came to some towers that were near his father’s house; the squire knocked and called to one of his younger brothers. The brother immediately heard him and said to his father, “My lord, I hear my brother, thank God; what a time for him to arrive!” Then he ran to the door and opened it. When he saw the knight, he ran to his stirrup and helped him dismount, and his brother came to his father and said, “My lord, here is a knight, the best you have seen in a long time.” “Dear son, is he your master?” “In God’s name, he is not: he’s better! Now attend to him as is right and fitting.” At that the lord of the house arose and ordered a large number of candles to be lit; he went to greet the knight and joyfully welcomed him, then led him to a chamber and had his armor removed. Then the lord went about the house and had everything prepared and readied that he thought might be needed. Once Hector’s armor was removed, they led him to a beautifully prepared bed. Why should I describe everything to you? He was very well lodged, and his wounds and his injuries were carefully examined, and they did!5 everything they thought might please him. When it was time for bed, they put him to bed in splendid fashion, and the squire told his father how this knight had twice defeated his master; he truly believed this was the best knight [260] in the world and that, had he not been so bold, he would never have continued so long seeking the Heath of the Crossroads, where many wonders occur. The next morning Hector rose early. The squire was ready and helped him to arm. Then Hector took leave of the squire’s father and of his mother, a beautiful lady. They set out, along a route well known to the squire, for he had often traveled it; they arrived at the heath at the hour of tierce. “My lord,” said the squire, “here is the heath.” “Good fellow,” said Hector, “now go back, for you have long kept me company, and give my greetings to your father and your mother, for whom I have great esteem, and to Guinas your master.” “My lord, for God’s sake, if I happen to need you, I pray you will not fail to recognize me.” “I won’t,” said Hector, “I assure you.” “My lord, adieu, but if you wanted me to accompany you farther, I would be very glad to do so.” “I know that,” replied Hector, “but go with God, for I have no need of any company but God’s.” they did,” as in note 24.b and Kennedy 435.19 (Micha has “and there was”). 182 Then the squire turned back, and Hector rode on down the heath and saw the two posts!‘ still standing there and wondered about their purpose. He came to the crossing and saw a clerk carrying bread and wine; Hector asked him in whose service he was, and he answered that he served a hermit in that wood, in a hermitage called Crossroads. Next Hector asked him why [261] those posts were set up on the heath, and he replied that a knight had had them set up there as lance-racks. Then he related how another knight had recently defeated him, and Hector realized that this was the knight who had been at King Arthur’s court and who had the broken arm. Hector asked him whether he had any news of the knight who had defeated him, and he said he did not, except that he had passed by the hermitage as he left. “And where does the road he took lead?” “My lord,” he replied, “to North Wales.” Then Hector took that road and traveled fully four leagues until he came into a broad valley, after which he climbed a tall hill from which he saw large, broad fields surrounded by fences, and before him he saw a fine, strong castle, no farther off than two English leagues. He came to the road leading to that castle and saw three knights pass before him, leading a lady! on a palfrey. She was wringing her hands, and it seemed her heart was full of grief. Hector spurred his horse and rode toward her as fast as he could. The knights increased their pace and rode faster. The grieving lady looked and saw the knight coming, but she did not know who he was and feared he could not catch up with them; she let herself slip off the palfrey and fled [262] down the field toward the approaching knight, crying, “Lord God, what shall I do?” The three who were leading her followed, caught up with her, and were about to make her remount. She lay down and cried to the approaching knight for help. The three conferred and concluded that he was not one of their men, “but that needn’t worry us, for there are three of us and he is alone.” Two of them were holding the lady to make her mount with one of them on his horse, and the third rode forward to meet the knight and asked him who he was. In reply Hector told him to defend himself and said that those who were holding the lady should do likewise. He charged and struck his opponent with all his strength, so that he bore him to [263] the ground, and his horse fell across its owner’s body, on top of a rock, shattering both his left leg and his lance. Then Hector drew his sword, pursued the one who was taking the lady away, and said he would be sorry he had seized her; then, before her abductor had a chance to defend himself, Hector gave him such a blow on the helmet that he split him right down to the teeth. When the third one saw his two companions dead, he was terrified, and he turned and fled at top speed. Hector did not bother to pursue him, but went back to the lady and put her back upon the palfrey from which she had let herself fall. She begged him, for the love of God, not to M4see chapter 60, pp. [238-242]. I5Though she is consistently referred to as damoisele (“maiden” or “damsel”) in this and the following sections, she is twice referred to as dame (“lady”) on p. [267]. Since it is explicitly stated, p. [268], that she is the wife of a knight, I have used “lady” throughout. Lancelot, Part II leave her until she was out of danger, and he said that he would not. As they were riding toward the castle, a squire came to meet them, armed like a man-at-arms and badly wounded. The lady recognized him and called to him; he came to her, grieving deeply, and said, “Ah, my lady, we are done for, since our troops are too long in coming.” And she asked, “Where is my lord?” “He is up there, the valiant, noble knight, fighting some twenty knights; if he had help, he would already have driven them off, but he is one of only three, and there are nearly twenty of them.” “Oh, my lord,” said the lady to Hector, “leave [264] me and go help him, for that would do more for me, whatever happens to me, than if you had rescued me a hundred times and he were taken prisoner or killed: if he survives unscathed, I’m certain to be saved from any prison I might be in, but if he’s killed or taken prisoner, I’m done for.” “My lady,” said Hector, “I’m concerned only for you. But you take care of her, good fellow, and escort her to her house, and if you have any trouble, then come for me; but first show me the knight.” When the squire heard this, he wondered who this might be who spoke so boldly; then he led him fully a bowshot from there and in a broad valley showed him the knights. “My lord, he’s the one who bears that golden shield with the red chief.”!® Then, having taken from the squire a lance he was carrying, Hector struck his horse with his spurs, dashed into the fray as eager and as ardent as he could possibly be, and picked out the most powerful knight, who was assailing one of the companions of the knight he was helping, holding him by the noseguard of his helmet. As the assailant was leaning forward, Hector struck him upon the cantle of his saddle. The lance was stiff and strong and the head was sharp: it broke through the hauberk, went right through his entrails, and came out through the saddlebow; and he fell to the ground dead in front of the knight whose noseguard he had been holding. That knight, who had been on foot, jumped on the horse, and those who had been on the side of the fallen knight were dismayed, for they had lost their lord. [265] A great sound of mourning arose. Hector charged!” into the middle of the field and back again, lance in hand, bringing both horses and knights to the ground and causing the enemy to tremble and flee so that none dared await his blow, and all were completely routed because of the death of their lord. Sinados,'8 the knight whom Hector served, was himself more amazed than any, for he did not recognize Hector’s arms. He in turn!® fought very well, both because of his own skill and because the matter concerned him directly, and for his part he was a very fine and confident knight. His 16The chief is the upper section of a shield (Broughton 107). 17«charged,” as in note 3l.a and Kennedy 438.11 (Micha has “Hector was in the middle of the field”). 18The knight's name is revealed only on p. [271]. We have introduced it somewhat earlier in order to make the text clearer. 197 in turn,” as in Kennedy 438.16 (Micha has “And they had fought”). Lancelot, Part IT three companions”? now made every effort to fight well and were more courageous than they had been earlier: they clearly saw that their foes could not hold out against them, for Hector had rendered three of their opponents unable to harm or hinder them, and they saw that the lord of the other knights was clearly dead. Sinados had wounded one and killed two others, and each of his companions had felled his opponent, so that the assailants now numbered only eight where there had been seventeen. They were intensely sorrowful and terribly afraid; they dared stay there no longer, but turned and fled to safety wherever they could.?! Hector and his allies pursued them and were very sorry they could not catch them, but it was not surprising, since Hector’s horse had traveled all day and those of Sinados and his companions had done a lot of running. [266] Their enemies had fresher horses, for they had just mounted when they saw the others coming after them. When they saw they could not catch their foes, they turned back toward the castle that Hector had seen; they met the knights who were trying to come to their aid, but who had not known where to find them. Sinados and his men recognized them from afar, and Sinados said he owed them no gratitude for his life,2* for they had left him alone all day long, “and,” he added, “were it not for this knight whom I don’t know at all, you would never have seen me alive again.” Then his men told him*? they had found fully twenty of the enemy knights, so that their numbers were nearly even.24 Sinados’s men attacked them, and many times they had the best and also the worst of it, until one of the enemy knights came and told his companions they had lost the lady they were escorting, and that there had been so many knights that all of them would be taken prisoner if they stayed there. “Then they turned their backs, and we pursued them vigorously until we killed or captured as many as eight, and three of our own were killed.” They” named them, and the others began to weep bitterly, but Sinados more so than anyone else, for one of the dead was his first cousin and just a youngster; he would have been a fine knight had he lived. And Sinados’s men said he would not have died, had it not been for his great prowess, for none of the others had thrown himself into the fray with such abandon, [267] “and all of us would have been lost,” they”6 added, “had he alone not been there.” 20The text is inconsistent, since we were told (p. [263]) that the knight was one of three. The three companions are again mentioned on p. [270]. 2lThroughout this passage, the abundance of pronouns and the lack of specific proper names often make precise identification difficult. We have added various nouns in an effort to make the text clearer. 22«for his life,” as in note 32.a and Kennedy 438.37 (Micha has “for their coming”). 23Plural subject and “him,” as in Kennedy 439.1 (Micha has “Then [he] told them”). 24«+heir numbers... even,” as in Kennedy 439.2. Micha’s text is unclear. 25«They,” as in Kennedy 439.9 (Micha has “[He] named”). 26«they,” as in Kennedy 439.13 (Micha has “he said”). 183 “Now there’s no more to be done,” said Sinados; “God rest his soul, for our enemies have lost more than we have. I’m very glad to have escaped alive, and I thank God first and then this lord here,” he said, referring to Hector. At that moment the squire who had escorted the lady returned; when the lord saw him, he asked where he was coming from, and the squire replied, “From my lady.” “And where is she?” he asked. “She’s in the castle; she has skillfully dressed and bandaged my wound, and she sends me to find out how things are with you.” “How was she rescued?” he asked. “In God’s name, it was this knight here who rescued her.” When the knight heard this, he jumped down from his horse and was about to kiss Hector’s foot, saying that he was a hundred times more grateful to him for rescuing his lady than for himself. Then Hector jumped down in turn, seeing the other on the ground, and did not allow him to do what he intended to do. Then Hector, who had far to ride, commended Sinados to God. But when he heard this, he cried, “Ah, my lord, even if I were offered another castle like that one there, I wouldn’t want you to leave this way, if you were at all willing to stay. And it wouldn’t be proper for you to leave this way; first you will learn who I am, if it please you, and who the lady is whom you rescued and who will be very glad to see you. And if I could in any way [268] help you in whatever you have to do, I would gladly do so.” He and his knights begged Hector so insistently that he promised he would stay, and they were delighted at that. The lord asked him where he was going, and he replied he scarcely knew where to go, “but I’m seeking a very worthy knight, yet I know neither who he is nor what his name is.” He recounted the adventure, and the knight asked him where he was from, and he said he was from the kingdom of Logres and was one of Queen Guenevere’s knights. The knight asked him his name, and Hector told them; the more the knight looked at him the more he esteemed him, and so did all the others. Then Hector asked him who the lady was?’ whom he had rescued, and he said she was his wife. “And why,” he asked, “were the knights taking her away?” “My lord, I'll tell you. This whole land is presently in a state of war; I never saw so much warring in this land as there is at present, for I know no powerful or noble man who doesn’t make war upon his neighbor. And I myself am at war with those who ought to be my friends, for they are my wife’s kinsmen. I’ll tell you how this came about. “It happened that when my wife’s father lay on his deathbed, and he was sure there was no chance of his being cured, he summoned his daughter and made her swear upon the relics and in the name of the devotion she owed him that she wouldn’t marry upon the advice of any relative, unless the person were her liegeman, and that when she married she would take the most skillful knight she could find, however poor he might be. [269] The 27«who the lady was,” as in Kennedy 440.8 (Micha has “how important [?] she was to him”). Log maiden swore that, and the father also made all his men swear that they would loyally agree upon the best one, without trickery. “The maiden long delayed marrying, though she loved me and I loved her. She had by chance heard more good said of me than there was, and she turned her heart toward me; I sought to do well for love of her, but at length her relatives were ready to marry her off and were about to force her to wed. She was completely opposed and said she would never be married by them. They were furious at this and threatened her and ravaged much of her land and every day took away some of her property. I was often in her company; she had given me her love and that was all I thought of. “It came about one day that they seized the castle’s herds; the cry was raised, and the knights who were there responded, for the castle still has a hundred forty knights in its fief. It pleased God that we rescue the herds, thanks to the prowess of those present, though those against us were far more numerous than we were, and there was great rejoicing in the castle. When we had returned, I was more highly praised than I deserved, and the valiant knights, who had performed better than I had, said that all would have been lost had I not been there. They spoke of marriage to my lady and advised her to accept me, and she, who was overjoyed at the prospect, replied as if it displeased her: she said she thought she would not be acting wisely, and she asked them all to swear to tell the truth of the matter as it seemed to them. They, thanks be to them, said they all agreed on me. So she accepted me, just as if they had forced her to do so. [270] “When her friends heard of this, they considered her dishonored and disgraced,-and they sent her word that they would never love her thereafter. They defied me, but, thanks be to God, I was able to shield and protect myself somewhat from them with the help of those through whom I had won the lady and the land, for they helped me wholeheartedly —until today, when they had their knights lying in ambush outside this castle. I was bathing because I had been hurt the other day by a horse that fell on me. My lady is in the habit of going to church every day to hear high Mass and say her hours, and they, having spied on her, took her prisoner as soon as she came out of the church: they thought that since they had her they would henceforth manage to get their way. I believe they did so more because they knew full well that I wouldn’t hold back from going after her, and they would find me ata disadvantage and then kill me or take me alive. “When I heard they were taking her away, I jumped out of my bath and was armed sooner than any of my knights except for three2® who were with me when you came along. As soon as I could attack them, they surrounded me to cut me off, and then three of them took my lady away. And you rescued her, like the finest knight I ever saw. God be praised for bringing you there, and blessed be you [271] above all knights, for he whom you struck first was the best knight in this land and the most powerful; because of his death the war will be intensified; he was my lady’s cousin. But since things are this way, we 28CFf. note 20. Lancelot, Part IT must behave appropriately, for no matter what happens, a worthy knight must not worry or fear, or be arrogant or show disdain because of good fortune.” Then Hector asked him his name, and he said it was Sinados, and his castle was Windsor. As they were speaking, they reached the castle, and Hector saw that it was well situated on all sides, as well as a castle may be, except that there was only a small river, but in all other respects it was well situated and comfortable and very fertile, though lacking in vineyards, of which there are scarcely any in Great Britain. The lord had sent word ahead to have a warm welcome prepared in the castle and to have his lady make ready, and throughout the town it was already known how a knight had rescued the lady and their lord, and all came to greet him, crying, “Welcome to the good knight who rescued our lord and our lady from their enemies!” And the men escorted him to their lord’s palace. Then the lady came out, most finely adorned, embraced Hector in his suit of armor, and said, “My lord, here is our castle and my lord and myself; you may consider all this as yours. This is only right, for you have done much to deserve it.” And Hector thanked her warmly. [272] Then the knights went to remove their armor, and there were a great number of ladies and maidens to remove Sinados’s and Hector’s armor. Sinados ordered them to give all their attention to Hector, and they were diligent in carrying out his order, for they were intent on obeying and honoring him, so much so that he felt they were overdoing it. When their armor had been removed, it was late in the day; the meal was hastily prepared, and the lady of the castle and Hector sat down and ate together. In the hearing of all, the lady recounted how Hector had rescued her and the great fear she had felt because he was alone. There was great rejoicing over Hector in the castle that night, and he was greatly admired by ladies, by maidens, and by knights. And Sinados said that he had never seen such an accomplished knight for his age. That night Sinados and his lady begged him to remain, but their prayers were to no avail; at length they stopped trying and went to bed. First thing in the morning, Hector took his leave of the lady,*9 after which Sinados and his companions mounted and escorted him and set him on the road for North Wales. Then Hector commended them to God, and they in turn commended him; Sinados begged him to remember him if chance brought him to King Arthur’s court, and Hector told him that wherever he could, he would be like a loyal friend to him. Sinados thanked him heartily for that, and then they parted. Hector rode on until evening, when he looked around and [273] saw before him a strong and well situated castle, but outside the walls there was no lodging worth a denier,” only walls of houses reddened by fire, as were the castle walls. But the castle was set in such a strong place that its 29«of the lady” supplied from Sommer 334.23 and Kennedy 442.28, 30The denier was a small coin of varying value, current in France and in western Europe generally from the eighth century until the French Revolution. It was sometimes, like the former British penny, 1/240 of a pound (livre). Lancelot, Part IT inhabitants feared nothing but being starved, for it was on a great natural rock on one side, and on the other side”! it lay at the sharp bend of a great river, deep and broad and swiftrunning. On the other side of the water, the palisade was large and thick and old, and the marshland was such that no one dared enter there. The rock was high and difficult of access on the side from which Hector approached, but he saw that his path led that way. When he came to the foot of the rock, he dismounted and climbed the rock on foot, leading his horse after him; he was very hot and tired before he reached the middle of the rock and could go no farther on foot. With great difficulty he remounted his horse, then rode until he came to the castle gate, passed through, and rode through the streets. As soon as people saw him, they closed their doors, and he was deeply puzzled as to what this might mean. He rode on until he reached the other gate, by the bridge, but when he was about to go out, he found it closed. He knocked and called out loudly, but no one replied, and he cursed both the castle and its people as the most accursed he ever saw, [274] wishing that an evil fire might burn the town on the inside as it had been burned without, and saying that “if?* God now hated it as I do, it would be destroyed this very night.” Then he came to the gate and called out loudly, but no one replied, and he was quite dismayed. As he was going back toward the other gate, not knowing what to do, he saw a peasant returning from cutting wood, who had entered through a hidden gate, an axe upon his shoulder. As soon as he saw Hector, he turned and fled straight toward a house near the gate, on the left. Hector spurred after him and reached the peasant before he could enter the house, for the door was closed. He seized him by the temples and said he was a dead man if he did not tell him how to get out of that castle. The man replied that he would never get out that night, and even King Arthur would not, were he there. “And why don’t these people wish to speak to me?” “Because,” he replied, “they’re afraid that you intend some evil. No one in this town is so bold as to dare give lodging to a knight errant; rather, they must all stay in that great tower in the castle.” “What?” Hector exclaimed. “I'll have to stay the night in this town against my wishes?” “Yes indeed, for you can’t leave.” “I believe,” said Hector, “that I soon will, or I will find something else to stop me.” Then he snatched the axe from the peasant’s shoulder and went to the gate. The man followed him and asked for his axe, and Hector told him that if he did not go away, he would split him in two with [275] his own axe, for a peasant must not die by any other weapon. Then the peasant was afraid and went away. Hector dismounted and tied his horse by the reins to a hook in front of a house beside the road;> then he went with the axe to the bar of the gate and began to strike great two-handed blows, saying that he 3l“and ... side” supplied from note 42.c and Kennedy 443.5. 32«;F* supplied as suggested by Lecoy 382. 33a house beside,” as in Kennedy 444.8-9 (Micha has “in front of him in the middle of the road”). 185 would go through it in spite of the disloyal serfs who had closed their doors to him. Then a squire came to him and said that he was not acting properly in attacking the gate, for there was no question of his leaving that day: “Come rather to the lord of the castle, for you must stay with him tonight.” But Hector, who was very much afraid of being betrayed, said that he would not set foot there, “and I won’t stay anywhere for some time.” When the squire saw this, he went to the horse and jumped into the saddle, saying that he would take it at least. When Hector saw this, he ran after him, but the horse ran off so quickly that he could not catch it. He was deeply distressed, but he said he would still do as much harm to the town as he could. Then he went back to the bar of the gate and began to chop at it. But then he listened and heard a great noise above him; he looked and saw that people were unfastening a great portcullis that was inside the gate. He felt he had been tricked; he drew back and said the devil take so many doors, for he had not been taught to watch for portcullises inside castles, but rather outside. [276] Then he threw down the axe in vexation and turned toward the castle that the peasant had indicated. When he had climbed the steps, he saw within many knights, their bodies bruised by their armor, and seated in their midst an old man who appeared to be a gentleman who had been a handsome knight. Hector greeted the gentleman and his company, but the man did not return his greeting; rather he said, “Ah, my lord, is this the way with the knights of your land, that you have become a carpenter to cut down my gate? Cursed be the land where you learned this! Well, we have made others as wise as you pay for their folly, and so shall we with you, before you escape from us.” “My lord,” said Hector, “I am a knight errant; be assured that my need is most urgent, and I would like you to have my horse returned to me: a squire brought it in here.” “So I shall,” said the lord, “when you have made reparation for cutting up my gate without showing me your need.” “Indeed, it’s true,” said Hector, “that I would have felled it if I had had the chance, for there are in this town the most treacherous people I ever saw, for they have no interest in helping a freeborn man, and I’ve never known any people so detestable.” Then the lord began to laugh and asked him where he was from. Hector told him he was one of the queen’s knights. “And what queen is that?” asked the lord of the castle. “The wife of King Arthur of Logres.” Then the lord stood up facing Hector and said that he was welcome, embraced him in his suit of armor, [277] and said he was now to be forgiven for whatever wrong he had done, saving the honor and the established procedure of the castle, “for you must by rights be able to use force in this town that belongs to me, and I wouldn’t compel you, for I am King Arthur’s liegeman and hold from him this castle and all that belongs to it.” Then the lord ordered Hector’s armor removed. 186 Hector said that he would still go elsewhere that night if he had his horse, but the lord said he would not have it, for even if King Arthur himself came there he would have to spend one night, if he did not wish to go against the established procedure and the customs of the castle. “And what are the procedures and the customs?” asked Hector. “Your armor will be removed before I tell you,” said the lord, “and you may be as confident as if you were in the house of our lady the queen.” Then squires sprang forth and removed his armor, and when the lord saw him without it he greatly admired him, for he was wonderfully handsome and well proportioned and looked very much a bold and valiant knight. The lord found him very well spoken and sensible in all he said. Hector begged him to tell him the customs of the castle, but the lord asked him first to tell him his name, and Hector did so. “Hector,” said the lord, “it’s true that this castle is mine, and it’s as strong as you have seen, because of its great strength many lords have desired it,4 for it borders on the lands of three very powerful and evil barons. One is King Bernant of North Wales;*’ the second [278] is Malaguin, the King of the Hundred Knights, a very fierce king and an excellent knight, the cousin of Galehaut, son of the Giantess; and the third is Duke Escan of Cambenic. These three have always coveted*® this castle and made war upon me, but they haven't taken it yet, thank God. Nevertheless, I have lost much; now there is war and dispute between the king of North Wales and the duke of Cambenic, though they have not attacked me for three years. Now I’m at war only with the King of the Hundred Knights—not him personally, for he has for some time been in the land of Galehaut, his cousin. But his seneschal, named Marganor, is causing me great damage; he is very valiant and skilled at waging war. Not a day goes by without their coming here; they?’ come to the gate by the bridge to splinter their lances, but they'll find nothing of mine worth a farthing outside the walls. They do it only because they think it will trouble me and I may agree to some unprofitable terms. But, God willing, I’ll never do so, since I’ve held out this long. [279] ’ “I have been in such anguish all my life; now I’m very old, and nothing else in all the world gives me such sorrow as the fact that there will be no one after me to maintain this castle as well as I have maintained it, for my only child is a beautiful and sensible daughter, who could already have three children, given her age, but I don’t want to marry her off until a knight of great wealth or great power comes along, upon whom she would be well bestowed and who could honorably maintain this castle after me—for had 34«desired it,” rather than Micha’s emended text (“have had grief from it”). 351n chapter 60, p. [231], the king of North Wales is named Tradelmant. Kennedy (2: 278) says this inconsistency “is not confined to one group of MSS and may derive from the author rather than from scribal error.” 36«coveted,” as in Kennedy 446.4 (Micha has “have always been enemies of this castle”). 37 their coming” and “they,” as in Sommer 337.12 (Micha has “his coming” and “he”). Lancelot, Part IT I wished to unite her with my enemies’ line, she would have been well and nobly married, but my heart could not love them, for they have killed so many of my kinsmen and my closest friends. And I have often sent messages to my lord King Arthur, so that he might send me help, but he has so much to do with the great troubles in his heart that he can do nothing to help me. I don’t blame him, for I know enough of the great pains and suffering he has had. I can wait a long time, thank God, for this castle fears no siege, provided we have enough to eat. But I have lost many of my men, and because I had but few knights with me, the burghers of this town came to me three years ago and said I was delaying too long in marrying off my daughter. I told them I saw no opportunity to do so, but they said that if I didn’t take their advice, they would abandon me and the town and leave for other lands, for they had endured this misfortune too long. So I told them I would do so, provided [280] it was not against my honor, and they said they would give me good advice, loyal and without dishonor, provided I swore to abide by what they told me. So I swore, and they told me that no knight should ever enter this town without spending a night in my house and staying until noon the next day in the service of the town. Then, the day he was to leave, before getting his arms, he would have to swear upon relics that he would always be hostile and opposed to all who would make war upon the Castle of the Narrow March—such is the name of the castle—unless he was the vassal of the man who besieged it, and he would never leave the town except by swearing that oath.” “Truly,” said Hector, “here is an evil custom, for strangers must not be made to pay for another’s war, for they have done no wrong.” “Upon my word, my lord,” he replied, “they do so, because we can get no help from King Arthur, who is my liege lord. They say that someone might arrive through whom the castle might be saved, for he would hear of the great evils that occur from this, and that have occurred, for in all Britain this is the castle that is in greatest danger. And they say that in this way I could marry my daughter to some valiant young knight who found his way here, and I wouldn’t die without an heir. And it has not even been a week since King Arthur lost two of the knights of his household here; [281] it grieves me, and I’m very sad for him, that such a custom was ever established here, but I gave them my solemn word, and I must abide by my oath.” When Hector heard that two of the king’s knights had been taken prisoner there, he asked the lord of the castle who they were and how they were taken. “T’ll tell you,” he replied. “One is named Yvain and the other Sagremor; they came here and told me they were seeking the best knight who ever bore a shield, but they didn’t know where he was or where to seek him or who he was, and they said that Sir Gawain was a companion in this quest. And the next day they swore the oath—with some difficulty, for Sagremor said he would never do so, even though he might die here in prison, and he remained unmoved, no matter what Sir Yvain said to him, advising him to swear the oath because the castle and I belong to King Arthur. But this was to no avail until he heard our enemies outside that door. Sir Yvain heard them and swore it. Then Sagremor said that, since the attackers were so Lancelot, Part IT near, he would swear. He did so,28 I had his armor brought, and he put it on. Then they both came with my knights to the gate and insistently begged me, like worthy knights who eagerly perform deeds of arms, to let them go forth. But I didn’t wish it, for I would gladly keep them from fighting, and I feared they might lose, for we had few knights on our side,?9 “Those outside were greater in number and very valiant, so I told them that, if they were willing to give their word [282] not to pass beyond a little bridge that is down there at the near end of that causeway, I would let them go forth, provided that each of them would joust with no more than one knight and that, if more came upon them, they would draw back inside here. They gave me their word and immediately rode out alone and asked those on the other side for two knights with whom to joust. And Marganor sent them two, one of whom was the best and most skillful jouster I ever saw, and the four of them went confidently at it. Yvain jousted with one and unhorsed him with the first blow; Sagremor broke four lances with the good jouster, but in the end Sagremor and his horse were borne to the ground. “I recalled them to their word and they returned, and Sir Yvain said he had never in his life seen such a skillful jouster, apart from the knight whom he had seen being beaten by the dwarf beside a fountain,*° and who, in front of Sir Gawain, had unhorsed four of the best knights anyone could name.” When Hector heard that, he blushed violently from embarrassment, but he still asked how they had been taken prisoner. “Well,” said the lord, “they pressed me like very valiant knights, saying that if I didn’t let them go, Sagremor would go mad because he was in an enclosed place, and he wanted to engage in battle and fight [283] with my knights right before my eyes. So I let them go forth, and I gave each one a large and sturdy lance. Then they did battle with all those who were on the bridge, and with his first blow Sagremor felled the good jouster and his horse under him, and Yvain unhorsed another; they drew their swords, and I tell you they would have performed many feats of arms, if they had fought with moderation, but they let themselves go too much, for they trusted in their great prowess. And they still would have lost nothing, had it not been for Sagremor, who really deserves to be called ‘the Unruly,’ for he showed no trace of reason in what he did, and never in all my life have I seen a single knight perform as many feats of arms as he did, right on the bridge, so that in the end I myself suffered harm thereby, for I sent some of my knights to help them, and I went out myself. As they saw us coming, they charged full speed at the enemy, and the fighting began upon the bridge and went on until in the end I lost three of my knights and the two of them were taken prisoner. But I grieve more for them than for the dead, for 38t76 did so” supplied from note 54.b and Kennedy 448.1. 39for .. . our side” supplied from Kennedy 448.6. 40This is a reference to Hector himself. 187 there is no recovery for the dead, but they were very worthy knights, and they will have difficulty*! getting out.” When Hector heard this news, he began to sigh deeply because of the king’s companions. And yet he did not know them, though on many occasions he had heard tell of Sir Yvain and of Sagremor; he had never been their close friend, but he would find a way to get them back, if [284] he could. They spent the whole day in such conversation until the evening meal was prepared, and they sat down, and the lord of the castle rejoiced over Hector, for he judged him to be full of valor and a worthy knight. When it was bedtime, they went to bed. Hector did not sleep all that night, but thought about the rescue of Sir Yvain and that of Sagremor, to the extent that a solitary knight could do something about it, but the odds were very much against him, for he was all alone, and his enemies were many and were* accomplished knights. In the morning he rose as soon as he could see daylight; the alarm had already been raised in the town, and those who had kept watch but a short while sprang to their arms, and the lord of the castle put on his armor. When Hector saw him, he asked for his own armor, and the lord told him he must first swear the oath; Hector replied that he was ready, since it could not be otherwise, and he was impatient to get to the fighting. The lord had had preparations made to hear Mass, and he took Hector there and had him hear it, and then he swore the oath. Then his armor was prepared, and he put it on; they all came to the gate by the bridge, and it was opened. Down below at the head of the bridge there was a closed barbican, and there were men-at-arms inside who defended it, and all day long the besiegers came up to it, but those within dared not go forth, for they were too afraid. Then those outside began to attack with great abandon, being both young knights and well-established knights, the first seeking booty and the others honor in the joust. And Marganor, their lord, a very skilled and confident knight, often rode behind, for he was not with the first attackers. [285] When Hector saw them attacking with such abandon, he said to the lord of the castle, “My lord, we can go as far as that bridge, for up to that point we have nothing to fear, and we can win more than we can lose. Look at what sort of people are here: they are all poor men, and young knights eager to joust. If you take my advice, we will go out against them, and you'll see the damage that will result. Now, how many knights do you have here?” He answered, “Only thirty-three, plus you.” “Then, my lord,” said Hector, “we outnumber the attackers; and even if they were a third more numerous than us, they would have to lose everything, provided we didn’t go beyond that little bridge, for the causeway on this side is so narrow that they won’t be able to come freely, and we have our men-at-arms and our knights who will help us.” The lord replied that he greatly feared the companions of Marganor, “and there he is, by that great banner.” 41 “have difficulty,” as in Kennedy 449.7 (Micha has “will get out unwillingly”). A2sand [were]” supplied from Kennedy 449.19. 188 “Well,” said Hector, “even if he were the world’s greatest knight, they could still lose, before they would have any help from him.” At length Hector was so persuasive that the lord granted he might go forth, on condition that Hector would solemnly promise not to go beyond the little bridge without his leave. “Agreed, my lord,” said Hector, “if I am not led there by force.” “Not,” said the lord, “if you are forced against your will; but if you went there by your own will, then you may be sure that you would break your oath.” So Hector gave his word. Then he went to [286] the barbican and had it opened. The attackers began to charge wildly forward, for they thought no one would dare come forth. “My lord,” said Hector, “if we all go out against them, they will certainly turn back, and we will have lost them, but I'll go forth alone, and as soon as they cross the bridge I'll attack them, and if any falls, don’t be slow about capturing him.” “Take care,” said the lord, “not to cross the bridge, for you may be sure that if my lord King Arthur were there and he himself went beyond my prohibition, I wouldn’t help him, for I have sworn it.” Then one of the knights from the other side crossed the bridge and came spurring up with a great noise; then came another, forty yards behind him, and after him came a third. Hector, who had withdrawn behind the barbican, ordered those who were on foot to get on their horses. Then the first of the other knights rode up to the barbican to strike amid the crowd, but as soon as he approached, Hector attacked at full speed right past the barricade, took careful aim right below the other’s throat, and bore him to the ground, and with that same charge he struck the second knight so that he knocked him to the ground, his horse upon his body, and broke his lance. He drew his sword and rode at the third, meeting him on the bridge. The other splintered his lance against Hector, and Hector attacked him and gave him a great blow on his helmet with his sword, so that he knocked him to the ground. Then the knights from [287] the barbican rode full speed to the two knights who had fallen, and retained them by force; one of them thrust his horse against the one who was under his own horse, and he captured him and led him away. Then Hector came back to get another lance. As he was about to ride straight back to the bridge to attack the others who were galloping toward them, the lord of the castle seized his reins and swore an oath that he was not to set foot there again. “We have won enough, now,” he declared; “let it be. When we are able, we’ll win in another way, but jousting wouldn’t be wise now, for Marganor is already quite nearby.*? Blessed be the hour when you came here, and blessed be he who taught you to wield a lance!” Then they dismounted and reassembled at the entry to the barbican, saying they would await the attackers there. And Marganor heard the news of the captured knights and was greatly distressed. People told him that the best knight B«quite nearby,” as in note 62.b (CRO) and Sommer 341.13 (Micha has “already very valiant”). Lancelot, Part I who ever lived was among the defenders and that he had unhorsed all three of them. Marganor declared that if he was willing to joust, he would joust with him before he departed, even if the other knight were ten times better than he was. [288] Then the whole causeway became covered with attackers. The lord of the castle ordered the archers of the barbican to shoot, and they did so, for they had not fired a shot until he gave them the order. But when the lord of the castle saw the great strength of the enemy, with whom the whole causeway was already covered, he had the barbican barricaded so that Hector would not go forth, for he felt he was too willful. Despite the archers, the attackers rode right up to the barbican, for most of their horses were covered with protective armor. As they reached the barbican, those inside threw great sharp stakes and big stones at them, but they dared not reveal themselves, for there were many archers outside as well. When those outside saw they could accomplish nothing more at that time, they withdrew to beyond the bridge. But Marganor sent them back at full gallop, just as the three had come before, by ones, then twos, then threes. Then the lord of the castle gave the order“ that the archers should stop shooting, and he had the gate reopened. Hector wanted to go forth again; the lord granted him permission to do so, on the promise he had made before concerning the little bridge, and Hector agreed. Then he went forth, and one of the enemy knights came charging. Hector charged at him and struck him so violently that he shattered his shield and hauberk and his left arm, and pierced right through his arm into his chest; the blood spurted out and he fell, and those of the barbican captured him. Then Hector looked and saw a knight on the far side of the [289] bridge, who seemed ready to joust but would not cross the bridge, since Marganor had forbidden it: Marganor was so saddened because of the knights he had lost that he was nearly out of his mind, believing that this knight was crossing the bridge—for if he were on the far side, he would never return. Hector saw him and spurred toward him, for his lance was still whole. And the knight who was waiting for him withdrew little by little toward his comrades, who were somewhat farther back. The lord of the castle shouted to Hector to remember his pledge. But Hector was already on the bridge, and shouted to the lord to give him leave to go where the knight was, but the lord replied that if he went even one step beyond the bridge, he would break his oath. Hector heard him and was filled with anguish; he asked the knight to cross the bridge, promising he would be safe from all men but him. The knight replied he would do nothing of the sort, “but you,” he said, “come to this side, and I guarantee you need fear no one but me.” Hector said he would gladly cross, if he could do so without breaking his oath. 44cave the order,” as in Sommer 341.33 and Kennedy 451.39 (Micha has “gave himself the order”). Lancelot, Part IT “God help me,” said the knight, “that’s nothing but cowardice.” Then Hector was deeply ashamed and would have gone across, if that had not been judged an act of perfidy. “But wait for me, sir knight, and I’ll go get permission.” The other said he would do so, provided Hector himself came back to tell him. Then Hector returned and begged the lord of the castle to let him go joust with that one knight, “and I tell you that on my oath I’ll come back here without doing any more, and he has guaranteed I need fear no one but him.” The lord said he would not have his leave to go during the rest of the day; Hector implored him, but the lord refused [290] to grant his permission. “My lord,” he replied, “then I must go tell him, for I have promised to do so.” “In truth,” said one of the knights, “Hector will surely pass beyond the bridge, for he is too eager; but if Marganor gives his word that he need fear none of his other troops, then let him go, on condition that if he comes out on top, he’ll come back.” The lord granted this and sent a knight with him to speak to Marganor, who had contrived one of the world’s greatest ruses, for he had plotted and ordered that as soon as the two knights jousted together and his men saw the opportunity, they should set to tearing the bridge apart, but they were not to touch the knight. And he would send eighty knights who were lying in wait there to capture him, once he could no longer get back across, for the marsh was such that any man who entered there never came out again. That was why he wanted to tear the bridge apart. Then the knight accompanying Hector came onto the bridge; he asked for Marganor, who came forward. The knight told him that if he guaranteed Hector would be safe from all men but him, he would have the battle, if he wished. And Marganor solemnly promised that never a man of all those present would lay a hand on him. Then the knight, suspecting nothing of the ruse, gave his consent, and returned to the barbican. All climbed to the top to watch the joust. Then the two knights took their distance and came at one another with [291] all the speed their horses could manage, striking each other so violently with their sturdy lances that, through the strength of their arms and their lances, they bore each other to the ground, their horses on top of them. And the enemy knight was the best jouster in the world. Seeing that they had fallen, Marganor’s men all ran to tear apart the bridge, which was made of wood. Hector got up before his opponent, for he was more agile and his horse was stronger. When he was on his feet, he heard behind him the noise of the bridge being torn apart; he jumped on his horse, rode to the bridge, and delivered great blows with the cutting edge of his sword, so that he killed and maimed many who stood up to his blows. They all ran off, for they dared not lay a hand on him because of their lord’s solemn promise, and the bridge was left completely abandoned, but badly damaged by the removal of a number of planks. Then Marganor came spurring up, without his helmet, and told Hector he had wronged him by killing his men. 189 “But you,” said Hector, “injure me and treat me disloyally by trying to detain me with your men.” “Has any of them,” he asked, “laid a hand on you? Nor have they done you any wrong if they tore the bridge apart, for it was not yours, but belonged to our mortal enemies.” “Good sir,” said Hector, “let me have my battle, and I will be ready to give satisfaction for whatever you may ask.” “Gladly,” said Marganor, “if you solemnly promise to do so.” Then Hector agreed, on condition that none of his men would do anything to him or [292] to the lord of the castle, and if he defeated the knight, he would take him to the castle without opposition or quarrel. And Marganor agreed to this, since he believed his knight would win. Then Hector and the knight went back to their joust, and Hector violently bore him to the ground from his fine, spirited horse. Hector had recognized the qualities of the horse, so he took it by the reins, led it over the bridge, and struck it on the rump with his lance, which was still whole. The horse ran off along the causeway, and the men of the castle captured it. The knight, who had fallen twice and was badly wounded, got up as best he could. Then Hector, who had dropped his lance, came back to his opponent, seized his helmet with his right hand, and pulled him toward him so violently that he tore all the laces and nearly broke all his teeth and squashed his nose, and the man bled profusely. Hector would gladly have dismounted to subdue him, but he feared some treachery, so he did not dismount, but hurled the knight’s helmet as far away as he could, drew his sword, and struck him twice with the flat of the blade so that he again bore him to the ground. The knight was bleeding as profusely as if he were mortally wounded. Turning his back to the bridge, Hector swore that if the knight did not declare himself vanquished, he would cut off his head. But the other could not utter a word, for he had fainted. Hector dismounted, [293] turned the knight’s ventail down all the way to his shoulders, and made as if he was about to cut off his head. Then Marganor came spurring up; he wore no helmet, for he had no wish to come in full armor, lest one think him guilty of treason, and he told Hector he had done enough. Hector had no wish to wait for him on foot, so he sprang to his horse, his sword drawn. Marganor cried out to him not to kill the knight; Hector replied that he would do so unless he declared himself vanquished, and Marganor summoned Hector and offered to surrender on behalf of the knight. Then the knight recovered from his faint, jumped up while Marganor was speaking to Hector, vigorously drew his sword, covered his head with his shield, and prepared to attack and to defend himself. “What, sir knight?” said Hector. “You still wish to fight?” And he replied, “Certainly!” for he was still quite hardy. “You'll fight no more with him,” said Marganor, “for you are his prisoner; otherwise I would wrong him, for J promised him I would place you in his custody.” “His custody?” he exclaimed. “By God, I’ll never be his prisoner as long as J can defend myself.” 190 “Yes, you will,” said Marganor, “for I have sworn to it.” “Since you wish it,” said the knight, “it’s no shame for me to do your will, for you are my liege lord.” Then he came forward and handed over his sword to Hector, who took it and was about to escort him to the castle. But [294] Marganor told him not to move before giving him satisfaction, and Hector said he would not. “But,” he added, “I’m ready here and now, if you wish to accuse me of anything.” And Marganor accused him of wounding his men during a lawful truce, for he had sworn that they had nothing to fear from him. Hector replied that he had never sworn to that, “and if I had sworn it, I would still not have wronged you, for they were behaving disloyally toward me. But I don’t believe,” said Hector, “that they did so because of you, for, God help me, I consider you a loyal knight, because you made the knight respect the compact you had with me.” Nevertheless, Marganor insisted Hector had to become his prisoner, because of his guilt, or else defend himself against the charge of acting treacherously; he accused him of perjury and disloyalty and was himself ready to prove it against him. Hector replied that there was no court in the world where he would not dare to defend himself, but the lord of the Narrow March said that if he took his advice, he would not defend himself there, for Marganor had the greater force. “But don’t be concerned,” he said to Hector, “for we have clearly seen that you didn’t commit any treachery. We’ll bear witness for you in any court in the world; if he wants to accuse you, let him do so at King Arthur’s court.” Then Marganor said that if he did not defend himself here, there was no court in the world where he would not go to accuse him of treachery, and his dishonor would be all the greater. Hector replied that he hoped God might never help him, if he took the accusation anywhere else: he was ready to defend himself on the spot. “If you take my advice,” [295] said the lord of the Narrow March, “you won’t do this here, for you have performed enough feats of arms today, but tomorrow let him be prepared to fight, and you too, since it is by combat that you wish to acquit yourself. a . “I won’t,” said Hector; “I’ll do whatever he devises, and I’ve done nothing in the way of arms that has hurt me.” “Truly,” said the lord, “I very much fear some treachery, and it would be a terrible thing if you were their prisoner. But I’m afraid that, if you fight him out there, he will be able, with the help of his men, to take you prisoner or defeat you, if he wishes.” “Say no more,” said Hector; “he would do no such thing.” “Didn’t you see,” said the lord, “that he had the bridge torn apart in order to capture your In the end, I’m afraid of some other trick, for you could get no help from us, since he has too many men. But I’ll tell you how to fight in such a way that you need have no fear of him, although he is one of the best knights in the world and knows the most about fighting. But if he orders all his men to remove their armor and he swears that none of them will move to help him or to hinder you, then fight him on the causeway between that big bridge and that little one; then, when he is on this side, Lancelot, Part I the little bridge can be torn apart, so that no one can Cross until one of you is defeated. The duel could take place under those conditions, but otherwise I don’t advise it, and I suggest you abandon it for my sake.” And Hector replied that it would be that way, if Marganor dared agree to it. Then Hector, in full armor, rode back to the little bridge and informed Marganor of the conditions. Marganor asked him [296] how he could be assured of the lord of the Narrow March and of his men, and Hector said he would make him swear and give his word. Marganor, who was most eager for the duel, agreed. Then he and Hector rode onto the bridge, and he told his men, on their honor, that none of them was to move until Hector was defeated or until Hector had taken him to the castle as his prisoner. He made his constable, who was his liegeman, swear to this, and likewise all the others who were his men; then he laced on his helmet and rode to the barbican*? where the lord of the castle was waiting. And Hector had the lord*® and his men swear that Marganor had nothing to fear from him or from them, if Marganor’s men did not move first. And all the knights swore to this along with him, at Hector’s request. Then they tore the little bridge pant The marsh was so vast around and beneath that nothing that entered there ever came out again. As soon as the bridge was torn apart so that nothing could cross, Marganor rode forth from the bridge and Hector from near the barbican. They charged at each other, their shields at their necks, as fast as their horses could carry them; each of them had plenty of courage and strength, but one was inflamed with rage and ill-will, and the other was anxious and eager to win honor, and they had strong, sturdy, sharp-pointed lances. Hector was mounted on the horse of the knight he had defeated beyond the bridge; it was of very good quality. They came together with great speed and struck each other on the shield. Marganor splintered his lance on Hector, and Hector struck him with all his courage and strength, bending him back upon the rear saddlebow and striking him so violently that he [297] knocked both horse and rider in a heap, and in their fall Hector splintered his lance. Hector could not hold himself back, his horse was charging with such force, and his opponent was lying across the narrow causeway; Hector passed over him, and his horse plunged into the river with all four feet, and horse and rider went in. But they did not stay there long, for the horse was strong and of excellent quality, and it jumped back up along with its master. Then Hector drew his sword and spurred as far as the barbican. He came back, sword in hand, and saw that Marganor was back on his feet and that his horse was running off along the causeway. It came to the bridge at top 45“barbican,” as in earlier passages, pp. [284-288] (Micha has “brattice”). 1 have made the same change wherever necessary throughout the remainder of this passage. SMicha says that the pronoun li (“him”) at this point refers to Marganor (1X:[346]), but I feel it must refer to the lord of the castle. 4Tand all... apart,” as in Sommer 345,18-19 and Kennedy 456.33 (Micha has “and with the promise all the knights tore the little bridge apart at Hector’s request”). Lancelot, Part IIT speed, jumped across to the other side, and landed with its hind feet in the marsh, but with its forefeet on dry land. It would have been lost, if Marganor’s men had not pulled it out by force. As Hector saw his adversary on foot, he did not want to attack him on horseback, for he feared Marganor might kill his horse, so he dismounted, gave his horse to two men-atarms from the barbican, removed his shield from his neck, and strode forward eager for battle: his eagerness became him well. The men of the barbican were praying for him, and those of the castle were weeping from fear and pity. As Marganor saw Hector coming in this way, he did likewise, and said to himself that he had never seen a better jouster, but he did not believe Hector could defeat him with his sword, for he believed himself one of the best knights in the world, and his prowess was without doubt very great. [298] Then the swordplay began, and each aimed many great blows at the other, and they covered themselves with their shields as best they could. Marganor knew a lot about sword-fighting, for he had learned it long before, and it served him well; he covered and protected himself for as long as his shield lasted, and he did not tire himself or strike in haste, if he did not see where to put his blow to very good use. And Hector nevertheless let his blows fly, for in his strength, he felt he could never be worn down or defeated, and he went on cutting and slicing and breaking Marganor’s shield so that there was very little of it left, and from top and bottom it was split all the way to the boss. The field was strewn with the pieces that flew from it, for Hector’s sword was of great quality and improved every day.*8 Hector’s armor was still practically undamaged, except that he had taken a blow on the right shoulder that had damaged it considerably, and there the hauberk was pierced and his flesh cut through to the bone, and he was bleeding profusely. The day was very hot, for it was in September; his arm was rapidly growing weaker, and he was no longer striking such mighty and vigorous blows as he had before. When Marganor saw this, he was very glad, for he himself was still somewhat fresh; he ran upon Hector and pressed his attack. But Hector covered himself well, for his shield was still quite intact, so that Marganor could scarcely strike him except upon his shield. They continued in this manner until noon was past. But by then Hector had caught his breath, and he was [299] deeply ashamed that he had held out so long without accomplishing any real feats of arms. So he attacked Marganor anew with great energy, striking him unrestrainedly, wounding and injuring him so that he was filled with fear. At this point Marganor was just surviving, for he had lost much blood, and it seemed to him that Hector was stronger and quicker than he had been at the 48The properties of this somewhat magical sword were described when it was given to Gawain by Agravain in chapter 60, p. [235], though there it was described as fated to deteriorate, not to improve. It was brought to Hector by a wounded knight, chapters 58, p. [209], and 60, p. [240]. 12] beginning; this grieved him deeply, and he would have given anything not to have begun this battle. He was already growing dangerously weak, and he said, “Sir knight, you are an excellent knight and I esteem you highly. The battle between us is begun for nothing, and it would be a great shame if one of us were to die here. I do you no dishonor if I yield it to you. It’s yours, for I would prefer to have lost some of my troops than to have killed you in battle. And I would be very glad to learn your name.” But Hector replied that he would not abandon the fight, “for it would be to my shame, if you don’t admit defeat.” “Indeed,” said Marganor, “I won’t admit defeat, God willing. Since you have refused the honor I proposed, I'll resume the battle, and to whomever God gives the honor, let him take it!” Then he resumed his attack, and the battle went on a long time, until Hector was full of shame and sorrow that it had lasted so long, for [300] he firmly believed that he still had a great deal to accomplish in his quest; he felt he would complete it badly if he did not soon finish this battle.49 Then he quickly attacked Marganor, and with his sword he struck great blows in places where he saw he was already the worst off, and inflicted much injury upon him. Marganor covered himself with what shield he had and all the while twisted away from the blows and went wherever he could find a place to go. But Hector was driving him wherever he wanted, and all could see that Marganor was getting the worst of it. Then Hector pressed his attack and struck him a great blow upon the helmet, recovered, and struck again with all his strength, so that he split the helmet and drove in nearly half the width of his sword, stunning him so that he had to drop to one knee. He pulled out his sword so violently that Marganor nearly fell with both hands on the ground, and he took a long time getting up again. Then Hector pulled him by the helmet, thinking to bring him to the ground, but the helmet came off in his hand; he raised his hand and flung the helmet as far as he could into the marsh. Then Marganor jumped up and covered himself as best he could, but Hector told him to declare himself defeated, for now he felt sure that he had the upper hand, and that Marganor could no longer defend himself. But Marganor said he would never consider himself defeated because of him, “for I am stronger now than I’ve been for some time, and that helmet was just a nuisance, because I was too hot.” [301] Then Hector attacked him fiercely, and Marganor’s vision was renewed because of the fresh air, and he valiantly defended himself as long as he had something with which to cover himself, but he was very worried about his head, which was uncovered and unprotected, and in the end he had to take evasive action. Hector kept on driving him wherever he wanted, and he recoiled so much that he was at last forcibly driven back to the gap in the bridge, and he barely avoided falling in. When Hector saw this, he cried, “Marganor, you’ll fall into the marsh! Come back this The phrase “if he did not soon finish this battle” is added for greater clarity. ig2 way!”°? Then Hector jumped back, and Marganor saw that if Hector had pursued him a bit farther, he would have been dead. Then Hector went back toward the bridge, placing Marganor between him and the barbican, and told him to declare himself defeated; Marganor replied he would rather be killed at once. “Then by God,” said Hector, “you'll die!” Then he attacked him and pressed him hard until he did not know where to turn. Hector looked and saw that Marganor was on the edge of the causeway and about to fall into the marsh; he cried to him, “Marganor, you are about to die!” Then Marganor looked around and saw that he had nearly fallen into the marsh, and he esteemed Hector highly for twice saving his life, and judged that Hector had behaved much better toward him than he would have done had he been in a similar situation. Hector again told him to declare himself defeated, for he could clearly see how things were, but Marganor replied that that would never happen. At that, Hector grew angry and said he would not ask him again that day. Then he ran upon him and struck him anew, violently, wherever he could reach him, wounding him severely so [302] that by main force he drove him back to the edge of the causeway. But Marganor did not notice, for he thought only of defending himself. And Hector pressed him so vigorously that Marganor did not notice he was so near to falling. Then Hector aimed a blow at his head, and he jumped back, fearing for his head, and fell into the marsh right up to his waist. When Hector saw this, he cried, “Holy Mary!” and seized Marganor by the hand, pulled him up, and said that, God willing, such a fine knight as he would never die so basely. Then with great difficulty he pulled him out of the water. Had he not been there, Marganor would have sunk into the marsh. Once he was out of the water, Hector asked him how he was, and he replied, “Fine, thanks be to God and to you, and I see that you are the most valiant knight in the world. If I had as much power over you as you now have over me, I would fight with you no more today; instead, I place myself at your mercy. Here is my sword: I surrender it to you and will do whatever you command.” Hector received it, and then they threw down their shields, what was left of them, took each other by the hand and came straight back to the barbican. Those inside, delighted at the outcome, hurried to meet them; they joyfully welcomed them and returned to the castle. Everyone ran to see Hector and the man he had defeated, for they believed there was no better knight than Hector in all the world. And there was great rejoicing. And the lord’s beautiful daughter, most elegantly adorned, came to meet Hector, as her father had sent word to do. She herself unlaced Hector’s helmet, kissed him in the sight of all who cared to look, and said [303] he was welcome, as the knight she most loved in all the world and the one who most deserved her love. 50H ector uses familiar forms of address in these sentences, resumes the formal usage in his next speech, and then uses the familiar again. Lancelot, Part IT Thus they went up to the palace, and the maiden led Hector to her chamber, and upon a beautiful mat she had his armor removed. She herself removed part of his armor and would allow no one but maidens to touch him, When his armor had been removed, water was prepared, and he washed his hands, his face, and his neck; then he was the most handsome knight one could have found anywhere. Then the maiden brought him a short cloak and fastened it around his neck, and the more she looked at him, the more pleasing she found him. She said to herself that God had been most kind toward him, for He had endowed him with all worldly beauty and valor. Then the lord of the castle came to see him and examined his wounds himself, for he knew much of such matters; he said he was in better condition than he had expected, “for you have no life-threatening wounds.” And when he had examined and dressed them, they went to see Marganor. His armor had been removed, and he was in great pain, for he was badly wounded, but he had no mortal wound; Hector was very glad of this, and so was the lord. It was already near nightfall, so they ate a little to give themselves sustenance. Then Hector told Marganor that he must send for the two companions of King Arthur, for he wished to see them, and Marganor replied that he would do whatever Hector wished. He sent for his constable, who was still beyond the little bridge; he and his [304] men were grieving bitterly. The constable sent away all his men, and the men of the castle rebuilt the bridge; the constable crossed all alone, came to his lord, and was full of grief when he saw him. Marganor told him to depart and quickly bring back all his prisoners. “And don’t be concerned about me,” he added, “for I am in good health.” Then the constable departed, and he fetched Yvain and Sagremor and told them of his lord’s misfortune: that a knight had defeated him and that such a fine knight had never been born. They immediately thought this was Sir Gawain, and they were most impatient to be there. At least a hundred other prisoners went forth with them and came to the castle, where there was great rejoicing on their account; everyone came to meet them, the lord himself and Hector and all the others. When Sir Yvain and Sagremor had had their armor removed, they asked to see the man who was asking for them. The lord brought Hector to them, and they jumped to their feet to greet him, but they were very puzzled as to who he was, for they did not know him at all, nor did he know them, except by reputation. And when he had given them his name, they were even more amazed, for they had thought all the good knights were at King Arthur’s court. Then, when he told them the name of his land, they knew he was from somewhere near where the good knight had unhorsed the two of them and Girflet and Kay the Seneschal,°! and they both began to laugh. Then Hector adjured them, by the faith they owed the king, to tell him, if it was appropriate to do so, why they had laughed, and they said they were laughing because a knight at that spring had unhorsed four of King Arthur’s 5ISee chapter 55, pp. [150-152]. Lancelot, Part I companions, and [305] a dwarf had beaten him nearly to death, and Sir Gawain was going to joust with him. Hector replied that he would rather be beaten by the dwarf than joust with Sir Gawain, for Gawain might well have lost. They both said they had never seen a better jouster, and at this Hector was silent. Then they questioned him further, because they had heard the lord of the Narrow March®? say he was one of Queen Guenevere’s knights; they asked him when he had joined her service, and he told them it had been very recently. He added that he was traveling in search of a knight whom he did not know at all. They asked him what sort of shield he bore, and Hector described it so well that they knew it was Sir Gawain; they told him, and Hector said he would rather lose a finger than have it be Gawain, because he had been such poor company for him.># That night Hector arranged the peace between Marganor and the lord of the Narrow March, and Marganor swore to the lord that he would ensure that his castle would forevermore be left in peace by the King of the Hundred Knights; and if he was not willing to do so, Marganor and his men would come to the lord of the castle and place all their forces and strongholds at his disposal. And if ever any man entered there who wished to do him harm, he would do all he could to protect him, and in token of this he delivered valuable hostages. After he had sworn to this, [306] all his friends swore to it in turn. Great was the joy in the castle; all came to see Hector, for they could not get enough of seeing him. That night, when Hector was seated at table and all the others with him, a squire came before the lord, greeted him, and asked him whether he had with him a knight who was a stranger, and the lord said he did. “What do you wish of him, good fellow?” “My lord,” he asked, “is there one named Hector?” And the lord replied that there was. The squire asked which one this was, and the lord pointed him out. The squire went over to him and said, “A knight, Sinados of Windsor, sends you greetings and asks you to let him know how you are, for he had heard you had been taken prisoner by the people of this castle and by the King of the Hundred Knights; and he sent me at top speed, for he said he would send®* as many of his men as he could, to rescue you. And he should have to do so, for you restored both land and honor to him.””° When the lord of the castle heard this, he asked him where he had seen him, and the squire told him how he had seen Hector rescue his lady and his lord, and Hector was very embarrassed by what the squire told them. Then they esteemed him more highly than ever, so that at length the news reached the daughter of the lord, who was very glad and very much wished, if it could be, [307] to have Hector for her husband. And the lord came to her and asked her if she would have him, if he could persuade him, 52of the Narrow March” supplied as in Sommer 349.27. 53[his is presumably a reference to chapter 56, pp. [185] and following. 54« vould send,” as in Kennedy 462.29 (Micha has “sent”). 55See this chapter, pp. [264] and following. 193 and she said he was the knight she would most willingly accept in all the world. Then the lord spoke of this to Hector, and he replied, “My lord, you do me great honor by wishing to give me your daughter, but at this point I shall not marry, nor hold any worldly honor, for I have much to do and I must ride far, before I have found what I seek. I don’t refuse her, for it has been a long time since I’ve seen a lady or a maiden I would so willingly wed, but I am not my own master, and you can clearly see how it is.” The lord dared not press him further; he returned to his daughter and told her how Hector had replied. She said she wanted no husband, since she could not have that one. And the lord said that could not be, for his reason was too compelling, to which she replied she would wait a long time, if it could be, for she would love him more, because he was a worthy knight, than she would love a richer man who was less valiant and less wise, and she esteemed him highly. Then the lord returned to Hector, and tried in every way he could to win him over, but to no avail. When it was time to retire, [308] the maiden had a bed prepared for Hector. Because he was tired, he lay in a room by himself, except for one other knight who lay far from him. And when the ladies had gone to bed, the maiden came to Hector’s bed and knelt down before him, but he did not see her until she had been on her knees for a long time, for he was deep in thought.°® And another maiden held a candelabrum, some distance away. When Hector saw her, he took her in his arms and welcomed her, and then he said, “Fair maiden, what need brings you here at this time?” The maiden’s tresses hung down upon her shoulders, her hair completely loose and unbound, and she wept as she said, “Ah, my lord, don’t think ill of me because I have come here so secretly, for my intentions are entirely honorable. But I have come to complain to you about you yourself, for I know no one else to whom I can complain, and no one else can give me satisfaction, unless perhaps you are not your own master.” He replied that he did not think ill of her: “My lady, you are welcome! And if I have wronged you in any way, I’ll gladly make amends, but tell me what the matter is.” “My lord, my complaint is that I had my father beg you to accept me as your wife, and you listened neither to his entreaty nor to mine, but refused me. I should like to know why, if you would tell me.” And he replied, “God help me, it is not because you are not extremely beautiful and worthy of one of the highest knights in the world, and you are very highborn and wealthy, but [309] the great difficulty, as I told your father, and now I’ll tell you, is that I cannot marry until I have achieved my quest. And if I could do so now, and married you and then died on this quest, would that not then be a great misfortune?” “My lord, may God protect you from death! Better that I were forever without a husband; but if you were willing, I would wait for you, provided you would promise not to marry without first informing me.” 56“for ,,, thought” supplied from note 91.c. ie Hector said he hoped it would not trouble her but that if he promised her this, he would be afraid of having some insurmountable obstacle that would force him to lie to her. “Truly,” she replied, “I wouldn’t want you to lie. But now do one thing for me, since I have lost you forever: give me your word that you will never marry anyone but the one you love above all others, and that you will not break faith with her for either land or inheritance.” “God help me,” said Hector, “T’'ll gladly keep this compact! I swear to you as a loyal knight that I'll do as you have said, and may God never help me if I marry any other than her whom I love best.” Then the maiden left, laughing and joyful, and told the maiden who was with her that she had successfully accomplished her mission. Then she went to her father, and told him what Hector had sworn to her and promised, “and I think that before the year is out he’ll love me more than any other woman in the world, because of what I'll do.” And the father replied that nothing else could ever make him so happy. Thus it remained until the morning, and then the maiden went [310] to Hector as he arose, and she wished God might grant him honor that day, and he wished her the same. “My lord,” said the maiden, “I want you to take a token of my affection. Take this ring and carry it with you, and you will take with you more than this is worth,°” for you'll have all my heart.” He took the ring, thanking her warmly; he put it on his finger and was very pleased. “My lord,” she said, “I give it to you on condition that you won’t give it away, but keep it as long as you are able.” And he took it, on condition that she think no ill of iter Then he asked for his armor and it was brought to him, for the lord could retain him no longer, despite all his efforts. And for his part Sir Yvain put on his armor, as did Sagremor. Hector took leave of the maiden, and she, both sad and joyful,°? commended him to God: sad that he was leaving in search of adventure, and delighted because of the joy she anticipated from the stone of the ring that Hector was taking with him. It had such power that if a woman gave it to a man, from that day forward, as long as he wore it, the love she had planted in him would become greater and stronger, and she had indeed given him her love. [311] She had begged him to wear it for love of her, and it was for this that her father had long kept the ring for her, for he had always dearly loved his wife. Afterwards he took leave of Marganor; each of them had great esteem for the other. And the lord of the castle 57than .., worth,” as in note 93.b and Kennedy 464.38 (Micha has “than I will show you”). 8that you won't... on condition that” supplied from note 93.d; “that she think,” as in note 93.d and Kennedy 465.3 (Micha has “that you think”). 59and she ... joyful,” as in Kennedy 465.7-8 (Micha has “of the maiden who was very sad and very joyfully commended him”), 60The term en aventure relates to knight errantry: the knight simply sets out, without a precise destination in mind, and opens himself to whatever “adventures” may come his way as he goes. Lancelot, Part IT and some of his knights mounted and escorted them— Hector and the two who were leaving, Yvain and Sagremor. Hector asked about the direct route to the land of North Wales, and the lord showed him. Then Hector told him to turn back, and the lord left him at that point, thanking him warmly, for he felt much love for him. So Hector and the other two knights commended him to God, and he them. The lord left them and went back to his castle, and they rode on together until they entered an ancient forest of very tall trees, but it was not very large. After they had ridden a long way they came upon a stretch of open ground. They looked about and saw a knight forcibly dragging off a maiden by the reins of her mount, and in another direction another knight battling alone against two others and putting up a great fight. But after holding out for a long while, he turned and fled as fast as his horse could go, and they went spurring after him. When he saw that only one of them was gaining on him, he turned around, but when [312] the other drew near, he dared not wait for him, but rode as fast as he could in the direction from which Hector and his companions were coming. His attackers had so badly wounded him, it was no wonder he did not dare wait for them. While they were watching these two things, Sagremor the Unruly said, “Oh, God, why is there not a third adventure here, just now, so that each of us might have his own?” No sooner had he said this than he heard behind him the loudest wailing in the world, and it seemed there must have been more than a hundred people. “In God’s name,” said Hector to Sagremor, “He heard you, for the third adventure is not far off. Now let each man take his own, for we have no time to lose.” “In God’s name,” said Sagremor, “T’ll help that knight, who is in need.” “And I,” said Sir Yain, “that maiden, if I can.” “Then I'll go,” said Hector, “in search of the wailing I heard.” Then they commended one another to God. Hector rode off at great speed toward where he had heard the wailing, and for a long time he rode the length of that forest; he had gone somewhat beyond it and still he heard the cry in front of him, and it seemed very near, yet he had ridden fully two English leagues. When he again came onto open ground, he saw before him a great company of people carrying a bier and bitterly weeping and wailing. He rode after them until he caught up with a dwarf riding a thin nag, who could go only at a walk. Overtaking him, Hector asked him what was troubling these people, but the dwarf said not a word, and showed a most gloomy face.®! Hector again asked him why the people were weeping, but he refused to say a word; and he [313] asked him a third time, and he said not a word. “You are most disagreeable and spiteful,” he said, “refusing to tell me what I ask of you. For very little I would give you a good slap.” 61The dwarf who is discourteous to a knight is a common theme in Arthurian romance, already seen in chapter 56, pp. [155] and following. For other references, see Kennedy 2: 306. Lancelot, Part I “God help you,” replied the dwarf, “strike me and I'll tell you why those people are weeping, for I won’t tell you otherwise.” “May devils strike you,” said Hector, “for I have no desire to do so. Tell me, and you'll be behaving sensibly.” “May God damn me,” said the dwarf, “if I tell you for nothing!” “Then I'll give you what you want,” said Hector, “if you tell me.” “Tl tell you,” replied the dwarf, “provided you strike me first.” ‘I’m not interested in striking you,” said Hector. “I would prefer to accomplish some feat of arms, for I’d be ashamed of beating you, however I might strike you.” “May God never help me, if any shame ever comes to you from that! But if you don’t do it, and you live until the day after tomorrow, you will have more shame than any knight ever had, and I’ll do all I can to bring it about.” “Why?” asked Hector. “Because you are an evil, treacherous traitor.” Then he flung out his hands, seized Hector’s reins, and tried to spit in his face, and with a club he was carrying struck his horse on the head so that he brought it to its knees. This greatly grieved Hector, for he was very fond of the horse; it was the one that had belonged to the knight with whom he had jousted at the Narrow March, beyond the bridge, and it was very fine. He said to the dwarf, “God help me, dwarf, I’ll strike you, if you strike my horse again this day.” Then the dwarf raised his club and struck again, and Hector raised his armored leg, and kicked the dwarf so that he bore both him and his nag to the ground. And [314] as he lay there, he said, “Get out of here, and cursed be the hour I ever saw you, for I have never had as much trouble as I’ve had from dwarves.” And the dwarf replied that he would have yet more because of him than he ever had before, “and I can tell you, you won’t live beyond tomorrow, provided I am still alive.” Then Hector dismounted and said, “I’m not concerned about whatever you may do, but I will nevertheless help you to remount.” And he put him back into the saddle. “God help me,” said the dwarf, “if you love your own life, you would have done better to kill me, for you will lose your life because of mine.” ‘TI care nothing for your threats,” said Hector, “but tell me why those people are weeping and wailing so.” ‘T’ll tell you,” he said. “They are carrying the bier of a dead knight who was a highborn nobleman, and because of whom many evils will yet be committed.” “And did he die in combat?” asked Hector. “Yes,” answered the dwarf. “And who killed him?” asked Hector. And the dwarf told him the story, until at length Hector realized that this was the knight he had killed when he rescued Sinados of Windsor, one of the cousins of that knight’s wife.©? Then Hector thought hard about what he was going to do, for he was sure he would have a fight if he went near the body; but if he turned back, he would have to say so, according to his 62See this chapter, p. [264]. 19D oath,® when he returned to King Arthur’s court. At length he said [315] he hoped God might never help him if he turned away from such a confrontation. Then he left the dwarf and rode forward ahead of the bier and greeted the people, but they said not a word. And as he passed by, the wounds of the corpse, which already smelled bad, began to bleed.64 And the dwarf began to shout, “Catch the murderer! Catch the murderer!” Around the bier there were as many as twenty knights, some unarmed and some in armor except for their heads. One of them recognized Hector by his armor and said, “By God, this man killed my lord!” And they all began wailing anew, and those who were unarmed called for their armor and the others called for their helmets, and they said he was a dead man. Then Hector charged across the field and headed for the first man coming toward him; he struck him so that he bore him to the ground, and unhorsed three others before his lance broke. When it was broken, he drew his sword and fought with them most valiantly. The horse he rode had all the qualities he could desire. Then the dwarf rode up and cried that it would be to their misfortune if he escaped. And they all attacked Hector and struck him high and low until they greatly tired him out and injured him. But then a knight errant came riding up, with a maiden beside him, and this was the knight whom Hector had avenged for the dishonor done to him by Guinas [316] of Blakestan, and the maiden who had led Hector to Guinas’s pavilion.© As soon as the maiden saw Hector surrounded by his enemies, she said to her beloved, as he was riding toward them, “My lord, that is the knight who fought for you against Guinas and risked his life in order to avenge your dishonor; they will soon kill him if you don’t help him.” “What?” said the knight. “Do you say that is the one?” “Yes, my lord, without a doubt.” “In that case he has nothing to fear.” Then he rode forward and ordered all the knights to draw back; when they heard this they said, “My lord, this is the man who killed your brother.” When the knight heard this, he fainted on the spot. And the knights attacked Hector anew, but the maiden dashed into their midst and said she would have them all put to death, for her beloved had promised this man his protection. Then her lover recovered from his faint, and she said that if he did not help Hector he would be guilty of treason. He ordered them, as they valued their lives, to break off their attack, which they did. And he asked, “Sir knight, what is your name?” And he said his name was Hector. “Hector,” he said, “you killed my brother, and I know how it happened; on the other hand, you have done so much for me that I cannot be base or disloyal toward you. 63See chapter 58, p. [212]. 641¢ was a common belief that the wounds of a dead man would bleed when his killer was near. See Chrétien’s Yvain, 117785, Kibler ed., and Kennedy, 2: 307. 65See this chapter, pp. [249-251]. 196 But now go on your way, for you are in no danger here, but elsewhere I won’t give you safe conduct.” And Hector replied, “Many thanks, my lord.” Then Hector went on his way, and the dwarf, who was supremely disloyal, said that the knights were dead and dishonored if they refused to follow the instructions he was about to give them, [317] and they said they would do so. He asked for a squire, and they gave him one. He sent him to a defile he knew about, saying that the knight would pass that way without fail. The squire was to take care to be there ahead of him and to ask him where he wanted to go, and he would say to North Wales. “You will tell him that you can lead him there; then lead him to Hermit’s Spring—you know where that is. Once there, tell him it is the best spring in the world, and that whoever drinks from it is just as fresh and healthy as if he had never felt any injury or pain. Then he will dismount; immediately get on his horse and ride quickly to the Fens. He will follow you without fail, for he is a valiant knight, and we'll capture him, for Ladomas doesn’t guarantee him his protection anywhere he may go.” (Ladomas was the knight’s name, and the name of his brother who had been killed was Mataliz.) “And,” the dwarf added, “take along a loaf of bread, and soak some pieces in the spring, for the knight may not have eaten today, and will be glad to do so.” So the squire went on his way, just as the dwarf had told him to, met the knight, and asked him where he was going, to which he replied that he wanted to be in the land of North Wales. “Ah, my lord,” replied the squire, “you're not going in the right direction.” “And [318] which way should I go, then?” asked Hector, suspecting no treachery. “T’ll show you the way,” said the traitor. Then he rode ahead and Hector followed; he left his road and they went along an old overgrown path that saw little traffic. Hector said he did not believe they were going the right way, for this path was too old. “My lord,” said the squire, “whatever its condition, it leads straight to the main road; but you left it long ago, and now I’ll guide you so that you’ll be there in short order.” He went on ahead with Hector following, and‘they rode until they saw Hermit’s Spring. That spring was so called because on a mountain above there was a hermit who drank no other water. As they reached the spring, the squire asked, “My lord, have you eaten today?” “No, in truth,” said Hector. “My lord,” said the squire, “I have a loaf of bread, and am very hungry myself. Even if you didn’t have anything to eat, you at least ought to drink, for this is the most healthful spring and the most wonderful in all of Great Britain, since any knight, no matter how ill or wounded, who drinks from it will be healed in all his body. Since you haven’t eaten today, dismount and eat two or three pieces of soaked bread, for I can go no longer without eating.” [319] 66This is another example of a character’s being named long after his first appearance in the story. Ladomas appeared at the very beginning of this chapter, p. {243]; Mataliz was killed by Hector on p. [264]. Lancelot, Part IT The squire insisted until at length Hector dismounted, and the squire prepared the bread in the spring. Hector removed his helmet and his shield and hung them on an oak, and the squire took Hector’s charger and tethered it near the spring. Hector was very hungry, and ate most gladly. But while he was eating, the squire took his shield and slung it round his neck, took the helmet, mounted the good horse and rode off with it. When Hector saw this, he realized he had been betrayed; he dashed to the squire’s nag, jumped upon it, and spurred after the squire as fast as the nag could go. The squire rode off without waiting for him, but Hector spurred the nag so that he drew near. When Hector was near him, the squire spurred the horse so that he again put a good distance between them, and rode tranquilly on. Thus they rode on for a long time, until they approached the castle to which the dwarf had told the squire to lead Hector. People called it The Fens because it was surrounded by marshlands on all sides. The squire rode through the gate, with Hector after him, and then into a [320] house and out the other side. Hector did not know what had become of him, so he dismounted and followed the squire on foot into the house, but he found no living creature. He climbed a stairway to the top of a tower, and he saw an aged, white-haired man sitting there. Hector came before him and greeted him, and the old man returned his greeting. And Hector said to him, “My lord, have my horse returned to me, which a squire has brought in here, and my helmet and shield, which he also carried off.” The gentleman asked him who he was, and he said he was a knight of King Arthur’s household. At these words the squire entered, with nearly fifteen knights and men-at-arms, all in armor. And Hector said to the lord, “My lord, here is the squire who wickedly and disloyally stole my horse.” ‘I did not,” said the squire; “I took it rightfully, for one owes no faith or loyalty to a murderer, and that is what you are.” Then he said to the lord, “My lord, this is the man who treacherously and disloyally killed your son Mataliz.” When Hector heard this, he was enraged and furious; he drew his sword, charged at the squire, and struck him on the head so that he split him down to the shoulders. When he had done that, he jumped back and saw a shield hanging on a hook at the bottom of the keep. With a blow from his sword he cut the guige; the shield fell and he took it and defended himself most valiantly against those who were attacking him. The lord of the castle, who was an old man, felt great pity for him, for he had been badly wounded before he entered there; the old man jumped up from the chair where he was sitting, [321] went to Hector and ordered him to stop fighting, and told his men to draw back, which they did. Then the lord told Hector to surrender, and Hector replied, “My lord, how am I to surrender?” “Place yourself at my mercy,” said the lord. “In God’s name,” said Hector, “that I won’t do, for I don’t know what your conditions would be. But I'll surrender on condition that you let me justify myself before those who accuse me of murdering your son or treacherously slaying him.” Lancelot, Part IJ At these words, those carrying the corpse knocked at the gate and came forward with Ladomas. When he had climbed (oye into the tower and he saw Hector, Ladomas was deeply distressed, for he thought he could not protect him as he would have wished. “Oh, why did you come here?” he said to Hector. “My lord, this was done to me by a traitor who stole my horse.” Then the lord ran to his son Ladomas and was full of grief when he saw that Mataliz was dead. “My lord,” said Ladomas, “don’t kill this knight, for I would be long dead had it not been for him.” Then the maiden® began to weep, and the lord again ordered Hector to surrender, but he [322] refused. “Hector,” said Ladomas, “surrender to my lord!” And Hector said he would do whatever Ladomas advised, and so he yielded his sword to the lord, who accepted it. Then all the knights and men-at-arms left, and Ladomas was laid upon a bed. Hector was made to remove his armor, and Ladomas had him shut in a chamber, so that neither his men nor he nor his father would see him, for some madman might come along against whom he could not protect him. They put him in the chamber on his oath that he would not move without the lord’s leave. Then the bier was brought down into the courtyard, and the great grieving began anew, and the corpse was brought into the great hall. The priests and clerks were summoned to perform the appropriate service; the lord had had the body carried for two days because he did not want his son buried anywhere other than in that castle. And if he had not been such an old man, no one could have kept him from killing Hector, but as it was he was only concerned about saving his soul. And yet he was much comforted by what Hector had done for his son Ladomas, for he had fought against Guinas in order to defend him. Thus Hector was in the chamber, and had everything he needed. And the maiden for whom he had fought against Guinas kept him company whenever she could. The next day they buried Mataliz, and no one could relate how much he was mourned by so many people, and Hector himself wept copiously. Now Mataliz is buried, and the story leaves off speaking of him and of Hector and says no more of them for now, but returns to Galehaut and his companion, who would have had a delightful existence if they had had with them the ladies they most loved in all the world. But that could not be, for they were too distant from one another, and their ladies suffered no less than they did. [323] 67«he had climbed up,” as in Kennedy 471.24 (Micha has “when it [or “he”] was carried up”). 68The ladylove (amie) of Ladomas. 197 62. Galehaut Sends Lionel with a Message for the Queen.’ At this point the story relates that Lancelot was so ill that he could hardly eat or drink or sleep. Galehaut was very distressed by this, for he saw that Lancelot was sorely troubled; he asked him what was wrong, and his friend replied that he was certain he was dying. And Galehaut said to him, “My dear companion, if you could see my lady the queen, wouldn’t you feel better?” “My lord,” he replied, “I believe I would.” “Then by God,” said Galehaut, “I’ll arrange for you to see her.” “My lord,” said Lancelot, “how can that be?” “T'll tell you,” answered Galehaut. “We’ll send word to my lady that she has too long forgotten us, for we have not seen her since the beginning of May, and it’s already January, and that she should arrange for us to see her again.” “Ah, my lord,” replied Lancelot, “for God’s sake, I believe my lady is so loyal and so excellent that she would most gladly see us, if that were possible, but she cannot. I greatly fear that this may be distressing to her, and I would rather die and much more gladly bear my illness as long as I can endure, for I live only through her, and I would not lose as much as she would if I died. But as you arrange the matter, so will it be.” “Now don’t be worried,” said Galehaut, guarantee you can rely completely upon her.” “My lord,” said Lancelot, “how will we get word to her?” “We will send your cousin Lionel, and I know how to charge him with your message.” Then he summoned Lionel, and said to him, “Lionel, you are to go to my lady the queen? and speak to her secretly, so that no one else hears what you say. And do you know how you are going to accomplish this? You will ask where King Arthur is, and you'll ask for my lady of Malehaut and tell her [324] that he who is entirely at her service, Galehaut of the Distant Isles, greets her, and that I send her as a sign this ring that she gave me the day after she gave me her love and I gave her mine, and that on the basis of this sign she is to believe what you tell her on my behalf.” Then Galehaut told him much of what had happened between Lancelot and the queen, and he explained the establish ment of their amorous liaison. “On the basis of these credentials you will ask the lady of Malehaut® to arrange for you to speak to the flower of all ladies, and she will very gladly do so. Take care to be noble, wise, and well-mannered, for you are to appear before the rose of all the ladies of the world. And if she asks you who you are, tell her you are the son of King Bors of Gaunes and first cousin to Lancelot. And if she asks about her friend, tell her he cannot fare well when he doesn’t see her. And tell her she has forgotten us for longer than we deserve, “for I Corresponds to Micha VIII:LXIla, Sommer III:357-358; Kennedy 472-473. 2“the queen” supplied from Kennedy 473.10. 3“he who is... lady of Malehaut” supplied from Kennedy 473.12-19; most of this material is in Micha’s note 2.a. eS and that she should take immediate measures so that we may see her again, if she wishes to have mercy upon the two most unhappy men alive.” Galehaut charged Lionel with all the words he felt would be most effective, and Lionel replied that he would faithfully tell the queen everything Galehaut had told him to say, omitting nothing. Then he took his leave. “Now go,” said Galehaut, “and swear to tell no one whose service you are in or where you are going, for you would bring about our deaths and your own dishonor.” And Lionel told Galehaut that he should not be concerned, for he would sooner let both his eyes be plucked out. Then Lionel set out and made his way directly toward [325] King Arthur’s court. But now the story leaves off speaking of Galehaut and Lancelot and the youth, and returns to speak of Sir Gawain. 63. Gawain’s Further Adventures During His Quest for Lancelot.’ At this point the story relates that when Sir Gawain had departed from the knight whose arm he had broken and had left him in the Heath of the Crossroads with the maiden who was carrying the shield to King Arthur’s court,” he rode on all day until he came to the head of the river that divided the forest. He rode along the river until it was growing very dark; then he looked toward the river to his right and saw a man wearing a white robe and walking along very fast. Sir Gawain, who had not eaten all day, saw that night was approaching. Since the forest was deep and dangerous and full of treachery, he spurred after the man in white. The latter heard him coming, looked, and saw he was a knight; then he waited for him, removed the white hood from his head, bowed, and said, “Welcome.” Sir Gawain thought he must be a priest or a hermit, so he dismounted and asked him whether he was a hermit; he replied that he was a cleric. “And where are you going?” [326] asked Sir Gawain. “My lord,” he replied, “I’m going to a hermit near here, and to” a castle called Leverzep; I am hurrying, for he won’t sing vespers until I arrive there.” “What?” exclaimed Sir Gawain. “I thought there was only one hermitage in this forest.” “My lord, there are three: the Hermitage of the Crossing, another called Restful Hermitage because it’s in the most isolated spot you ever saw, and the third is called the Hermitage of the Cross, for on that spot, so say the ancients, was set the first cross ever raised in Great Britain or in all the lands on this side of the great sea.” “And the castle you come from, is it relatively near?” “My lord, it is fully two Welsh leagues off.” “And where is it situated?” asked Sir Gawain. “My lord, that way,” and he pointed off to the left. 1 Corresponds to Micha VIII:LXIUla, Sommer III:358-372; Kennedy 474-493. See chapter 60, pp. [238-243]. 3“near here, and to,” rather than Micha’s emended text (“near here, to”). Lancelot, Part IT “If I went there, I would go too far out of my way.’ I beg you to tell me whether there is any place of shelter near here.” “No, my lord,” said the cleric, “for this land has been completely destroyed by the war between the king of North Wales and the duke of Cambenic;” even now, at the castle I’ve come from, they expect the king of North Wales’s troops in the morning. But if you were to take my advice, you would come with me to the hermitage: you will be honored there this night.” [327] “Well, then,” said Sir Gawain, “I’ll do so, since you advise it; but now mount behind me, and we will go more quickly.” “My lord,” he replied, “I won’t mount, for I will go as quickly as your horse can pace.”® Then Sir Gawain remounted, and the cleric went speedily ahead with Sir Gawain following, until they reached the hermitage; the cleric knocked on the door, and the hermit opened it. When he saw the knight, he joyfully welcomed him and led him into his house. The cleric took his horse and carefully stabled it, then returned and helped Sir Gawain remove his armor. When his armor had been removed, the hermit went to sing vespers and Sir Gawain went to hear them. When they returned from vespers, the hermit hastily had what food he could find prepared for their meal, and this was on a Friday, so the story relates. That evening, after dinner, the hermit asked Sir Gawain who he was, and he said he was from the kingdom of Logres. “My lord,” he asked, “are you from the household of King Arthur?” “Yes.” “Then, my lord,” he said, “I believe the king has sent you here because of the discord between my lord the duke of Cambenic and the king of North Wales.”” “No,” said Sir Gawain, “I didn’t come here for that reason; rather, I’m seeking a knight I have never met, and I wouldn’t lie to you about this.” [328] “My lord,” said the hermit, “were you ever acquainted with my lord the duke?” “l’ve never met him,” replied Sir Gawain. Then the hermit began to look at him and, judging him to be a man of great valor, said, “My lord, since you are from King Arthur’s household, tell me your name, for I’ve heard that the greatest knights are always in King Arthur’s household.” “And who told you that?” asked Sir Gawain. “My lord, I had here with me a lord, a companion of mine, a knight, and he was deeply religious until great concern for worldly matters made him leave, for he had a 4Punctuation (period) as in Kennedy 474.32 (Micha has a question mark). 5 Already alluded to in chapter 60, p. [233], and in chapter 61, pp. [246] and [278]. Technically, ambletire (“pace”) refers to the gait of a horse in which both feet on one side are raised and lowered together. This is not necessarily a slow pace; in the present context there is some suggestion of speed. 7“my lord the duke ... North Wales,” as in Kennedy 475.2122 (Micha has “my lord the king of North Wales and the duke of Cambenic”). Lancelot, Part IT son who was being dispossessed by a neighbor who had taken all his land except for one very strong tower. There his troops were still holding out. The attacker was a very fierce knight named Segurade, who lived along the road out of Britain, beside Roestoc, near the river Severn.2 When the son saw he had lost everything, he did not know what to do except flee, for he saw that all his men had abandoned him because of their fear of this wondrous knight. So he came here to seek his father, whose name was Alier and who had been, so people said, wonderfully strong and an excellent knight. And the son, whose name was Marec, told his father he was going to flee. “When the father saw him in such anguish, he trembled in his heart, for he was still a man of flesh and blood. He asked me what he should do, and I told him I could give him no advice; he said to me, ‘Master, is he who [329] destroys life without justification not worse than a Saracen? If I went overseas to fight against the destroyers of Christendom, it would be judged praiseworthy, for I must do all in my power to avenge the death of Jesus Christ, since Iam a Christian. Therefore I'll go to avenge my son, who is a Christian, and help him against those who are in the place of the unbelievers.’ This was the argument he set forth to me. “So he left here still wearing the monk’s robe, and he said he would not abandon it. And he often spoke of King Arthur’s household and said he had long been a part of it.” “In God’s name,” said Sir Gawain, “he spoke the truth. And when was this, when he left here?” “My lord,” said the hermit, “it was after Easter, and since then I have had much news of him, for with great force he brought his war to an end, and he is soon due to return. And he told me I should never fail to ask the name of any knight I met, either here or elsewhere, if I had the opportunity. And now I have the opportunity, and so I ask you to tell me your name.” Then Sir Gawain said his name was never concealed, “and even if I concealed it from some people, I wouldn’t keep it from you. My name is Gawain, the nephew of King Arthur.”9 “Ah, my lord,” said the hermit, “before all other knights, you are welcome! And so you should be, and it grieves me that we are unable to show you greater honor. But may God do so, for all the world speaks well of you. And to what land will you go, and by what road?” “I wish to go to the land of Galehaut, the son of the Giantess.” “And are you certain the knight you seek is there?” “Indeed,” replied Sir Gawain, “Iam not.” “And [330] what will you do there, good sir?” 8The names Segurade, Roestoc, and Severn create a linkage with earlier events, particularly in Chapters 56-58. 9Gawain’s readiness to give his name is a traditional motif in Arthurian literature. Kennedy contrasts this behavior on the part of the well-established knight with that of Lancelot, “who is determined to withhold his name until he has established his reputation under various disguises” (2: 312). This contrast is treated at length in Elspeth Kennedy, Lancelot and the Grail: A Study of the Prose Lancelot (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986), particularly chapter II, “The Making of a Name or Quest for Identity,” pp. 10-48. 199 “ll tell you,” said Sir Gawain. “I’m seeking the very best knight in all the world; he is a young bachelor, and I believe he is there with Galehaut.” “What is his name?” asked the hermit. “Sir,” he replied, “Lancelot of the Lake.” The hermit was silent for a moment, and then he said, “My lord, may God grant you success in this quest.” Then the cleric began to speak of the war between the duke of Cambenic and the king of North Wales, and he said to the hermit that the king’s troops were due to arrive the next morning at the castle of Leverzep, and that though the duke was there with all his forces, there were, it was said, many more knights on the other side. Then Sir Gawain asked which of them was in the wrong in this war, and the hermit said it was the king, for he had built a mighty castle on the duke’s land while the duke was in King Arthur’s service, so that the king lost it. And the duke gave it to a very fine knight, because the knight had taken the king’s daughter from him. Then Sir Gawain was sure that this was Agravain’s castle.!° And he asked which of them was winning the war, and the hermit replied that the duke was, except for one of his sons who had died, the cause of great mourning in this land, “nor have you [331] ever seen the likes of him, for the young man was very handsome and valiant, and were it not for that, the duke’s war would have been fine and honorable, and you would never see a handsomer knight than he or one who loved Holy Church more.” The hermit and Sir Gawain spoke together at length, until it was time to retire; then they gave Sir Gawain a very good place to sleep. In the morning, after the hermit had sung his matins, he found Sir Gawain had risen; he wished God might grant him a good day, and Sir Gawain invoked God’s blessing upon him. “My lord,” said the hermit, “I advise you to hear Mass, since it is daylight.” “Indeed,” he replied, “I would gladly do so, for I haven’t heard it as often as I would have wished.” Then the hermit went to sing Mass; Sir Gawain listened wholeheartedly and then went to put on his armor and take leave of the hermit, before mounting to leave. And the hermit drew him aside and said, “My lord, you are a great nobleman and much honored, and if you tell me why you’re seeking that knight called Lancelot, perhaps I could tell you where you can find out about him.” “Sir,” said Sir Gawain, “I promise you on my oath that I seek him only for his own benefit; he is the knight I love most in all the world, though I have never met him.” Then he told him how twenty knights of King Arthur’s household had set out to seek him. “My lord,” said the hermit, “T’ll tell you how {332] to obtain news of him. The other day a maiden who is my niece stayed here, on her way to King Arthur’s court, and she told me Lancelot was with Galehaut in the land of Sorelois.” And Sir Gawain said he had met her and that she was carrying a shield.!! 10Compare chapter 60, pp. [231] and [233]. see chapter 60, pp. [242-243]. 200 “That is the truth,” said the hermit, “and I can tell you that she is a close cousin of Lancelot’s.” “And where is Sorelois?” asked Sir Gawain. “My lord,” replied the hermit, “at the end of North Wales, in the direction of the setting sun. But I must tell you that he is there with so few companions that no one who goes there can find him. I would not tell this to anyone else, whoever he might be, but one must conceal nothing from you, since you are such a loyal gentleman.” “Sir,” said Sir Gawain, “I would gladly go by way of the castle where the duke of Cambenic is.” ‘First,” said the hermit, “I will tell you all the details of your route, since I have begun. Go straight through the land of North Wales to the waters of the Ausurne, and from that point on ask the way to Sorelois, and you will find plenty of people to inform you. And once you have gone a long way from the river, you’ll see a high hill to your right, called the Round Mountain by the people of the land. Keep straight on until you see a stream that runs toward the mountain, and there you turn. Go to the top of a hill and you will find a hermitage and a hermit who is my lord. [333] Greet him for me, and tell him that I ask him, because he taught me what I know, to tell you news of Lancelot, if he has any, and you will hear whatever he can tell you. And I beg and advise you to stay one night with him, and he will love you all the better for that, for all people who have not seen you are eager to do so, because of the good that is said of you. And because you have said you would gladly go by way of the castle of Leverzep, I’m very grateful to you, for I dared not suggest it myself, lest you think I did so for some other reason. I will have my cleric lead you, until you see it with your own eyes.” “Many thanks,” he replied. Then he took his leave, and the hermit sent his cleric to lead him until they were in sight of Leverzep. The cleric set out with Sir Gawain following him, until they reached the forest of Breckham. And when they saw the castle, Sir Gawain asked the cleric what castle it was. “My lord,” he replied, “that is Leverzep.” “Cleric,” said Sir Gawain, “is this the way there?” “Yes, indeed, my lord,” he replied. “Then be on your way, for you have led me far enough.” “My lord,” said the cleric, “I’d like to accompany you farther, if you have no objection.” “You will not,” said Sir Gawain. “Now go with God.” Then the cleric turned back, and Sir Gawain told him to convey his greetings to his lord. [334] Then Sir Gawain rode on, fearing he had tarried too long. When he saw the castle it was already well after daybreak, for the days had already grown short as in winter. Then he looked around, and in an open space before the castle, as near as one could reach in three shots, he saw a great assembly of knights, and these were the men of the castle who had gone forth, and they were not having the best of it. And he saw one knight all alone in the middle of the fields, taking no part in the action on either side. Then Sir Gawain stopped, for he did not know whether they were fighting in precisely equal numbers, or in what manner Lancelot, Part IT they were fighting;!* he did not wish to intervene, for he feared his action might be misconstrued. The hermit’s cleric had thought he would be cheated if he did not see this good bit of fighting, so he had come to the castle by way of a short-cut and had climbed up onto the walls. When he saw Sir Gawain was not moving, he was very sad, for he was eager to see him joust, so he thought he would do what hé could to get him involved. He came down from the wall and into the field, and found the duke’s brother coming out of the melee where he had been hard-pressed; he wanted to change his helmet, for he had acquitted himself well. “Ah, my lord,” said the cleric, “don’t go there! I'll show you how your enemies will [335] all be defeated.” The knight asked him how this might be. “God help me,” said the cleric, “there is the best knight who ever bore a shield, and if you can get his help you will have won everything.” “What is his name?” asked the knight. “In God’s name,” said the cleric, “he is Sir Gawain, the nephew of King Arthur.” When the knight heard that, he was as happy as could be. “Which one is he?” he asked, “for I see two there.” The cleric replied, “He’s the one with the white shield.” Then the knight turned his horse and told the cleric to take care that no one else should know this, and he said he would. Then he galloped full speed toward Sir Gawain and greeted him from as far away as he could be heard, and Sir Gawain returned his greeting. “Ah, sir knight,” he said, “pray come help us, and you will perform a good and courtly deed. You see we need you badly, for we are defending our right against him who assails us and the right to our heritage itself.” “Truly,” replied Sir Gawain, “I didn’t know how things stood, for I see a knight just standing there, and so I thought you were fighting with precisely equal numbers.” “My lord,” replied the knight, “we are not, for we are badly outnumbered.” “Then I will very gladly go to your aid,” said Sir Gawain, “but go to that knight and beg him to help you, for one good knight is worth a lot.” The knight went to him, and begged for his help. “Have you appealed to that one there?” he asked. The knight said he had. “And will you have hime” “Yes, my lord,” he replied. “And do you know who he is?” “My lord,” he replied, “I don’t know it for a fact, but if you will not reveal it, I'll tell you what I have heard.” “I won’t speak of it, so help me God.” [336] “He is Sir Gawain.” Then the other knight began to laugh, believing this was a lie, for he thought this must be some knight who was going by the name of Gawain. The duke’s brother begged him to join their forces, but he replied that since he had Gawain he had enough help, and he would never fight on his side. “Now let Gawain be with you,” he said. 12«were fighting,” as in note 13.b and Kennedy 479.30 (Micha has “were pursuing one another”). Lancelot, Part IT Then the duke’s brother turned back. The other knight was Girflet the son of Doon, but he was not wearing his own arms—for Sir Gawain would certainly have recognized them. But he had lost them in a fight in which he had been taken prisoner, the day that Sir Gawain had left them, when Hector had unhorsed all four of them.!5 And the war of which the hermit had spoken to Sir Gawain was the one between Marec, the son of Alier, and Canagues, the nephew of Segurade, whom Sir Gawain had defeated with his own helmet.!4 Then the duke’s brother came to Sir Gawain and told him that the other knight refused to join them because he was there, but he did not tell him he had told the knight his name or that he knew it. Then the two of them rode forth, and the duke’s brother kept the helmet he had, waiting to see what Sir Gawain would do. [337] Girflet rode off in the other direction. Sir Gawain did not go where he saw the thickest fighting, but he saw a group that had withdrawn and put their arms and the straps of their shields in good order and were about to come back into the melee. Sir Gawain charged at them full speed. When Girflet saw this he said he would be very sorry if he failed to strike him first, for he did not believe this was Sir Gawain. And if it was he, so be it, for in any case he could gain nothing but honor by jousting with him, and many times he had wished to joust with him without being recognized. Then he spurred his horse and positioned his shield and rode to attack Sir Gawain as fast as his horse could go. Sir Gawain saw him coming, recognized this was the knight he had seen in the fields, and turned to meet him. They struck each other on their shields with such speed and so violently that each one’s boards were split. Girflet’s lance shattered and flew into bits, but Sir Gawain thrust so well that he vehemently bore him to the ground. Then Sir Gawain’s lance shattered in turn. He looked about and saw that those with whom he wished to do battle were headed toward the melee. He spurred his horse, charged in where it was thickest, drew his sword, [338] plunged into their midst, and began to perform such feats of arms that all who saw him were amazed. And the duke’s brother stayed right with him, striving to do well, and yet he had already acquitted himself well before. When Girflet had remounted, he came to the melee where Sir Gawain was and saw the wonders he was accomplishing; he immediately realized this was truly Gawain, and he watched him with great pleasure. And when he saw he was at a slight disadvantage, he could not abide it, but rather helped him all he could. Sir Gawain clearly saw this, and was greatly puzzled as to who this might be. Then the duke’s brother went to the duke and said to him, “Look, my lord, how the battle is going for you: just a single knight has done this for you.” 13See chapter 55, pp. [149-152]; “the day that,” as in Kennedy 481.9 (Micha has “where”). l4See chapter 56, pp. [186-188]; for Marec, see this chapter, pp. [328-329]. 201 The duke had seen him, but he did not know who he was, and his brother said he was from the household of King Arthur. “What is his name?” asked the duke. “In truth,” said his brother, “that is Sir Gawain.” “Say no more,” said the lord; “let’s go see him more clearly, and let’s be nearer to him.” Then they went to see Sir Gawain. The duke’s men were striving to acquit themselves well, for Sir Gawain inspired even the most cowardly with courage. And the duke’s brother was amazed at Girflet, who had been against him that very day and who was now helping to relieve Sir Gawain wherever he could. Those fighting with Sir Gawain performed very well, pressing so hard upon their foes that they were put to rout, [339] though they had the greater numbers, and the pursuit began. The duke’s men spurred to attack them, Sir Gawain and Girflet following them closely, and Sir Gawain was most puzzled as to who this knight might be. Then Sir Gawain arrived at a ditch; he felt his horse was very willing, and he let him jump over it. But when he saw another he was afraid, 5 and he pulled so hard that one of his reins broke. Girflet took the horse by the rein and stopped it, then retied the reins and said to Sir Gawain, “My lord, I don’t know whom I serve, but I am fighting on this side only because of you. Now I adjure you, in the name of the person you love most, to tell me who you are.” Sir Gawain gave his name, and Girflet was overjoyed. “Ah, my lord,” he said, “welcome to you above all men, for God help me if I didn’t suspect it was you, ever since you unhorsed me.” “And who are you, then?” asked Sir Gawain. “My lord, I am Girflet.” When Sir Gawain heard this, he embraced his friend, in full armor though he was, and welcomed him most joyfully. While the two of them were discovering each other’s identity, the forces from North Wales had rallied against the duke’s troops and were returning powerfully to the attack. And [340] Girflet saw this and said to Sir Gawain, “See, my lord, how things are going badly for us, because you’re not there! But as soon as you are back in the fight, those who have rallied will be defeated, and, God willing, they will have no shelter where they can hide, and every single one will be taken prisoner.” Then both of them spurred back into the melee, swords drawn, even keener on distinguishing themselves than they had been before: you may believe that in their charge they met no knight who could resist them, and each of them had such a good sword that no armor could withstand them. Both of them accomplished such feats of arms that all who saw them were amazed, and their allies, who had earlier been repulsed, now drew courage and boldness from them. The king’s troops so feared them that they dared not stand their ground: they turned their backs and the pursuit began; they loosed their reins and rode off at full speed. The others spurred after them, and in the chase a nephew of the king fell. The duke came upon him «was afraid,” as in note 19.a and Kennedy 482.30 (Micha’s sentence is unclear). 202 and killed him, and said, “That is for my son, whom he killed.” Then they were so put to rout that there could be no orderly retreat, and each one fled for safety wherever he could, The duke’s men took many dead and wounded and captured many prisoners, and they would have taken many more, [341] had night not overtaken them, and they turned back. Together Sir Gawain and Girflet rode off as quietly as they could and traveled at random through much of the night until they came to the edge of a forest. Then the moon began to shine brightly, and Girflet looked and, by the moonlight, saw at the entrance to the forest what seemed to be two maidens. He said to Sir Gawain, “My lord, do you see what I see?” “I see two maidens sitting under those far trees.” “My lord,” said Girflet, “this is a fine adventure for this time of night!” Then they made their way toward the maidens, and the more beautiful one rose, came straight to them, and said, “My lords, welcome; you have long delayed your coming.” “God grant you good fortune,” they replied. “What then, fair friend,” said Sir Gawain, “did you know we were to come this way?” “We have known it,” they replied, “as of today.” Then they both dismounted to join them and removed their helmets. Sir Gawain took the more beautiful one and led her to one side, and Girflet took the other; they were both so beautiful that they said they had never seen more beautiful maidens. When they had unburdened themselves of their armor, they unbridled their horses and then sat down at the entrance to the forest, and each knight asked for the love of the maiden with him. One replied to Sir Gawain, “My lord, your love would be an evil thing, if I had it, for [342] it would be wasted, since you’re a great knight and I am buta poor and not very beautiful maiden. But I’ll give you a ladylove, the fairest your eyes have ever seen and a more noble lady than I.” Sir Gawain replied that she could not be any more beautiful than the maiden herself. “God help me,” she declared, “she is, and I assure,you she has a hundred times my beauty. When you see her you will certainly not want to have had your way with me; I would never dare see her if you did, for she is my lady, and I would rather be dead than be possessed by you.” “And who is she?” Sir Gawain asked. “By God,” she replied, “you won’t find out until you hold her in your arms, if you dare to hold her, for she desires nothing else in the world as much as she desires you.” “And do you know who I am?” he asked. “Yes, indeed,” she replied, “you are Sir Gawain, and that knight there is named Girflet.” Then Sir Gawain began to laugh, and he took her in his arms and began to kiss her as gently as he could and laid her beneath him on the ground and was about to make love to her. But she said it was in vain, that it could not be, “but I’ll give you a more beautiful lady, I promise you, by the day after tomorrow, if you dare follow me; a more beautiful lady Lancelot, Part IT you will never see. Now I beg you, as truly as you hope to enjoy the person you most desire in all the world, press me no further,!® for you would regret it.” And Sir Gawain granted what she asked. Girflet, meanwhile, so successfully wooed his maiden that she gave him her love and agreed to let him do with her as he wished, and he swore he would follow her wherever she wished to lead him. [343] Then they withdrew to a most delightful spot, some distance from Sir Gawain, and he took his pleasure with her. Indeed, Girflet had conceived such a love for his maiden that he loved no one else so much. The maiden who was with Sir Gawain then summoned him to follow her; he replied that he was all ready, then called to Girflet and asked him whether he was ready to go. “Yes, my lord,” he replied, “wherever this maiden, whom I serve, wishes.” “My lord,” said the maiden to Sir Gawain, “go forth from here, for Girflet won’t follow you.” And Sir Gawain asked Girflet whether this was so, and he replied that it was and that he would follow her wherever she wished to lead him. “Then may God be your guide,” said Sir Gawain. “Go with God,” he replied. “And where will you go?” “‘T’ll follow this maiden wherever she goes.” “God help me,” she said, “you have no cause to fear, and I will never lead you anywhere that will not be to your honor, or where I believe you might not be received as handsomely as you might wish.” [344] Then they left Girflet and his ladylove and rode all night with the maiden confidently leading the way, until they saw a fine fire burning in the forest. The maiden rode in that direction, and found another maiden and two squires in full armor. The fire was large and fine, for winter had already begun; it was the end of September, when snow and frost approach and mornings and evenings grow colder. The maiden went straight to the fire, with Sir Gawain behind her. When those near the fire saw her, they jumped up to meet her and bade her welcome and asked who the knight was; she replied he was the knight she most loved and esteemed in all the world. They immediately came running and joyfully welcomed him, they helped him dismount and skillfully took care of his horse, for they had all they needed. Next they took his helmet and his shield, which they hung on a branch of a tall tree, and then they removed his armor, according to the maiden’s orders. When his armor had been removed, another maiden draped a cloak over his shoulders; she had taken it from a chest in the pavilion, and from the equipment there it seemed that the cloak was made for a highborn man. Then the other maiden ordered live coals brought into the pavilion. The maiden and Sir Gawain followed her; he looked about and saw one of the most beautiful beds he had ever seen, and he was profoundly puzzled why this bed was so finely and so richly prepared. Seats were arranged around the fire and tablecloths were spread; they sat down to a beautifully prepared meal. Sir Gawain was amazed at 16<sress me no further,” as in note 23.a and Kennedy 485.2 (Micha has “do not put me on the ground any more”). Lancelot, Part IT the richness of the wines and the dishes set out in such a place and so opportunely. When they had eaten all they wished and at their leisure, the maiden and Sir Gawain rose and went [345] for a walk in the woods, but they did not stay long. When they returned, Sir Gawain asked where such a pavilion had come from and why such a beautiful bed was prepared there, and she answered that all this was for him, the bed and all the fine preparations, “and yet no one but me knows who you are or what your name is.” Sir Gawain thought this was splendid. “And she sent me here,” she went on, “who loves you more than anyone else, so that I might welcome you as splendidly as I possibly could. But you will never learn who she is until she tells you herself. And I must tell you that she believes you more haughty than you are, for she believes that you would never deign to love any woman who is not of the highest lineage and of extraordinary beauty; I would not at any price want her to know that you wanted to make love to me. And if you speak of it to me again I’ll never love you, so take care not to do so, both for your own nobility and to avoid great injury to me.” “Have no fear,” he replied. “But tell me now where Girflet is going with his maiden.” ‘T’ll tell you,” she said. “It came about, long ago, that she loved a knight, and he dearly loved her, but in the end he left her and loved another, less worthy than she, and he gave her all this maiden’s jewels and one of the most beautiful chaplets any maiden ever had. She went to ask for her jewels, and the knight said she would never get them. And she discovered that his new ladylove had her chaplet on her head, and she told him that if she saw the woman, she would take her chaplet and her other jewels from her. And the knight asked her who would help her get them. ‘By God,’ she replied, ‘a better knight than you, one from King Arthur’s household, will accompany me, and I will bring him where you are and [346] you’ll see what I can do about you and your friend, for he will do!” whatever I command.’ ‘You whore!’ said the knight. ‘Because you have boasted of this, I will wait here every day for a month.’ “Now I’m sure,” she said, “that she is taking him there. And yesterday, when we were riding along a forest, we met a maiden—I don’t know who she is—and she implored us to tell her what adventure we were seeking, and she would put us on the right road, if she could. We told her one of us was seeking Sir Gawain, and the other another knight of King Arthur’s household, and she said no women had ever been so fortunate, ‘for tonight,’ she said, ‘at the edge of Combe Forest, you will find Sir Gawain and Girflet the son of Doon, if you go to that region called the Great Plain; they will come along the road that comes from Mavaches to Windsor, and you'll recognize them by the fact that Sir Gawain carries a white shield!8 and Girflet a red shield with a very broad gold band!® across it.’ That’s what the maiden said to us, and I can tell you we were very glad to hear this 17«for he will do” supplied from Kennedy 487.3. 18«white,” as in Sommer 367.28, Kennedy 487.16-17, and on p. [335] (Micha has “red”). 196d ... gold band,” as in Sommer 367.29 and Kennedy 487.17 (Micha has “a white shield with a very broad gold top”). 203 news, as long as we didn’t find out who she was.” And Sir Gawain was deeply puzzled as to who she might be. As they were talking, they reached the pavilion and found beds richly prepared. The maiden had Sir Gawain’s boots and leg-armor removed, and then had him lie down in the most beautiful bed and stayed with him until he fell asleep; [347] then she and the other maiden lay down at the foot of that bed. The next morning the maidens arose very early, and when Sir Gawain had awakened he arose and his armor was brought to him. When he had donned his armor, the maiden called two squires and told them to prepare all their equipment for departure. Then she drew the other maiden aside and told her quietly, “Tell my lady that I have faithfully done all she ordered and that I will be with her before the day after tomorrow and will bring her what she wants, but be sure not to speak of this to anyone else.” And she said she would not. Then she and Sir Gawain set out, and she said, “My lord, I'll lead you as secretly as I can, for under no circumstances would I want you to be seen by any man or woman. Tonight you'll stay at the home of my aunt, the most generous lady I ever saw, and tomorrow evening we'll reach our destination, in the most beautiful place you ever entered in your whole life.” So they rode all day through the remote places she knew, until at late afternoon they came to the house of the maiden’s aunt. She joyfully received them, for she knew just how to do it, and had everything prepared that she believed fitting. They dined very well, for they had fasted all day. [348] At the end of the meal two squires entered there, one of whom was the lady’s son and the other her nephew. When the lady saw them, she asked what news they had, and they told her “very bad.” “How is this?” she asked. “Indeed, my lady,” said her son, weeping, “my father bids me tell you he’ll never see you again, and he asks that for God’s sake you remember his soul.” “What is this?” she asked. “My lady,” he replied, “the duke has commanded that tomorrow he be put to death, for it cannot be otherwise.” When the lady heard this she jumped up from the table and began to mourn as bitterly as any Christian woman ever could. And Sir Gawain did all he could to comfort her, and he asked how such a situation could be. “My lord,” said the lady, “I had a lord, an excellent vavasor,2? somewhat elderly, and he was much loved by the duke of Cambenic and by his people. Now war has broken out in this land. And my lord the duke had a son, a handsome and valiant young man, the king’s men killed him near here, at the entrance to this forest, and my lord was there, filled with grief. But the duke’s seneschal told the duke that my lord had betrayed him, and the duke asked him how he knew this. ‘From those,’ he said, ‘to whom he boasted in the war,’ and he said he was ready to prove it. The duke was full of anguish at this, for he dearly loved my lord, [349] who had served him all his life. But he was so full of grief over his son that he had my lord arrested and said he must be punished, if he didn’t defend himself.” 20His name, Manassel, is revealed on p. [351]. 204 And Sir Gawain asked, “Has he no one to defend him?” “My lord,” said the lady, “he could find no knight, however close a friend he might be, who dared fight against that man, because he is the duke’s seneschal, a man of great prowess and a fine knight. Now things have gone so far that the seneschal has sought my lord’s death, because the duke had dearly loved and trusted him, but may God have mercy on my soul, he served him loyally, and I know he would prefer that his son and mine, who is standing there, were dead, rather than my lord the duke’s son.” Then Sir Gawain called to the son and asked him how it had happened that his father was condemned for the next day. “Well, my lord,” said the young man, “yesterday, when the troops of the king of North Wales were defeated, the seneschal went to the duke and said that if he didn’t do justice to him, he would never again serve in his household. The duke said he would gladly do so, and he asked him how; the seneschal spoke to him of the traitor who was in his prison?! because of the duke’s son, and he said that the traitor deserved to be hanged. Now he is summoned to appear tomorrow.” “And if he had someone to fight for him,” said Sir Gawain, “could that still be of use to him?” “God help me,” said the young man, “the duke said that if, before the morning, there were no man to defend him, he would be put to death. And my lord has not been able to find anyone, and he can no longer bear arms himself because of his great age.” [350] Then Sir Gawain looked at the maiden who had brought him there; she was weeping bitterly, and it grieved him, for he thought perhaps she was eager for him to undertake this fight. “But perhaps she dares not ask it of me,” he thought, and he feared she might consider it as unworthy conduct and recreancy if he drew back from it. So he went to the young man and told him to go quickly to his father and tell him?? to rest easy, for he had found a knight who would defend him. “And, God willing, I’ll manage to deliver him.” When the young man heard this he was overjoyed. He and his companion jumped onto their horses and went to the vavasor and told him the most joyful news he had ever had. Sir Gawain comforted and reassured the lady and told her to find him another shield, since the duke’s people would easily recognize him by his shield. The lady could suggest only an ugly old discolored shield that hung in the house; she showed it to him, and since it seemed solid and sturdy, he declared he would carry no other, even though it was quite ugly, but he would wear all his own armor. Things turned out well for him with respect to his horse, insofar as he did not wish to be recognized, for he did not have the one on which he had fought all day before Leverzep, but rather it was the one from which he had struck down the nephew of the king of North Wales, whom the duke killed.23 So he told the lady he required no more, that he had all he needed. 2lprison,” as in Kennedy 489.11 (Micha has “house”). 22 el] him,” as in Kennedy 489.25 (Micha has “and he [was to] 20 3See p. [340] of this chapter. Lancelot, Part IT And the lady said, “My lord, if you advise it, Pll go to my lord the duke and say that my lord is prepared to defend himself against him, thanks be to God, by the efforts of a single knight, if anyone dares come forward.” “My lady,” he replied, “that’s what I advise. And is [351] it very far?” “No, my lord. “It’s no more than five leagues from here.” : Then the lady had a horse brought out, and mounted and took some of her men-at-arms with her. And Sir Gawain admonished her to say nothing of him to anyone, except that he was a knight, “and tomorrow, as soon as you know the battle is to take place, send someone to fetch me with all speed, for I’d like to go there as quickly?* as possible.” Then the lady left him, and her niece came to her and told her to rest assured, for this was the best knight who ever bore a shield. She was much comforted. She rode to the castle and managed to speak to her lord and tell him of this; as she was leaving she said, “Dear Lord God, help us, as truly as we have no guilt in this!” In the morning the duke learned that Manassel had found a knight to fight for him, and he was very glad. Then the lady came before him in his bed where he lay, and she told him her lord’s knight was prepared for battle. And the duke sent for the seneschal and told him, and the seneschal replied that he was never so happy, and he declared he was completely ready. “Well,” said the lady, “God willing, you’ll have your hands full before the day is out.” Then she asked the duke where the battle would be, and he said outside the walls, on a great plain recently enclosed by ditches for the fortification of the castle; the castle was called Cicaverne, and it was very [352] fine. Then the lady sent for Sir Gawain; he was already fully armed, for he did not know when someone would come for him. The seneschal had asked where the knight was who was to fight with him, and he was told he was at Manassel’s castle. If he had known he was at the lady’s house, he would have sent someone ahead to kill him, for he was full of the greatest sort of treachery. Thus was the seneschal’s scheme foiled. Sir Gawain rode until he came to Cicaverne. In the house where he had stayed he had taken an old, blackened lance with a heavy ashen shaft; the head was old and rusty, but it was sharp and would cut well. The seneschal had already come before the duke, all ready for battle. But Sir Gawain told the lady he wanted to hear Mass; it was prepared for him, and he went and earnestly prayed to Our Lord to grant him honor that day, since he was truly fighting on the side of honor and pity. Then he came out of the church, and his horse was brought to him. As he was putting his foot into the stirrup, an arrow struck him right in the middle of the flap of his hauberk, so that it went through and struck his horse in the flank and wounded it. He was deeply grieved by this. Nevertheless, he mounted and rode through the town, placing his shield on the side from which the blow had 24«quickly,” as in note 36.a and Kennedy 490.16 (Micha has “secretly”). Lancelot, Part IT come. He came before the duke, and his horse was bleeding profusely. The duke asked the people with him who had wounded the knight’s horse, and they told him. [353] Then Sir Gawain dismounted before the duke, greeted him, and said, “My lord, I believed myself to be safe, for in my land it is the custom, when one knight is to do battle with another, that he is protected from all men except for him with whom he is to fight. Yet my horse has been wounded while under your protection: I should have been under your protection, since I had undertaken a combat before you. I can tell you that this will be spoken of here and elsewhere, and my complaint is addressed to you alone, since this misfortune befell me while under your protection.” The duke was deeply ashamed at this and said that, if he discovered who had done this thing, he would not for all his lands refrain from having him hanged by the neck, however close a friend he might be, “and I swear to you, sir knight, that I knew nothing of this, and it grieves me much more than it pleases me, for this brings great dishonor to me, and I hold myself responsible for it.” Then he had the relics brought and first of all swore upon them in the same terms he had already used, and then had the seneschal and all those who were with him swear the same oath. There were some who knew” that a brother of the seneschal, who was a young squire, had shot at him, and the duke immediately had him hanged, saying he would never go back on his oath. Then he had his best and most handsome horse brought for Sir Gawain, and told him to mount. Sir Gawain did so reluctantly, but found the horse very much to [354] his liking; then he dismounted again. They came back to the matter of the oaths, and the vavasor was brought*® to the field in order to take his oath. First the seneschal swore that he knew that the vavasor was guilty of treachery toward his lord. Then the vavasor=’ swore by God and the saints that the seneschal had sworn falsely. “So help me God,” said Sir Gawain, “it seems clear that he has sworn falsely, as you told me.”28 Then both mounted their horses and went to the field where the battle was to be. They were let in through a gate, and then the field was carefully closed on all sides. When they were inside, all the people assembled outside above the deep ditches, and from every side they observed the two knights enclosed there. The vavasor’s wife and niece were on their knees before the altar in the chapel, praying God to grant the victory to their knight. The two knights charged each other and collided with all the speed their horses could manage, and they struck such mighty blows that their stout and sturdy lances splintered and shattered right up to their hands. But neither one fell, and they rode most skillfully on and threw 25“, new,” as in note 40.a, Sommer 370.41, and Kennedy 491.35 (Micha has “swore”). 26«They came ... was brought,” as in Kennedy 492.2-3 (Micha has “dismounted again and came to the field”). 27“+he vavasor’” is a clarification based on Kennedy 492.5, il, “he” (Micha has “and then Sir Gawain swore”). 28«So help me ... as you told me,” as in Kennedy 492.7-8 (Micha’s text is unclear). 205 down the stumps of their lances. Then they drew their sharp swords. Both knights were filled with great wonder [355] at this joust, for it had been most fierce and terrible. Then Sir Gawain rode back, full of esteem for his opponent, and he said to himself that it was a great misfortune if he was a traitor, and he would not have believed a treacherous heart could show such prowess. He said to him, “Admit your?? disloyalty, and I’ll try to reconcile you with the duke and with the vavasor for whom I’m fighting; I’ll arrange matters, either myself or through another, so that you’ll lose neither life nor limb nor honor, for envy makes many a man undertake many an evil thing.” “No, you,” said the seneschal, “declare yourself vanquished, for there’s no knight, however valiant, under Heaven whom I wouldn’t defeat or kill this day, if he were in your place. I tell you you’re fighting for the most disloyal man ever born of woman.” “Indeed,” replied Sir Gawain, “your brother’s treachery today makes me attribute treachery to you, and the vavasor has solemnly sworn that you have sworn falsely.” The seneschal boldly denied this; he spurred his horse and came toward him, his sword drawn, and landed a great heavy blow upon his helmet, so that Sir Gawain painfully felt it and knew for certain that the knight was capable of great resistance. And he boldly charged at him and with his sword struck such a blow that all who saw it?? were aghast, and each sliced the other’s helmet and cut his shield to bits both top and bottom, and mangled his hauberk in many places so that the slashing swords made the blood gush forth. Sir Gawain found this knight to be a formidable opponent, and [356] their mounted combat lasted a very long while. They had lost so much blood that they could barely continue, and each of them was growing very weak. Among the spectators there were many people who would have liked Sir Gawain to win, for the vavasor was held in high esteem. News of the battle spread until it was heard in the chapel. The maiden who had brought Sir Gawain there heard what people were saying, that he did not have the upper hand and that the seneschal was holding out very well. She was greatly distressed; full of anguish, she rushed from the chapel and climbed to one of the highest places in order to see how Sir Gawain was doing. She saw that he had lost a lot of blood. For his part, the seneschal was also full of anguish, for he saw that he too had lost much. When she saw the blood, she no longer had the strength to stand, and she fell in a faint. 64. Lionel’s Encounter on the Way to Court; Adventures of Gawain and Sagremor.’ Now the story leaves off speaking of the battle for a while and tells of an adventure that befell Lionel, Lancelot’s cousin, who was on his way to court.2 Chance 29Gawain uses the familiar “you” (tu); the seneschal replies in kind. 30«who saw it” supplied from note 43.a and Kennedy 493.5-6. 1Corresponds to Micha VIII:LXIVa, Sommer III:372-388; Kennedy 493-515. *This relates to chapter 62, pp. [323-325]. 206 brought him to the place where Sir Gawain was fighting, and he saw the people on their way to the battle. When he had inquired what was happening, he went to see the battle and came to the spot where the maiden had recovered from her faint, and knights related to the vavasor were helping her up. The youth rode right up to watch, for he had never seen a combat between two knights; he was so eager to see [357] that he rode right in among those who were holding the maiden. One of them told him to back away, but he was so intent upon watching that he heard nothing that was said to him. Then a knight took his nag by the bridle and pulled it back so violently that he nearly unhorsed him. Lionel looked at him and asked, “Good sir, what do you ask of me?” “I’m very close to giving you a bit of this staff on the top of your head,” he replied, “you are so foolish and illmannered!” Then Lionel drew the sword that hung at his side and ran to attack him, but the maiden cried out that he was making a grave mistake, since the other was a knight. Then the youth sheathed his sword and said he would not harm him, “but by the Holy Cross, if he were not a knight he would pay for his action, and cursed be any boorish and wicked knight,” he said, “whoever he may be!” Then he rode off and said, “Sir knight, the battle is yours to see; I leave it to you, and in truth I often see a much better knight than either of those two, and will again, whenever I wish.” Sir Gawain heard this dispute, looked in that direction and saw the youth who had quickly remounted, and was very puzzled as to who he might be. And the knight with whom he was quarreling, considering him foolish, asked him, laughing, “My good fellow, God help you, tell me, who is the good knight you see so often?” “Don’t let it concern you,” replied the youth, “for, God help me, he would be worth less if you [358] knew his name. But if you and those two fighting there were facing him in this field and it came to heads being cut off, not one of you would want to be there for all of Galehaut’s kingdom.” He said this because he believed no one else was as rich as Galehaut. 5 When Sir Gawain heard Galehaut mentioned, he thrilled with joy and looked at the youth, but he did not know what to do, for he feared the youth might leave, and his heart told him he knew something about Galehaut. Then the maiden who had brought him could contain herself no longer, but cried out so all could hear, “Gawain, Gawain, you are held to be the best knight in the world, yet you allow a single knight to get the better of you this way!” Then the youth looked at her, and said, “My lady, are you saying that’s Sir Gawain? May God never help me if that is Gawain, who is considered so valiant, for he would never hesitate, before a crowd like this, to defeat a single knight, and each of them is as nearly defeated as the other.” When the maiden heard this, she fainted anew; and when the duke heard that this was Gawain, he was very surprised, for he knew something of his power, because he had seen him fight before, in the battle of Leverzep, and his brother had told him [359] that was Sir Gawain. But now he could see that Gawain was thinking about Lancelot, Part IT something, and he was grieved not to know what, for he feared it might harm him. When Sir Gawain heard himself rebuked by the maiden and the youth, he was deeply troubled; he attacked the seneschal with such valor and speed that all those watching were amazed. The seneschal could no longer endure, for if he had done with his opponent as he willed,? now Sir Gawain was twice as able to do as he willed, though he was greatly distressed that he had heard his name revealed. At this point a maiden came riding in front of the ditch, her palfrey all in a sweat, and she was so heavily veiled that nothing could be seen but her eyes. When she saw the youth watching the battle from his horse, she asked him whom he served, and he said he was in the service of a knight. Then she seized his bridle and told him to tell her the name of the knight. “My lady,” he replied, “I won’t.” “Yes, you will,” she said, “for I have hold of you.” “Go ahead,” he said, “and Ill be free of you whenever I like.” “Tell me.” “I won't.” “You will,” she said, “by the allegiance you owe to her who protected you,* when the sword was poised above your head.” [360] When the youth heard this he was so distressed he knew not what to do. And the maiden turned to go, and when she was a short distance away she said, “Young man, young man, won’t you tell me what I beg to know, even in the name of her whom you most love in all the world?” “Ah, my lady,” he replied, “I will reveal it to you on the condition that you should be as glad to hear it as I will be to say it, for you will cause me to do wrong—but for God’s sake release me from this claim.” “God help me,” she said, “if you don’t reveal it straightway, the time will come when you would give an arm or a leg not to have concealed it from me.” ‘Tl tell you, but God willing, let no one else hear. I’m in the service of Lancelot of the Lake.” When he had said this, he was so full of grief that he was Close to fainting, and he was exceedingly sorrowful. And she said to him, “Lionel, Lionel, you've done something for which you will pay dearly, for you cursed me, and you should love me more than you yourself.” When he heard this, he spurred his horse and declared he would find out who she was. “Unveil yourself,” he said. “I won't.” “You will, by the one you most love, or I’ll unveil you myself.” “No, I'll do it myself.” And she unveiled herself. When he saw her, he was so astonished he could not speak, for this was the person he had most loved in all the world. And he said to her, “My dearest, fairest friend, when did I curse your” 3“The seneschal ... as he willed” supplied from note 5.b and Kennedy 495.4—5. 4See chapter 12, p. [119]; she is called Celise on p. [361], but she was called Saraide in chapter 11, p. [102]. Cf. Kennedy 2; 325. Lancelot, Part IT “When you wished I might be as glad to hear the name as you would be to say it.” Then he was so distressed that he was close to madness. “Be off,” she said, “back where you came from.” He said not a word, and the maiden, because she wanted him to go away, cried [361] out loudly, “Gawain, Gawain, here is someone who can direct you in what you seek; if he escapes, he prolongs your quest.” When Lionel heard that this was Sir Gawain, his grief was greater than before; he spurred his horse and fled up the road as fast as the nag could carry him. His grief was overwhelming, and he cursed the day he was born and prayed God to grant him an early death, for this was the maiden who had protected him when the sword was poised above his head to kill him; her name was Celise and the lady’s name was Ninianne, and that Ninianne was she who brought up Lancelot in the lake. When she saw him ride off in one direction, she rode off in another. And Sir Gawain was so full of anguish concerning the maiden, who was riding off without another word, and the youth by whom he hoped to be instructed, and whom he was also losing, that he attacked the seneschal. He struck him upon the helmet with his sword again and again until his blows cut through the coif and into his head, so that the blood covered his chest and shoulders; he was so stunned that he nearly fell, but he threw himself onto his horse’s neck and hung on. With his sword Sir Gawain struck him on his helmet and on his arms; the seneschal lost his seat and fell head downward to the ground, nearly breaking his neck, and the blood gushed forth from his mouth, his nose, and both ears. Then Sir Gawain dismounted and without delay cut the laces of the seneschal’s helmet, sliced through the blood-soaked ventail, and told him to declare himself vanquished or he would kill him and cut off his head, for he urgently needed to be off. But the seneschal could say not a word. When Gawain saw that he made no reply, he was most distressed, for he would have preferred not to kill him, but his urgent need to be elsewhere [362] put him under pressure. Nevertheless, he was sure the seneschal was condemned to die, so he went ahead and raised his sword and cut off his head. Then he got back on his horse, went to the duke and gave him the head, and told him to deal with the body in a way befitting a traitor. The duke assured him he would do so, and then he begged him to remain, but Sir Gawain replied that he could not, because his need was too pressing. Then the vavasor, his wife, and children threw themselves at his feet and offered to do all they could to serve him. The maiden who had guided him there mounted to go with him, but he said he had to follow the squire until he found him. Now the duke and the vavasor were very joyful, and they made great efforts to retain him. But he rode off, and the maiden went with him. When she saw that he was riding away so fast, she said, “How is this, Sir Gawain? Are you going to leave me behind this way?” “Ah, my lady,” he replied, “my need is too pressing, for I'll never be happy if I don’t find that squire you saw. Now act sensibly and wait for me wherever you wish, and I solemnly promise that I’ll come back to you.” 207 “Do you swear,” she asked, “that you’ll come back to me without undertaking any other task?” “Yes, unless it’s a matter that would bring me dishonor, if I avoided it.” “Then Ill await you in this castle, where you'll be joyfully welcomed. But you are badly wounded and in need of good lodging tonight, where you would be made comfortable and your wounds could be attended.” “As you [363] desire, so be it; now have this shield carried to the castle, for I wouldn’t abandon it for anything in the world.” Then Sir Gawain went on his way, and the maiden returned to the castle, bearing the shield. Then great preparations were under way, for the duke and the vavasor were very keen on honoring and serving him. And the duke had the seneschal hanged beside his brother, for there was at that time no earthly lord who maintained justice better than he. Sir Gawain rode until he entered a tall forest, and when he had gone a long way he looked before him and saw a man on foot holding a naked sword in his right hand and the scabbard in his left, and saying to himself, “Oh, God, why didn’t I already have myself put to death? For as it is, I have little love for my life.” When Sir Gawain heard this he rode in that direction. The man looked around, saw that it was Sir Gawain, and fled into the woods as fast as his legs could carry him, for he was afraid of being recognized. Sir Gawain saw that this was the youth he was seeking, and he spurred after him, crying, “Squire, don’t flee, for you have no cause to fear! If anyone harms you, and I know about it, I'll make him pay for it, for you serve one of the men I love most in all the world.” The youth thrust his sword back into its scabbard and, as he did so, asked, “My lord, what do you know of whom I serve?” “I know that you serve Lancelot of the Lake, and I know him as well as you do. But tell me why you are lamenting so.”° “Ah, my lord, first tell me on your honor who you are and what your name is.” “In truth,” he replied, “my name is Gawain, and I am the nephew of King Arthur.” “Well, my lord, then I'll tell you. When I left the battle that you won, a little while ago, I entered this forest and was riding along when I met a knight [364] on foot, fully armed, who took my horse from me. I didn’t want to fight with him, because he was a knight and fully armed, but it would have been better for me to fight with him, except that it would be treachery for a squire to strike a knight.” “And which way did he go?” “My lord, here are the horse’s tracks; I can clearly recognize them.” “Then come along after me at your own pace, and if I don’t restore your horse to you, I'll give you this one.” “My lord,” said Lionel, “many thanks!” Then Sir Gawain spurred his horse and galloped along for quite some way until he entered a vale and saw below him a beautiful heath. He turned that way and found two knights fighting on foot; their horses were tied by the reins 5“But ...so” supplied from Kennedy 498.10-11. 208 nearby. Sir Gawain recognized the squire’s horse and said to those who were fighting, “Stop, my lords, and fight no more until you have told me which of you brought this horse here.” “I brought it,” said one of them. “What do you want to do about it?” “I claim,” said Sir Gawain, “that you did so disloyally and in a manner unworthy of a knight, for you took it away from a squire who was alone and unarmed, and you will have to constitute yourself his prisoner in order to make amends.” “You haven’t brought me there yet,” said the knight. “God help me,” said Sir Gawain, “it’s not far to go.” “Now then, my lord,” said the other knight, “come fight with me.” Sir Gawain immediately dismounted, drew his sword, and was about to® attack him, but the other knight said, [365] “Come now, sir knight, you won’t deprive me of my battle! Let the two of us fight until he has defeated me or I him.” “Indeed,” said Sir Gawain, “and if he is defeated, he'll have to constitute himself your prisoner! I’ll never consent to that, but if he will come to make amends to the squire for the wrong he has done him, so that he is satisfied, let him do so. Otherwise, if he won’t do this, you’ll both have to fight me. Then if you defeat me, you can do with me as you will, but if I defeat you, you'll have to do as I will.” “And who are you?” asked the knight who was fighting the man who had taken the squire’s horse. “Well,” said his opponent, “he is the best knight you ever saw. Today he fought against the duke of Cambenic’s seneschal, Gloadain.” “And did he defeat him?” asked the other. “You can clearly see that he did!” “My lord,” they said to Sir Gawain, “we won’t fight against you, but instead place ourselves at your mercy and in your power.” “And do with me,” said the one who had taken the horse, “whatever you wish, and the squire as well, for I took the horse, though it was in a moment of great need. Now take my sword; I surrender it to you.” The other knight was very surprised at this. “Come with me,” said Sir Gawain. “My lord,” said the knight, “tell [366] me your name, since you deprive me of my battle.” “Don’t say that I deprive you of your battle,” said Sir Gawain, “but go ahead and fight him, on condition that, should you defeat him, you will answer for his misdeed and for yours, if there is any.” “I won’t,” he replied, “but I beg you to tell me your name.” “God help me, I’ve never concealed my name from any man, and so I won’t from you. My name is Gawain, and I am the nephew of King Arthur.” “Ah, my lord, have pity! Truly, you are such a noble knight that you would never commit such an outrage, and since it pleases you, Ill gladly forgo this battle.” \ 6«was about to,” as in note 14.a and Kennedy 499.5 (Micha has “and attacked him”). Lancelot, Part IT Then all three mounted, and the knight who had taken the horse rode ahead and met the squire, who was coming on foot. Sir Gawain said to him, “Good brother, do you see here the knight who took your horse? Now do whatever you wish with him in exchange.” “My lord,” he replied, “many thanks. I do believe it’s this one.” Then the knight dismounted, approached the squire, and on his knees begged him for mercy. The squire raised him up, and Sir Gawain told him to demand whatever reparation he wished. “My lord,” said the squire, “I acquit him, provided he will swear to you on his honor as a knight that he’ll never lay a hand on an unarmed man, except to defend himself, and [367] if that man had need of him, he must swear that he would do all he could to help him.” Then Sir Gawain took the knight’s oath. “Now tell me, sir knight, the reason for this battle between you two.” “Well,” said one, “this knight and I were boasting about our valor, and he said he was a better knight than I. I denied that, and he said I wouldn’t dare follow him into this forest, and I said that I would. I did follow him, and at the entrance to this forest we jousted, and I unhorsed him. Then I went after his horse, which was running away, and grabbed it. And he, I believe, met this squire and took his horse from him, and then followed me and caught up with me, and we went on with our battle, as you saw.” “What?” exclaimed Sir Gawain. “You were fighting without any other quarrel? Now let this hostility cease, and be good friends, I beg you.” They agreed to this, and Sir Gawain asked the knight on horseback to carry the one who was on foot, and he did so. At that point they took leave of Sir Gawain and he of them, and they commended him to God. Then Sir Gawain accompanied the squire a long way and begged him to tell him news of Galehaut. “Truly, my lord,” he said, “I’m not in his service.” “That may well be,” replied Sir [368] Gawain, “but you do have reliable news of him.” “My lord,” said the squire, “if I do, I cannot divulge it, and you must not ask me to say more.” “Indeed, I wouldn’t want you to be in any way disloyal because of me, but you can surely tell me whether or not he is in Sorelois.” “My lord, if he were there, you couldn’t easily go there, for there are many treacherous passages, and two causeways, long and high, and no knight can pass without first doing battle with a most valiant knight and fifteen men-at-arms who are with him. Both causeways involve such a passage, and no knight errant can pass by any other way.’ More than that I cannot tell you.” Then Sir Gawain commended him to God, since he could learn no more from him, but he was still able to deduce from the squire’s words that Galehaut was in Sorelois. So he returned to the castle where he had fought the seneschal, and it was late evening when he arrived. The duke and the vavasor and the maiden who had guided him came out to meet him, and they gave him the most joyful 7Earlier, the figure given was ten men-at-arms; see chapter 53, pp. [129-130]. Lancelot, Part IT welcome they could, and had his wounds and injuries examined and attended to. And the duke thanked him most warmly for so ably defending his cause, when he carried the day in the battle of Leverzep. Great was the rejoicing in the castle because of Sir Gawain, and the vavasor was as highly honored as he had ever been, for Sir Gawain [369] entreated the duke in his behalf. The duke said he wanted the vavasor to be as completely the lord of his land as he had ever been. “And be assured there is nothing you could request of me that I would not grant without delay.” Sir Gawain thanked him most sincerely for that. That night he was shown much honor by one and all, and he warmly thanked the duke on behalf of his brother Agravain, who had spoken very highly of him. “My lord,” said the duke, “Agravain has done much more for me than I have done for him, and no man on earth could make me happier, if he were cured, for I wouldn’t have been at such a disadvantage as I was in my war, had it not been for his illness; he is one of the most valiant knights in the world and one of the boldest and most trustworthy.” Sir Gawain received all the good services a tired and wounded knight can have in a good town;8 he went to bed quite early, but he was served most nobly that night, and his wounds and injuries were very well cared for. The next morning he rose early and put on his armor, for he would be detained no longer. The duke asked him to take his doctors with him to heal his wounds, but he replied he would not do so, for he believed he had no dangerous wound. He asked the doctors, and they said he did not and that he should confidently go on his way. Then Sir Gawain and the maiden departed, and no one but he knew where she was taking him, [370] for he did not wish to reveal it. When the people from the castle had escorted him some way, they commended one another to God, and he and the maiden went on their way and rode all day long. She did not lead him directly to the land of North Wales, but took him out of his way in order to make him more comfortable. They spent that night without finding any adventure mentioned in the story, and they were lodged at the home of the maiden’s father, who joyfully welcomed them. The next morning, when they had dressed his wounds, he took his leave and left with the maiden, and they rode until midday. Then they entered the wildest forest in the world, called the Blue Forest, which belonged to the king of North Wales. There was but one house in the whole forest, and the forest was very broad and very long, and outside it there was no town within five leagues, for the land was so barren and so ravaged that no animal could live there. When they had ridden all day until a bit after midday, they came to a broad heath. There they saw a knight in great difficulty, defending himself so valiantly against three other knights that Sir Gawain felt great esteem for him, though he did not yet know who he was. There were also as many as five mounted men-at-arms, some healthy and some 8«sir Gawain ... good town,” as in Kennedy 501.32-33 (Micha’s text is unclear). 209 wounded, but they dared not touch him, for he had so frightened them that they dared not advance. The maiden said to Sir Gawain, “My lord, I believe those knights are men of the king of North Wales, and if they [371] are, they'll readily recognize me. Let’s turn aside this way and observe them for a bit.” “But, my lady,” he replied, “shouldn’t I help that single knight whom they have pressed so hard?” “God help me,” she said, “I don’t know who the knight is, but he deserves help from anyone, for he has acquitted himself extremely well: I see there are still eight of his opponents, and he is alone. Whoever he may be, I give him my love right here and now, and you have never said anything for which I am so grateful to you.” Then Sir Gawain spurred his horse, and when he drew near he recognized that this was Sagremor the Unruly. He charged full speed at the lot of them, most eager for battle, couched his lance, and struck one of the three so violently that he bore him, and his horse as well, to the ground. Then he threw down the lance and drew his sword and attacked the other two. When Sagremor saw that he had some help, he regained strength and courage, though he did not recognize Sir Gawain. And when the men-at-arms, who before had dared not get involved in the attack because Sagremor had so thoroughly battered them, saw Sir Gawain acquitting himself so well, they dared stay no longer but turned and fled, and the other two knights rode off after them. Then Sir Gawain and Sagremor pursued them relentlessly. Sir Gawain caught up with the last and seized him by the neck, thinking to drag him down from his horse, but his hand reached his helmet and tore it from his head. Then Sagremor rode up and struck him so violently with his sword, with all his strength and will, that he split him to the teeth, and he fell. When Sir [372] Gawain saw that the knight was dead, he was sorry, for he would rather have taken him alive. He took hold of Sagremor’s rein and said to him, “Sir knight, let’s depart, for you have accomplished much, and you can see that those fleeing there have escaped us.” “By God,” said Sagremor, “that one lying on the ground didn’t escape, and they'll never get any help from him.” “You'll do no more now,” said Sir Gawain, “by the allegiance I owe to Sagremor the Unruly.” When he heard this, he thought this must be someone he knew. “My lord,” he asked, “who are you, that you know me?” “My lord,” said Sir Gawain, ‘T am a knight, as you can see.” “My lord, in the name of the person you love most, tell me who you are.” “IT am Gawain.” “Ah, my lord, may you be welcome, and so you are, as far as I’m concerned.” Then they ran to embrace, and they rejoiced over one another. “Sagremor,” asked Sir Gawain, “how did you come to this land?” “Well, my lord, through news I learned of you in various places. Today these knights met me upon this heath, and they attacked me in order to win my armor and 210 my horse. And have you recently seen any [373] of our companions?” “Yes,” he replied, “I saw Girflet, in a battle in which we participated on the side of the duke of Cambenic.” “And did he tell you how he had been imprisoned in the meantime?” “He never mentioned it. How was he taken prisoner?” “Ah, my lord,” said Sagremor, “it happened at our departure from the heath where you left us, when the dwarf beat the knight who sorrowed and rejoiced beside the Spring of the Pine.”? “There never was a man so frequently taken prisoner as Girflet has been,” said Sir Gawain, “and it isn’t because he lacks courage, for, God help me, he is extremely valiant and enterprising and bold.” “By God,” said Sagremor, “Sir Yvain and I were also imprisoned,!° in a place from which we thought we would never be freed for a long time.” “And where was that?” “My lord, in the prison of the King of the Hundred Knights.” “And how were you freed?” he asked. “God help me,” said Sagremor, “by a most worthy young knight who performed great feats of arms and acted very wisely, as I heard tell, for I didn’t see him do it.” And he related the whole story just as he had heard it, how he had jousted more fiercely than anyone else and fought most boldly against the king’s seneschal. “And what is his name?” asked Sir Gawain. “His name is Hector,” replied Sagremor, “and he is a knight of the queen’s household.” [374] When Sir Gawain heard this, he was certain of the knight’s identity. “And whom does he seek?” “My lord, he seeks a knight who fought a battle for his lady, and I was sure this must be you.” “Oh, you are right to say that he is a good knight.” “Do you know who he is?” “He is the one who unhorsed you and Sir Yvain and Kay the Seneschal and Girflet at the Spring of the Pine, when the dwarf beat him.” “What?” exclaimed Sagremor. “Are you telling the truth?” “Believe it as the truth,” said Sir Gawain. “By God, he said something that made me look at him closely and think long about it, for he said it was better for the knight to be beaten by the dwarf than for him to have jousted with Sir Gawain, for the loss might have been too great.!! And is it you, my lord, that he is seeking?” “God help me, yes, and may it now please God that I might find him, for I set great store by his company.” So they spoke as they rode along, until they came to the maiden. And when Sagremor drew near her, he asked who she was. “In God’s name,” replied Sir Gawain, “she is a maiden who has given you her love,!* because she saw you defend ‘ See chapter 55, pp. [147-154]. 10See chapter 61, pp. [281-304]. ‘See chapter 61, p. [305]. 12See p. [371]. Lancelot, Part IT yourself so well against the three knights. And I can tell you she is just as beautiful as one could wish.” “She is most welcome,” said Sagremor. Then [375] they came to the maiden, who was waiting for them under the cover of the woods, so that the knights would not recognize her. Sagremor greeted her first, and she welcomed him. And Sir Gawain said, “My lady, have you not declared your love for this knight?” “Indeed, my lord,” she replied, “I have.” “My lady,” said Sagremor, “please unveil yourself.” “But my lord, you have not declared your love for me!” “I wish to see you first,” he replied, “for a knight should not give his love if he does not know to whom he gives it.” “Then, my lord, I must tell you that I esteem you more highly than you do me, for I declared my love for you just as soon as I saw you, but you don’t wish to give me yours unless you see me first. I'll unveil myself, and if I please you, you will say so. But I’ll wish to see you, and if you don’t suit me, we'll be even.” Then Sagremor began to laugh; and the maiden unveiled herself, and she too began to laugh. When Sagremor saw her, he said, “Ah, my lady, God help me, I do wish to be yours, and I consider myself well rewarded.” “In God’s name,” she replied, “another knight as worthy as you! begged me for my love not a week ago, but he will do better, God willing.” “My lady,” said Sagremor, “you will see me ugly, black, and bruised.” And he took off his helmet, and she saw that his face was handsome and pleasing, and all the rest of his body was most attractive. Sir Gawain said to her, “What is your opinion?” “My lord,” she replied, “better than before.” And Sagremor [376] was very glad, and he kissed her in the presence of Sir Gawain, and she most willingly kissed him. “My lady,” said Sir Gawain, “you have in no way misplaced your love, for you have a knight of King Arthur’s household and a companion of the Round Table as your lover, and his name is Sagremor the Unruly.” And she was very glad of this; she and Sagremor kept looking at each other, and the more they did so the more they loved each other, and they went on riding in this way until nightfall overtook them. Now Sagremor had eaten but little all that day and the day before. It was his custom that he would readily undertake all feats of arms, but he was never much of a knight nor very confident until he was thoroughly worked up. Then he feared nothing and gave no thought to himself, but after this had passed he became surly and grew weak, and a pain rose in his head from which he thought he would die, for he was positively mad with hunger. And because of his great prowess, when he was worked up, he was called Sagremor the Unnuly, a name given him by the queen before Esterbury, the day the thirty knights defeated the army of Saxons and Irishmen and drove them to the River Vargonche, where Sagremor [377] beheaded Brandague, the Saxon king, and Margan, the king of I3see chapter 63, p. [342]. Lancelot, Part I Ireland. And because of the malady he so often had, Kay the Seneschal called him Sagremor-Starvation. This malady now came upon him with such force that he thought he would die without confession. When Sir Gawain saw this, he was extremely distressed, and said, “Sagremor, you are very ill.” “My lord,” he replied, “I’m dying, but for God’s sake, and if ever you loved me, fetch me something to eat or fetch me the priest.” The maiden told him not to worry, that they would soon reach shelter. And when he saw that Sagremor could no longer ride, Sir Gawain mounted behind him and held him up, and for this reason they had to ride very slowly. They rode until the first part of the night had passed and the moon shone brightly. Then they went on until they came to a narrow river, and they found a strong plank at least two feet wide above the river. The maiden advanced onto the plank with her palfrey, followed by Sir Gawain’s horse, which she was leading, and she went across and so did the two knights. When they had crossed, Sagremor was in such a state that he could hardly speak. The maiden said the shelter was quite near, where he would be served whatever he could ask for. Then Sir Gawain looked ahead and saw a splendid house [378] set in a large and well-appointed enclosure, and he asked the maiden whose house this was. “I'll tell you,” she replied, “when we’re inside.” They rode on until they reached a large enclosure behind the house. The maiden followed a trench down to a secret door, dismounted and opened it, then took in her palfrey and the horse she was leading. And Sir Gawain and Sagremor rode in without dismounting. “My lord,” said the maiden, “please dismount.” They did so and carefully stabled their horses. Afterwards she led them below ground and up into the main hall, but when they arrived they found no one there. Then Sir Gawain asked how Sagremor was to have anything to eat. “In God’s name,” the maiden replied, “he will have plenty.” Then she led them into a chamber to their right, and the hall was brightly lit by the moon shining in through more than twenty windows. When they were in the maiden’s chamber, they sat down. She left them for a while, went out, and soon returned bringing great quantities of food and excellent wine. At first Sagremor had difficulty eating, despite great efforts, but afterwards he ate very easily. And when all three of them had eaten, the maiden went out again, and after a long time she returned and said to Sir Gawain, “My lord, leave Sagremor to me, for I’ll take very good care of him; you will come to see your lady, {379] the most beautiful woman you ever saw, and I’ll tell you whose house this is, as I have promised: it belongs to the king of North Wales, and your lady is his daughter. Be assured that she desires nothing else as much as you, but upon my word she is most closely guarded.” Then she took a candelabrum full of burning candles and led him to a stable, where he saw as many as twenty of the finest palfreys in the world, all black; from that stable they entered a room and saw as many as twenty goshawks and other birds, the finest in the world, seated upon perches, and from there they came to another room and PU saw as many as twenty chargers, the finest one could wish to find anywhere. And Sir Gawain asked the maiden whose horses and whose birds these were. “In truth,” she replied, “they belong to twenty knights all sleeping in one room in the castle; from now on they will sleep in their armor every night, for my lord the king has made a truce with the duke of Cambenic and fears no man but you. He wishes this house guarded in such a way that, if you come to it, you’ll find the main hall completely unencumbered and unguarded. And he has heard that if you came there you would not fail, because of any knights who might be there, to go to my lady his daughter, or else you would die in the attempt, for after nightfall no one goes where she sleeps and no one can enter there except by way of these twenty knights. And my lady is well aware of what you said at Agravain’s house:!* that, if you came to a place where she was, you would see her if you could, and she made me swear that I would bring you here if I could find you.” [380] Then she extinguished the candles she was holding, and they entered another room, very brightly lit. “Sir Gawain,” she said, “the knights are in this room, and they have no other task each night than to guard the maiden, and during the day they go off to play and amuse themselves wherever they like. I believe they are asleep now, and in that other chamber lies the most beautiful woman in the world. I dare not advance farther, for fear of being recognized; I will return to Sagremor, in the room where we ate.” Then the maiden left, and Sir Gawain entered the room, holding his naked sword. He listened attentively to see whether any of the knights moved or spoke, but he heard nothing; then he thrust his head in and saw a tall, thick candle in the middle of the room. The room was square, as broad as it was long, with a vaulted ceiling, and in each of the four parts there were five beds, and in each one lay a knight armed in hauberk and greaves, his sword, shield, and helmet at his bedside. Sir Gawain stood at the door for a long time, and he concluded that none of them was awake. He could see the door to the other chamber standing wide open, and he saw that the room was brightly lit. He took a step forward, saw that no one [381] moved, then strode up to the candle. Once there, he extinguished it and then went to the door of the chamber and closed it behind him. In the middle of the room he saw one of the finest beds he had ever seen, covered with an ermine coverlet, and beneath it a maiden of great beauty, such that none should seek another as beautiful as she. In the room were four candles burning brightly. Sir Gawain removed his helmet, lowered his ventail, and came to the bed where the maiden was sleeping soundly. He began to kiss her very gently, and she awoke and moaned like a woman sleeping. When she saw him, she said, “Ah, Holy Mary, what is this?” “Keep still, my sweet; this is the person who loves you most in all the world.” “Are you one of my father’s knights?” “No, Iam not.” 14See chapter 60, p. [234]. 212 “Then who are you?” she asked, trembling. “Tell me your name, for you have given me the greatest fright I have ever had, and yet you may be one who would never frighten a maiden.” “Dear, sweet friend,” he replied, “I am Gawain, the nephew of King Arthur.” “Light a candle, and let me see.” Sir Gawain lit one of the candles, and she looked into his face and then looked at a ring she had on her finger. Then she began to laugh, and [382] she sat up and said!5 he was most welcome; then she embraced him in his armor and kissed him as gently as she could. “Take off your armor,” she said, “for it’s too cold, and relight these candles, for now I have what I have always desired.” He did as she asked, and when he had removed his armor he came back to the bed and lay down with the maiden, and she welcomed him as warmly as she could, and they willingly took their pleasure. And Sir Gawain told her how he had come there, without anyone seeing him, and they talked and played until it was nearly midnight. It was not long before Sir Gawain reluctantly fell asleep, though he had struggled mightily before sleep overcame him. And when he had fallen asleep, the maiden, who was young and tender, fell asleep from the sweetness of her lover whom she held in her arms, and so they slept a long time, their arms around each other and their lips touching. In an adjoining room lay the maiden’s father, the king of North Wales. He got up to go to the privy, and when he returned he opened a window that was near the maiden’s bed, by which one could go from one room to the other, and when he had opened it he thrust his head through and saw his daughter and the knight holding one another tightly in their arms. And when he saw this [383] he exclaimed, “Alas, that’s what I’ve always been worried about!” His chamberlains, who had got up with him, asked, “My lord, what’s the matter?” “Don’t concern yourselves,” he replied; “go back to bed.” They obeyed. He closed the window, then went to the queen and told her what had happened, and she began to grieve bitterly. “Now be silent,” said the king. “If you say a word, I’ll kill you with my sword, for I believe I know how to bring this matter to a satisfactory conclusion. Now watch what I do, and don’t say a word.” Then he summoned one of his chamberlains whom he had always maintained in his household, and another one with him, and he told them he would make them lords over his land and himself in perpetuity, if they did what he ordered, and they replied there was nothing in this world they would not do for him. Then he told them what he had seen, “and I have thought of a way to kill the knight so that no one but you two will ever know: one of you will take his spear and the other a big, heavy mallet; you place the spear right over his heart, on the coverlet, so that he won’t feel it, and when it’s properly positioned, the other will strike it \5«and she sat up and said,” as in Kennedy 509.17 (Micha has “to laugh so loudly as she sat that she could be clearly heard and said”). Lancelot, Part I with the mallet, and he’ll die so speedily that he won’t utter a word, and my shame will be concealed and no one but the three of us will ever know of it.” The two henchmen agreed to this plan. One of them went to get a spear and the other a big, heavy mallet, and they came to a door to the chamber. They opened it [384], came before the bed, and saw that they were both sleeping. The two knights saw that the lovers were both wonderfully beautiful, and they felt great pity for them. One of them positioned the spear against the coverlet, and the other prepared his blow. But Sir Gawain had put his arm out, and it happened that the cold steel touched his arm. He awoke and grabbed the spear with both hands. And the one with the mallet struck with such force that the spear splintered the edge of the bed, flew across the room, and with a terrific racket buried itself more than half a foot into the wall. When Sir Gawain awoke!® and saw the man who had been holding the spear, he jumped out of bed completely naked, tore the spear from the wall, thrust it into the ribs of the man who had held it above him, and laid him out dead. Then he caught up with the one with the mallet, who was already at the door, and struck him so violently that he spilled his brains as he was going out the door.!” The queen had arisen and could not keep from crying out, but rather raised the alarm. Sir Gawain had thrown out the first one he had killed and solidly bolted the door; then he put on his armor. The maiden jumped out of bed and told him not to worry, then helped him with his armor as he instructed her to do. Meanwhile, the clamor increased until the twenty knights jumped up and saw the candle extinguished; they went to [385] the maiden’s door and asked her to open it. She!® replied that they would not set foot therein, to which they replied that they would break down the door, but the maiden said she had little fear of that, for the door was very strong and thick. So they let the knights go on banging and shouting, and she told them they would not get in until she had taken the time to make ready. On the other side the queen was shouting, “What are you doing, you bastards? Why don’t you kill that traitor in there?” She cried out like a madwoman who cannot hide her dishonor, but they could not get in before Sir Gawain had tranquilly put on all his armor. Then he took the spear!® and told the maiden she could confidently-open the door. “In God’s name,” she replied, “you won’t get out through those knights, but through my father’s room: there you won’t find such great resistance as you would on that side.” “God help me if ever I am reproached with leaving by another way than I came in, because I was afraid, for I have plenty of help, since Sagremor is here.” “Then I'll tell you what to do,” she replied. “I’ll go before and open that door beyond and extinguish the 16Gawain was already awakened by the cold steel on his arm (6 lines above in Micha). I have modified the text in the interest of internal consistency. «and struck ... 510.38. 18«She,” as in Kennedy 511.8 (Micha has “Gawain”). 19s pear,” as in Kennedy 511.17 (Micha has “sword”). out the door” supplied from Kennedy Lancelot, Part IT candles, and you stand beside that vaulted arch: they'll think you are escaping through my father’s room. Then I’ll open the door to them; they'll all run into the farther room, and you immediately come out, because if you were”? out where they are now and they were all in this room, they would [386] never take you, for the door is narrow and only one man can pass at a time.” The maiden did as she had announced. When the men on the king’s side saw the door open, they fled?! back into the great chamber and raised a great cry. Then the maiden opened the door toward the knights and said they could come forward. They rushed in headlong and plunged on into the great chamber. And when the last one was about to close the door so that no one could get out, Sir Gawain ran him through, knocking him dead. But the man cried out, and when those ahead heard it they ran back with candles and torches, saw that Sir Gawain had already crossed the threshold, and cried out, “Here he is! Here he is!” Then they all ran toward him, but he was already firmly planted in the middle of the room, holding the spear,?* and he struck the first one who came through with such violence that nothing availed him, and he cast him dead upon the floor. Then the others were so dismayed that no one dared come forth, so they threw sharp spears at him through the doorway. Each time they ran for the door where he was waiting for them, he quickly drove them back, and when he could reach one of them, no armor was ever strong enough to prevent his thrusting his spear into his body, and they greatly feared [387] to encounter him. When he saw that no one dared come forth, he left that room and went to the one where the horses were, and he found Sagremor and the maiden who was his ladylove; she was holding a lighted candle while Sagremor was putting a saddle on the finest horse and the one that seemed the best. When the saddle was in place, he had Sir Gawain mount. “Now ride into the main hall,” he said; “I’m going to put on my helmet.” So Sir Gawain mounted and rode into the main hall. Then as soon as one of the others showed himself, he charged. Most of the knights went to saddle their horses. Sir Gawain looked about and saw Sagremor arriving, fully armed, upon a large horse; he was in good condition, for he had slept. “My lord,” said Sagremor, “where are they?” “There they are,” replied Sir Gawain, “but they don’t dare come out.” “By God,” said Sagremor, “coming out would be too bad for them. But draw back to the end of this hall, and let them come forth, for we can get out of here whenever we wish, but may God never help me if I leave before I learn what sort of knights they are.” Sir Gawain laughed, then they both withdrew to the end of the hall. But Sagremor saw that they showed no sign of coming forth, so he shouted out, “Cowardly recreants, ignoble curs, why don’t you come out? Don’t you see that 20«were,” as in note 44.a and Kennedy 511.29 (Micha has “went”). 2l«fled,” as in note 45.a and Kennedy 511.33 (Micha has “rushed”). 22«snear,” as in Kennedy 512.3 (Micha has “sword”). Zo we [388] are taking your horses right before your eyes, and that is all you do?” When he had said this, they saw ten mounted knights ride forth at the other end of the hall. “By God,” said Sir Gawain, “I’m afraid they may surround us, and if we were caught?? in here, we'd get the worst of it, for we don’t know the passages, the ins and outs of this place. But let’s get out in that courtyard, and then no one can come out without our seeing them.” “Gladly, my lord,” said Sagremor, “provided I have first struck one of those coming there.” “Let’s go then,” said Sir Gawain, “since that is what you wish.” Then they charged the ten, who returned their charge, and between them they unhorsed the first two they met, and Sir Gawain killed his man with the spear, and Sagremor splintered the lance that his lady had given him. Then he drew his sword and attacked them, and the knights began to come out of the room. Sir Gawain saw them and pursued them with the spear and struck the first one so violently that he bore both horse and rider to the ground. The spear broke and he drew Excalibur,*4 attacking them and forcing them back into the room from which they had come. Then he rushed back to help Sagremor, who was valiantly defending himself. And Sir Gawain began to perform such feats of arms that all his opponents were dismayed; [389] between him and Sagremor they had already killed three horses, but their riders did not stay long on foot, for they were worthy knights who did much to help one another, and they soon had new mounts. Now Sir Gawain realized they might stay there too long, and he feared being taken by surprise, so with great force they drove them back into the courtyard of the castle. They saw that the gate of the enclosure was open, and they heard that the alarm had been raised within and that, all in all, as many as a hundred more men were armed and ready. Sagremor’s lady climbed up on a wall above and cried out to the two knights that they should get out or they would die there, “but be assured,” she said, “you have nothing to fear if you are outside.” So they began to leave, and when they were beyond the gate they saw that the king was pursuing them, shouting to his men that they would regret it if their foes escaped, and around him there were more than a hundred men, knights, archers, and men-at-arms. But the two rode calmly until they were beyond the gate, and all the king’s men charged after them. Sagremor’s lady had climbed up above the gate via a concealed passageway, so that none could see her, and she went along that gallery until she reached a room in which she lay hidden. When she saw that the two knights were outside, she cut the rope supporting a portcullis. It fell, killing one knight and cutting off another, so that he .vas left outside with the two who were getting away. When she had done that, she returned to her own room, without being seen by anyone. 23«caught” supplied from note 47.b. and Kennedy 512.38. 24According to the Vulgate Merlin, Arthur presented this famous sword to Gawain when he knighted him. See Merlin, chapter 32. 2 Then Sagremor [390] charged at the knight who had remained outside, and with his sword he struck him on his helmet and tore it from his head; then the knight surrendered his sword and Sagremor accepted it, because the knight begged for mercy. Then the knight gave his word to constitute himself a prisoner wherever Sagremor liked, and he told him to return to the castle and surrender himself to the king’s daughter, in the name of Sir Gawain. “Is your name Gawain?” he asked. “No; my name is Sagremor the Unruly. And you can tell the king that no woman of his line is so nobly married as his daughter, may he not be offended.” “My lord,” said the knight, “I’m bound to you by oath and will do all I can to save you. Follow me, and I'll get you out of these straits.” Then the knight led the way, and the two followed until they came to the plank over the river; they crossed it, and the knight and they commended each other to God. They stayed there a long time to see whether any of the others would follow them. Sagremor said he was puzzled that his ladylove was tarrying so long; no sooner had he said this than he saw her coming, and the maiden herself crossed the river, riding a fast palfrey. “What is this?” asked [391] Sir Gawain. “Welcome, my lady! Where will you go?” “Where?” she replied. “I want you and Sagremor to take me to a place of safety, for I would be dishonored if I stayed here, and all the gold in the world could not protect me.” “God help me,” said Sir Gawain, “you would have performed a poor service if you couldn’t count on our help! But tell me news of my ladylove.” “God help me,” she replied, “she need have no fear because of what she has done, for my lord the king and the queen love her more than they love themselves, for they have no other children, or so they believe, for they believe the other one is lost.2° But I would be dead if I were found here.” So the three of them rode on together, and when they had gone a short way they saw horses coming hard after them. “Sagremor,” said Sir Gawain, “I think I hear them coming.” “Don’t be concerned,” said the maiden, “for I believe these are your horses, which I ordered to be brought after you.” They stopped and waited and saw that she had been correct. And Sir Gawain asked her how she had thought of that, and she said “if your horses were killed, you could replace them with these.” Sir Gawain felt great esteem for her because of this. They rode on until it was broad daylight. Then the maiden said to Sagremor, “You will escort me, and Sir Gawain will go on about his business.” “Dear friend,” replied Sir Gawain, “we will both escort you, for I would [392] certainly not want you to have any difficulty without me.” 25Reference to Agravain’s amie, daughter of the king of North Wales, mentioned in chapter 60, p. [231]. Lancelot, Part II “My lord,” said the maiden, “Sagremor’s protection is plenty, for I'll take him through a place where we’ll never be found by anyone who is looking for us.” “And where will you go?” “Straight to my father’s,” she replied, “and from there to your brother Agravain’s, for I could be safe nowhere else.” And Sagremor said he would be very glad to see Agravain, to which Sir Gawain replied that he was very 1,26 “and this maiden will tell you all about it.” “And where will you go?” she asked. “J wish to be in the land of Sorelois.” “Do you believe,” asked Sagremor, “you will find what we have been seeking in that land?” ‘In truth,” said Sir Gawain, “I don’t know what I’ll do there, but I’ve heard it is a land full of great adventures.” “My lord,” said the maiden, “it is not far at all from here to Sorelois, and I’ll give you one of these squires, who will take you there as directly as by a straight line.” Then she called to the one who was on foot, had him mount Sir Gawain’s horse, and told him to take him as directly as he could to the land of Sorelois. The squire mounted; Sagremor and his ladylove went on their way, and the squire and Sir Gawain headed toward Sorelois, the squire leading him by the most direct way he knew. But now the story leaves off speaking of Sir Gawain and of Sagremor and resumes speaking of Hector, who was in the prison of the lord of the Fens, father of Ladomas, whom Guinas of Blakestan had wounded in the pavilion because of his ladylove, and father of [393] Mataliz, whom Hector had killed in rescuing Sinados of Windsor.2” 65. Hector Rescues Elaine the Peerless From Her Imprisonment.’ At this point the story relates that when Hector was detained at the castle of the Fens, the news reached the castle of the Narrow March. And when the lord’s daughter, who dearly loved him, heard it, she went to her father and asked him to go to Hector’s aid, and he replied that he would do so, with as many men as he could raise. And the maiden sent a message to Sinados of Windsor, telling him that the knight who had rescued him from the hands of his enemies was in prison, and asking him to go to his aid, for her lord of the Narrow March was going to do so as well. He immediately went there with his troops, and they joined their forces at the castle of the Narrow March.? And Marganor himself, who was at the Narrow March, ordered all his men to go there to deliver him. So it was that, when they set out from the Narrow March, they numbered fully two thousand, counting both knights and men-at-arms. Though Hector was in prison, those holding him had no wish to kill him or to bring about his death, for the lady 26For Agravain’s illness, see chapter 60, pp. [227-233]. 27Reference to the end of chapter 61, p. [322]. 1Corresponds to Micha VIII:LXVa, Sommer III:388-394; Kennedy 515-525. 2“He immediately ... Narrow March” supplied from Kennedy 516.5-6. Lancelot, Part IT dearly loved him for avenging her against Guinas of Blakestan. And the father himself said that he could not henceforth have him killed, regardless of what he had done, “for I assumed responsibility for his safety when he entered here.” To their deliberations came a maiden who was much loved in that place, the niece of the lord of the Fens, and the cousin of his son Ladomas. And when she heard it said that Hector was such a fine knight that he had gone through so many perils, she [394] went to her uncle and her cousin and said, “My lords, entrust the custody of this knight to me, for I believe you don’t want him to die; I'll take him to deliver my sister, who is imprisoned as you know.” The father agreed to this. “Very well,” said Ladomas, “if the knight himself consents, for otherwise we won’t entrust him to any man or woman.” “Indeed,” said the lord, “you are right.” “Many thanks, my lord,” she said; “I’ll go see whether he is willing.” Then the maiden went to Hector, and with her Ladomas’s ladylove, who dearly and honorably loved Hector, and the maiden said to him: “Hector, I have arranged to have custody of you. Won’t you willingly come where I wish to keep you?” “Who are you, my lady?” asked Hector. “Tam a maiden who has rescued you from death, if you will constitute yourself my prisoner.” “And what would your conditions be?” “ll tell you,” said Ladomas’s lady. “Dear friend, she will take you to fight against the best knight in the world; if you can defeat him, you will be free. Now go with her, if it please you, but if you don’t wish to go there, you need have no fear of death here, you need not go, if you don’t wish to.” “Who is the knight?” asked Hector. “Is he of King Arthur’s household?” “No,” said Ladomas’s lady, “he is from this land.” “In that case,” said Hector, “I’ll go most willingly.” “Many thanks,” said the maiden who had made the request. Then she went back and said that Hector had acceded to her request. “Have him brought forth,” said Ladomas, “and we will hear his wishes.” Then Hector was brought forth, and Ladomas [395] asked him whether he was pleased to go with the maiden. “My lord,” said Hector, “there is no maiden on earth whom I wouldn’t go to help in her need, if she needed me and I knew of it. But I tell you I won’t go if it is to be construed as ransom, for then it would seem I were guilty of unworthy conduct, and the squire who stole my horse? would accuse me of it. So I won’t go in that manner. But when he who wants to test me in this has come forth, and I have with God’s help proven my loyalty, then I'll willingly follow the maiden in her need.” “God help me,” said Ladomas, “you have spoken like a worthy knight, and you deserve to be loved all the more. My lord,” he said to his father, “renounce your claim on him.” And he did so. 3See chapter 61, pp. [319-320]. VAD “Many thanks, my lord,” said Hector. Then they had his armor brought to him, and he put it on. Whenhe had finished doing so, the maiden fell at his feet and begged him to help her in her need. “She is my niece,” said the lord of the Fens, “but don’t do it for that reason, for God help me if I did not prefer her death to yours: more is lost in the death of one worthy knight than in the death of all the maidens in a land.” “In truth,” said Hector, “I will most willingly go where she wishes to take me, both because she is a maiden and for you, who have honored me more than I deserved.” And the maiden thanked him wholeheartedly. Then they went out, and Hector’s horse was brought to him and he mounted. The maiden in turn mounted her palfrey. So Hector took leave of the lord of the Fens and of Ladomas and of the maiden whom he loved, and he set out with the maiden [396] who was taking him where she wished. When they were fully a league from the castle, he and the maiden saw to their left the troops that Sinados was bringing, his own men and those of the lord of the Narrow March and those of Marganor the seneschal, fully two thousand, and they were greatly puzzled as to what troops these might be. Nevertheless, they rode on without turning aside. And Sinados, who was a most excellent knight, told his men to ride slowly on, “for I know that knight whom I see there riding all alone.” Then he left them and, wearing no helmet, galloped toward Hector. Each quickly recognized the other, and Sinados said to him, “God be praised, my lord, that you are freed, for many people were saddened by your imprisonment.” Hector embraced him and welcomed him. “And how did you know that I was in prison?” “In truth, my lord,” he replied, “the lord of the Narrow March sent word to me, and I came with as many men as I could, for I greatly feared for you because of Mataliz, whom you had killed.” “In God’s name,” said Hector, “I would have died there, had it not been for a brother of his named Ladomas, who did all he could to save me. I praise him highly and would serve him, if I found that he needed me, and likewise his lady, who is most excellent and courtly. And are those men there in your service?” “My lord,” replied Sinados, “part of them are, and the others serve the lord of the Narrow March and [397] Marganor: each one brought as many men as he could, on such short notice. And had we not found you,* I can assure you that before the day was out there would have been the greatest attack you ever saw by so many people against one castle, for you have more friends in this land than you realize.” Hector thanked him most sincerely. “My lord,” said Sinados, “where will you go from here?” Hector replied, “I’m going with this maiden, for an urgent matter to which she is taking me. But turn back now, and go no farther; convey my greetings to the lord of the Narrow March and to his daughter, whom I dearly love, 4The phrase “had we not found you” is added for greater clarity. 216 and tell her that, if I could, I would be happier to see her now than I was a few days ago, for I praise her company most highly. And convey my greetings to Marganor the seneschal and to your wife, for I have never seen her equal for splendor and excellence since I left Queen Guenevere.” Then they commended each other to God, and Hector took off his helmet and they kissed each other, and Sinados earnestly begged him to let him know if it happened that he came to any place where he was staying, and Hector said he would do so. Then they parted, and Sinados led his men back. Hector went on following the maiden until it grew quite dark and he asked her [398] what urgent task she needed to attend to. “I’ll tell you,” she said. “I have a sister,” the most beautiful lady I ever saw, and others also say they have never seen such a beautiful one. When she was a maiden, a knight fell in love with her; he believed himself to be one of the best knights in the world, and he still believes it, and he is much more highborn and noble than my sister. He married her against the wishes of his family, and his parents and friends blamed him severely and were deeply saddened. The rancor lasted a long time between them and my sister, until one day it happened that the knight and my sister were lying in a meadow beside a spring, for they were very much in love. “Now the knight had already become quite slothful and had given up deeds of arms. And one of his aged uncles came by and began to reproach the knight, saying that he was much disgraced, since he was so taken by his wife that he could not be without her, and that he had lost all companionship of other knights and that everyone was deriding him. My sister was angry at this, and spoke a little more than was necessary, and she has since paid for it many times over. ‘Why, my lord,’ she asked, ‘is he then so shamed because of me? He may be a nobleman, but I myself am not of humble birth,® and if he has lost the company of others because of me, so have I because of him, for many people used to come to see me every day. And truly I’m a more beautiful lady than he is a handsome or excellent knight, and my beauty has been more praised than has his valor.’ “When her lord heard this, he grew angry and swore that she would never leave his great [399] tower until one of them was proven right, either that she was a more beautiful lady or that he was a better knight. ‘And you may be sure, dear uncle,’ he said, ‘that if a more beautiful lady than she comes along, I will never again lie with her, if I can help it. And if a better knight than I comes along, she'll be free from her imprisonment.’ “So my sister has been imprisoned for fully five years, and her relatives have brought all the beautiful ladies they 5The story of the sister, Elaine the Peerless (her name is given on p. [400]), can be compared and contrasted with the stories of other lovers in Arthurian romance, among them Erec and Enide. For more details, see Kennedy 2: 339. Elaine was presented in chapter 8, p. [59], as one of just two women whose beauty could be compared to that of Queen Guenevere. SPunctuation follows Kennedy 519.26-27. Micha has “‘My lord,’ she asked, ‘why? Is he then so shamed because of me, if he is a nobleman? I am not of humble birth....’” Lancelot, Part IT could find, but never was there a single one who’ could be compared to her; and many knights have come there, but he has always been the best. Now I have told you the truth of the matter, and I’ve gone to King Arthur’s court more than ten times over the last five years, but I could never find Sir Gawain there, for I would gladly have brought him here, if I could have.” So they spoke’as they went along, and Hector was most impatient to see the lady who was of such beauty. They rode until they reached the home of another sister of the maiden, and there they were joyfully welcomed, for they knew that the knight was on his way to deliver the lady. Hector was shown much honor and warmly welcomed in that house when the maiden had said what sort of knight he was; the people there were very happy and showed him much hospitality. The next morning they arose early, set out on their journey, and rode until they reached a very fine castle. This was the castle to which the maiden was taking him to do battle; it was called Gazevilte, the lord’s name was [400] Persides, and the lady who was of such great beauty was named Elaine the Peerless. The castle was fine and well positioned. The maiden led the way and Hector followed, and each one who saw him said, “He is coming to fight for our lady. Cursed be the beauty that has been paid for so dearly!” Hector and the maiden rode up to the fortress where the lady® was imprisoned; they both dismounted, after which they climbed the steps. Those who guarded the lady came forward and asked Hector what he wanted, and he said he wished to see a lady who was imprisoned there. They led him forward. The lady, who had heard that a knight was coming, was in an inner chamber adorning herself. When she was ready she came out, and she was of such great beauty that Hector was quite dazzled: he took off his helmet in order to see her better, for she was shut in a strongly fortified room, and there was but one window through which one could stick one’s head and one door through which the knight entered when he wished to speak to her, and he himself carried the key. Hector stuck his head in through the window, the lady bade him welcome and he wished her good fortune, “as the most beautiful lady? I’ve ever seen and the most beautiful in the world, [401] to my knowledge. My lady,” he continued, “I have come to help you; I didn’t think I had so rightly undertaken this mission, but now I’m certain there is no knight so valiant that you are not still more beautiful, and I believe that Sir Gawain, who is one of the best knights in the world, would agree, and so would God Himself.” At that point a knight came to ask Hector whether he wished to prove that his lady was more beautiful than his lord was valiant, and he replied that he most certainly did. “Would you dare try to prove it?” 7 Qui, the nominative form of the relative pronoun, as in Kennedy 520.1; Micha has the accusative que. B“lady,” as in Kennedy 520.22 (Micha has “damsel” or “unmarried woman”). 9Punctuation as in Kennedy 520.34 (Micha begins the quote after “lady”). Lancelot, Part I “God help me, yes,” he replied, “and I think there is not a man on earth who would not gladly and confidently make that claim, if he had seen her.” “Then come with me, sir knight,” he said, “for the lord of the castle is waiting outside to fight with you.” “Is he armed?” Hector asked. “Yes, completely.” “Well,” said Hector, “it grieves me that he is rushing things so, for I’d like to gaze upon this lady’s beauty: I am so much improved thereby that I am now worth twice as much as I was when I came here. My lady,” he continued, “so that I may always be your knight, I beg you to indulge my request, to touch me with your bare hand. Truly, if I had lost my helmet, I would be better protected than with it, if you had touched me.” Then the lady [402] put her arms around his neck and wished that God who was born of the Virgin Mary might grant him the power to free her from that place where she was bound. Then Hector took leave of her, relaced his helmet, and returned to the foot of the steps of the tower. He mounted his horse, and the knight led him to the place where the combat was to take place. When he arrived there, the lord of the castle asked him whether he wished to contend that his wife was a more beautiful lady than he was a valiant knight. “God help me,” replied Hector, “if you were chivalrous, there would be no battle, for even if the lady were the wife of Sir Gawain, who is the best knight in the world, it would be true that she was a more beautiful lady than he was a valiant knight, because every beautiful thing that should be in a beautiful lady is present in her, among the things that can be seen. But there are qualities in a good knight that you don’t have at all, for at the very least one cannot be a very good knight without chivalry, and you were certainly not chivalrous when you became angry with her because she claimed she was more beautiful. But give up the battle, and accept your wife as the most beautiful creature alive.” He replied that that could not be. “By God,” said Hector, “if I cannot prove this, I have no wish to go on living.” Then they drew apart and charged at each other with all the speed they could get from their horses, and crashed together as hard as they could. Persides shattered his lance, and Hector struck him so violently that he bore him to the ground in the middle of the field. “Sir knight,” said Hector, “I don’t know how you will do at hand-to-hand fighting, but in jousting you got the worst of it. But now [403] acquit yourself well: acknowledge your folly and free your wife from prison, for she will have to come out today, and your dishonor will be greater than it is at present.” He replied that that could not be. “No?” said Hector. “You will, when you can do nothing more about it.” Then he let his horse run at him full speed and made as if to strike him with his lance, but Persides drew his sword and cut the lance in two and sent the pieces flying. Then Hector drew his sword and galloped toward him, and Persides covered himself with his shield and struck the horse upon the head, knocking it dead. ey “Cursed be anyone,” cried Hector, “who considers you the world’s best knight, for you have performed a most unworthy act by killing my horse! This is not the custom of an excellent knight, and you’ve lost more than I, for Vil ride off on yours, there, or on a better one, if you have it. But if you take my advice, you'll do as I ask concerning your wife, before you’re forced to do so, with greater dishonor.” He replied that the knight was not yet born who could force him to do that. “Now let each man do his best, for we’re quite evenly matched.” Then Hector came running at him and pressed him vigorously, striking him left and right in all the places where he thought to do him harm, so that he injured him in many places. Persides still defended himself as best he could, but Hector drove him wherever he wished, cutting and breaking his shield so that the pieces were strewn upon the field, and he was forced to give ground. Then Hector saw how he was taking evasive action, [404] and he thrust with his sword and struck him upon the right hand so that the sword flew from his hand and he was sure he was going to be killed. And Hector made him give ground more and more, and Persides put all his effort into just holding out, for he could do no more than that. And Hector had cut his shield completely to pieces and maimed and wounded him in many places, and again he asked him to free his wife from prison, and again he said he would not. So Hector said he would kill him. “You do that,” replied the knight, “if you can!” Then Hector attacked and struck him anew, and Persides kept on dodging and retreating until at last he fell. And Hector jumped upon him and tore off his helmet and said he would cut off his head. ‘Do it,” he said. And Hector turned the ventail down upon his shoulders, and raised his sword to strike. But when Persides saw the sword coming, he cried out for mercy. “God help me,” said Hector, “you’ll have no mercy unless you swear with your bare hand, on your honor as a knight, that you will do exactly as I wish.” And he gave his word. Then Hector got up, and everyone gathered around him, and he asked Persides whether all these people were in his service, and he said they were. ‘Do I need to worry about them?” Hector asked. “No, my lord; they have all sworn that any knight who came to fight with me would have nothing to fear from anyone but me, for otherwise the custom I had established in this castle!® could not have continued, because the knights would not have come, [405] had their safety not been assured.” “Now I tell you in accordance with your oath,”’* said Hector in the presence of Persides’s people, “that your wife is a more beautiful lady than you are a valiant knight.” And he acceded to this. “Next,” said Hector, “I order you to set out by the day after tomorrow for King Arthur’s court and »11 101 had established in this castle,” as in note 18.a and Kennedy 523.18; Micha has “the custom of the country,” which usually designates a long-standing custom. MyThe oath Persides had sworn five years before: pp. [398399]. Zs to tell my lady the queen that I’m sending you to constitute yourself her prisoner. Take your wife with you, and tell the queen how and for how long you have held her in prison, without concealing anything. And ask for a maiden who is my lady; greet her on my behalf and tell her I am quite hale and hearty, but I have as yet accomplished nothing of my quest.” “My lord, what is your name?” “My name is Hector. And yours?” “My lord, Iam called Persides.” Then Hector ordered that he take him to see the beautiful lady. They set out, and the people all followed them. When they reached the top of the tower, Persides raised the flap of his hauberk and gave Hector the key to the door of the lady’s cell. “Come,” he said, “and free her yourself.” Hector took the key and went to open the door, saying, “My lady, come forth; God help me, you should not be imprisoned, for you are a joy to behold.” When the lady was out, he took her in his arms, and she embraced him and welcomed him. Then they kissed each other. “My lady,” he said, “now I can boast that the most beautiful [406] lady in the world has kissed me.” “My lord,” she replied, “I think you have not for a long time had a kiss you purchased so dearly!” Then Hector told her of his conditions, and she was very glad. After that, both she and Persides begged Hector to stay the night. Hector asked her her name, and she said her real name was Elaine, but because she was considered so beautiful people had called her, before her marriage, “Elaine the Peerless.” That night Hector stayed there at the insistence of Elaine and her lord. And the maiden who had brought him there was as happy as she could be, and all the people of the castle rejoiced that Hector had won the battle and that the lady was freed from her prison. Hector was greatly honored that night and served by the lord and the lady and all the people of the castle. The next morning, when day broke, he rose and heard Mass, then put on his armor, and Persides gave him a fine horse, the very one he had ridden when he was unhorsed. Then he took leave of them, and the maiden mounted and escorted him until they came to a shelter; there she asked him to tell her which way he wished to go. “God help me,” he replied, “I don’t know, for I am seeking a knight; I don’t know where he is or what his name is, but I’l] wander at random until God gives me some indication of his whereabouts.” “Now I would advise you,” said the maiden, “to go where you will hear news of knights errant, for you could easily go astray in this forest.” He declared that he agreed with her, and she said, “Here’s a path [407] that will take you to the land of North Wales. Follow it, and always take the right-hand fork. Once you get there you'll be able to get information more readily than in this forest. There’s a great war going on there, and the knight you seek could well be there to help the king.” So he said he would go there. Then they commended each other to God; she turned back toward the castle, and he continued on his quest. But now the story speaks no Lancelot, Part I more of him, but returns to speak of Lionel, the cousin of Lancelot of the Lake, who was on his way to Queen Guenevere. 66. Lionel at Logres; Saxons and Irish Attack Scotland; Guenevere Sends Word to Lancelot.’ Here the story tells that Lionel found the queen staying at Logres, King Arthur’s principal city because it was the capital of his kingdom, and he himself was there. No one was ever so warmly welcomed as he was by the queen and the lady of Malehaut, when they learned he was the cousin of Lancelot of the Lake and nephew of King Ban of Benoic. He told them news of Sir Gawain, whom he had found engaged in combat because of the treason of the duke of Cambenic’s seneschal, and that Gawain had defeated the seneschal. The queen asked him how he was, and he replied he was very well, “and he returned my horse to me,” he added, “which a knight had taken from me, and he followed me a long way to find out where I was going, but I told him nothing.” When the youth had told the queen and the lady of Malehaut everything he had been asked to tell them, they took counsel together as to how they might see their lovers. [408] At that point news reached the court that the Saxons and the Irish had entered Scotland? and were destroying all the land and killing all the people and laying siege to the castle of Aresbeth. The king was dismayed at this news and summoned all his troops, near and far, to assemble in two weeks in the fields below Carduel, equipped in full armor in order to make a show of force. And the queen sent a message to Lancelot, telling him to let nothing prevent him from being there, and Galehaut as well, and that she would be there herself; they were to conduct themselves secretly until she made her wishes known. Lancelot was to wear on his helmet a pennoncel she was sending him, with a tongue-shaped piece of red silk, and to carry the shield he had carried at the last battle, but with a white band upon it.’ And the queen sent him the clasp from her neck, a ring from her finger,* a splendid comb with some of her hair entwined in it, and also the belt with which she was girded and the purse. She further sent Lancelot word that, if he valued her love, he was to do whatever Sir Gawain wished, since he had suffered so much for him, except that they were not to go together to the battle. Then the youth departed and set out on his way. And the king conferred with the queen as to whether he should summon Galehaut, but she advised him not to do so until ‘Corresponds to Micha VIII:LXVila; Sommer III: 394-395; Kennedy 525-526. 2Sommer (394) identifies Escoche as Scotland, but West suggests that it is instead “Scotia, the territory to the north and northeast above the Firth of Forth.” 3See chapter 52, p. [107], where Lancelot describes to the queen the various shields he has borne. a ring... finger” supplied from Kennedy 525.28-29. Lancelot, Part IT he knew just how urgent his need was, “for it would seem to him,” she said, “that you were frightened.” Now the story leaves off speaking of the king and the queen, who have summoned their forces to [409] appear below Carduel in two weeks in order to make a show of force, and resumes speaking of Sir Gawain, who had left Sagremor and the maiden who had led him to the daughter of the king of North Wales, as the story has already related. 67. Gawain Defeats the Defenders of the Bridge into Sorelois.' Now the story tells that Sir Gawain rode on, without finding any adventure worth recounting, until he reached the house of the hermit of the Red Mountain, who showed him great honor when he had given his name, and did all he could to set him on the right road, in gratitude for the news he brought of his brother. He said that Lionel had been his guest when he left Sorelois, “and he told me that Lancelot and Galehaut were in Sorelois, but that there would be difficulty in entering that land.”* “Good sir,” said Sir Gawain, “what difficulty?” Then the hermit told him of the treacherous passage of the causeway over the waters of the Ausurne, as the story related earlier.* In the morning, after hearing Mass, Sir Gawain departed, with his squire leading his horse, and he rode until he came to the causeway at the hour of tierce. He saw that it was high, solidly built of wood, and dangerous, and it was called the North Wales Bridge. That was the name of the first bridge, the one to which Sir Gawain came. The bridge of the other [410] causeway of which the story spoke was Called the Irish Bridge, and Sir Gawain saw the tall, thick tower of a castle situated at the end of the causeway toward Sorelois. When he had ridden until he was near the causeway, he dismounted from the horse he had been riding and got on the one the squire had been leading, and he told him to be on his way, that the horse was his to keep and that the other would suffice him from then on. The squire thanked him wholeheartedly and took his leave, but decided he would not go far until he saw how Sir Gawain would fare in getting across the causeway. Then he rode back a short way and climbed a hill in order to watch. Sir Gawain came to the causeway and saw a knight coming toward him fully armed; the knight asked him whether he wanted to cross, and he replied that he did. “What, sir knight,” he said, “do you think you are going to cross? You’ll have to fight with me.” ‘T’ll sooner fight,” he replied, “than not Cross.” “There is still more bad news,” said the knight, “for you will have to get rid of ten men-at-arms, even if you defeat n me. 1Corresponds to Micha VIII:LXVIa; Sommer III:395-397; Kennedy 526-529. 2The reference to “his brother” is obscure, since it cannot be the hermit’s brother. Kennedy 2: 343 points out that this is just one of several examples of “inconsistency over proper names.” 3See chapter 53, pp. [129-130]; see also chapter 64, p. [368]. Pails “I cannot do otherwise,” said Sir Gawain; “I’ll have to fight, for I won’t remain on this side if I can avoid it.” “Upon my word,” said the knight, “you will have a battle.” “I want your assurance that I’ll have nothing to fear from anyone besides you and the ten men-at-arms you mentioned.” Then the knight called them. They came forward, equipped like lowborn men, with axes, swords, and habergeons, and they swore that he had nothing to fear from any others and that he could pass, as soon as he could defeat the knight and them, but he would have to give his name first. “And there is one other thing we [411] should tell you,” said the knight: “if it happened that you defeated me and them, we would be at your mercy* and you would have to guard this passage until a messenger came, and you would perform the same duty here that I do. You must give your word on this, if it happens? that you defeat us.” Then he gave his word, though reluctantly, and said that the guard duty troubled him more than the fear of fighting. Then the ten assembled on the causeway, and the combat began between the knight of the bridge and Sir Gawain. The knight lost his shield at the first joust and missed his target, but Sir Gawain’s lance was not broken, and he charged again as fast as his horse could go; he took careful aim and struck his opponent right above the chest, in the clavicle, so that his hauberk was ruptured and the lance tip and the shaft went completely through his body and bore him from his horse to the ground. He lost consciousness, for he was gravely wounded. Sir Gawain saw that the ground was all sprinkled with blood around him, and he did not know what to do, for he feared that if he dismounted he would never have him in a similar position, and that the knaves would assail him as soon as they saw their knight defeated. So he drew his sword and continued his attack® on horseback and told his opponent he was a dead man if he did not admit defeat. The knight regained consciousness, saw that the blood was streaming from his body, and [412] feared that he was mortally wounded and would die without confession. He begged Sir Gawain for mercy, without attempting to do anything else. And Sir Gawain told him to admit defeat. “My lord,” he replied, “I place myself entirely at your mercy.” The knight surrendered his sword and Sir Gawain accepted it, and the knight gave his word to constitute himself a prisoner. Then the ten attacked, striking to left and right with axes and swords; they killed his horse under him, but took great care not to injure the rider. The squire who had come with him spurred his horse at them as fast as he could make him go, took up the lance belonging to the wounded 4«that you defeated ... at your mercy,” as in note 4.a and Kennedy 527.9-10 (Micha has “that we defeated you, they and I, you would be at our mercy”). Stat happens,” as in Sommer 396.12 (suggested by Lecoy 383). 6 Requerre (“attack”) as in Kennedy 527.27; Micha has conquerre (“conquers”). Z20 knight, for it was still whole, hung? the shield round his neck, and cried out to the men-at-arms, “Bastards, lowborn scoundrels, don’t kill the best knight in the world, for this is Sir Gawain, the nephew of King Arthur, and if he dies you will all be killed and hanged from the gallows!” Then he struck one of them in the throat so violently that he knocked him dead. When the knaves heard that this was Sir Gawain, some ran off to seek safety in the tower and the others ran up the river. Then the squire dismounted and gave his horse to Sir Gawain, who mounted, and the squire took the wounded knight’s horse, mounted, and followed Sir Gawain, who vigorously pursued and harried them. When the wounded knight learned that this was Sir Gawain, he was greatly comforted. And one of the men-at-arms came to meet Sir Gawain, handed him the keys to the castle, and said, “My lord, I bid you welcome. You need have fear of us no more, since you are [413] Sir Gawain.” And the others came forward and removed their helmets and their armor; three of them were badly wounded and one was dead, whom the squire had killed with the lance. Then they took him inside, along with the wounded knight. The squire took his leave, and Sir Gawain gave him his horse and sent him on his way, carrying off the lance and shield of the wounded knight. And Sir Gawain entreated him, if he wished to remain in his favor, to reveal his name to no one who might ask about it, unless the other first swore he was of the Round Table or Queen Guenevere’s knight, and this, he added, was because he wanted Hector to find him quickly.8 Thus Sir Gawain remained in the castle, where he was treated with great honor. His name was inscribed on a stone tablet, and the inscription said, HERE SIR GAWAIN, NEPHEW OF KING ARTHUR, FIRST PASSED BY FORCE OF ARMS FOLLOWING THE PEACE BETWEEN GALEHAUT AND KING ARTHUR.? Sir Gawain learned that he had been preceded by King Yder. The first who had passed there by force had been King Arthur. In the same way were recorded the names of all the other knights who had been defeated and those who had defeated them. And the knight whom Sir Gawain had defeated was named Elinan,!® one of the best knights of whom one could tell in Galehaut’s land. The inscription also said that since the causeway had been built only five knights had passed there: King Arthur, King Yder, Dodinel the Wildman, Meliant of Liz, and Sir Gawain.!! [414] 7hung,” as in Kennedy 527.39 (Micha has “took”). 8Gawain knows from Sagremor that Hector is looking for him; see chapter 64, p. [374]. °The last part of the inscription, “Following... King Arthur,” and the next several lines, through the second mention of King Yder, are added from note 8.a, with slight modifications or additions from Kennedy 528.31-37. The missing passage could be explained by scribal error, a case of eye-skip between the two occurrences of li rois Ydiers. 10The name is supplied from Kennedy 528.33; Elinan is named again in Chapter 69, p. [419]. 1«and Sir Gawain” supplied from Kennedy 528.38. Gawain’s name needs to be added in order to get five (a number on which all manuscripts agree, according to Kennedy 2: 346). Lancelot, Part II Then Sir Gawain stayed in the tower at the end of the causeway, as you have heard. But now the story leaves off speaking of him for a while and speaks of Hector, who had left the maiden who escorted him, when he left Gazevilte, where he had fought for the beautiful lady.!* 68. Hector Achieves His Quest for Sir Gawain.’ At this point the story relates that chance led Hector until he reached the edge of North Wales, where he heard that a knight errant was heading toward Sorelois. He continued on his way and wandered until he met the squire who was riding Sir Gawain’s horse. They exchanged greetings. “Good sir,” said Hector,” “can you tell me news of a knight errant who is heading for Sorelois?” “Who are you?” asked the squire. “lam a knight of King Arthur’s household.” “I bid you welcome,” said the squire. “T’ll tell you news of a knight who crossed the causeway of North Wales, the worst passage you ever saw: I saw him do battle with a knight and ten men-at-arms. I left him on the causeway just yesterday, a little before the hour of nones.” “And what is his name?” asked Hector. “In truth, he is Sir Gawain.” Then they commended each other to God, for Hector was most impatient to arrive at the causeway to meet Sir Gawain, because he believed he had never seen him. [415] Hector spent that night at the hermit’s where Sir Gawain had stayed. The hermit welcomed him very joyfully; he told him that Sir Gawain had stayed there and that he was headed for the land of Sorelois. The hermit said he had had news of him from a squire who had spent the night there, and that he had defeated the men of the causeway. Then Hector asked him whether it was far, and the hermit said he would be there by midday at the latest. In the morning Hector rose and set out on the road to the causeway, as the hermit showed him. When he arrived there, Sir Gawain sent a man-at-arms to meet him, to learn whether he wished to pass according to the custom of the place, and he declared that he did. Then Sir Gawain came fully armed along the causeway, riding the horse of the wounded knight and holding a big, strong lance, for there were plenty of good ones in the tower. He came to the knight and asked him who he was, and he said he was a knight from another land. “And are you one of King Arthur’s companions?” He replied that he was not.? “Do you wish to pass according to the conditions conveyed to you by the man-at-arms?” “Yes,” he replied. See chapter 65. 1Corresponds to Micha VIII:LXVIIIa, Sommer III:397-399; Kennedy 529-531. 2“Hector,” as in Kennedy 529.8 (Micha has “Sir Hector”). 3Hector is telling the truth, for he is the queen’s knight, not Arthur’s. See chapter 58, pp. [212-213] and chapter 71, p. [488]. Lancelot, Part I Then they drew apart, and both spurred their horses and struck each other as fast as their horses could go, with such violence that their lances splintered and shattered to bits; [416] yet neither of them fell, and they passed by each other. Then they drew their swords and gave each other such blows upon their shields that they sliced and cut them apart, each pressing the other so vigorously that neither had any chance to rest; each had lost blood in several places, and this continued until midday approached. But then their breath became so short and their strength so diminished that their blows were of little use. One of the laces of Hector’s helmet broke, and his helmet turned a little to the side, so he jumped back a little to set it right. And Sir Gawain stopped to catch his breath and saw that it would soon be noon.‘ Still on horseback, he leaned against one of the pillars of the arch of the causeway and wiped his sword Excalibur, which was stained with blood. Hector likewise wiped his, and Sir Gawain looked at it and recognized it by the pommel, the hilt, and the inscription; he came forward and asked Hector his name. “What concern is it of yours?” he retorted. “I would like to know it,” replied Sir Gawain. “My name is Hector.” “Ah, Hector, I bid you welcome!” Then he thrust his sword into its sheath and removed his helmet. As soon as Hector saw him, he recognized him clearly. “Ah, my lord,” he cried, “what have I done? For God’s sake, forgive me!” “In God’s name,” said Sir Gawain, “you’re completely in the right, and I’m in the wrong: I should long since have asked [417] your name, for I knew perfectly well that you were in this land,®? and for that reason I declare myself defeated.” “Oh, my lord, I beg you,” he cried, “that must never be, for no one is as worthy a knight as you!” “God help me,” said Sir Gawain, “of all the knights of your age in the world, you’re the one I would most reluctantly fight to the finish, both because you have served me and because there is plenty in you that one should fear.” Then he took him by the hand, and together they went to the men-at-arms, who were mightily puzzled as to who this knight could be whom Sir Gawain was treating with such great honor. He told them that he considered himself defeated and that he would fight no more. Hector was deeply troubled by this and said that it was he who was defeated.® “My lord,” said the men-at-arms to Sir Gawain, “you gave him the honor of the battle when you removed your helmet first, and so the honor must be his.” Hector was greatly disturbed by this, but Sir Gawain insisted that his name be added to the inscription.” Now Hector was greatly honored there and Sir Gawain rejoiced 4Gawain’s strength traditionally ebbed around noon (and redoubled thereafter). See chapter 56, pp. [181-182]. 5See chapters 64 and 67, pp. [374] and [413]. 6This is reminiscent of the discussion between Gawain and Yain at the end of Chrétien’s Le Chevalier au lion, lines 6233-6314 (Kibler ed.), when each of the combatants claims to be defeated. For other examples of this theme, see Kennedy 2: 347. 7See chapter 67, pp. [413-414]. Jaad| at his presence. And Hector told him how he had undertaken his quest for him, and thanked him for the sword he had sent him.® 69. Galehaut Takes Lancelot to the Lost Island.’ Now the story tells that while Sir Gawain was fighting against the knight of the causeway, wounding him and making him admit defeat, and defeating the [418] men-atarms by his prowess, so that they no longer dared stir, a squire set out directly for Sorhaut, where Galehaut and his companion were staying in his dwellings outside the city. He told them that a knight had defeated the knight of the North Wales causeway and all the men-at-arms as well, but he did not know his name. When Galehaut heard this he was amazed and told his companion that a knight errant had defeated one of the best knights of his land, as well as ten men-at-arms. Lancelot said he hoped God would grant that the knight would come their way. “Why?” asked Galehaut. “Because, my lord,” he replied, “we’re in prison? here and for a very long time have seen neither jousts nor knightly deeds, and our lives are wasting away. May God truly help me, if he comes here I'll fight with him!” Galehaut began to laugh, and those who heard him said he had no wish for repose. Then Galehaut thought he would keep him from fighting, if he could. He had a fine dwelling place upon an island in the Ausurne; there was easily half a league of water on every side, and it was called the Lost Island because it was so surrounded by water and isolated. He thought he would take Lancelot there. That evening one of his knights, named Elias of Ragres, asked to guard the causeway. He was a fine, bold knight, and Galehaut granted him this. Then that very night he [419] took his companion to the Lost Island, and Elias went off to guard the causeway. There he met Sir Gawain, and Elias gave him a joyful welcome as soon as he knew who he was. Sir Gawain asked him where Galehaut was, and he replied that he had no news of him. “No? Isn’t he in Sorhaut?” “In truth,” replied Elias, “he departed last night at midnight, and we don’t know where he went.” Then Sir Gawain was greatly distressed, for he feared his quest would be prolonged. In the morning Sir Gawain took his leave, and he and Hector departed, since there was a guard at the bridge. He told the wounded knight, who was still there, to swear that he would go to King Arthur’s court, surrender himself to Queen Guenevere, and tell her that Hector had found him and that he would return to court as soon as he could, and that Hector would have returned, “if I hadn’t retained him 8See chapters 58 and 60, pp. [208-209] and [240-241]. 1 Corresponds to Micha VIII:LXIXa; Sommer III:399-400; Kennedy 531-532. 2Lancelot’s choice of words is surprising, since he and Galehaut had gone to Sorelois completely of their own free will. Zee to accompany me. Now tell me your name,” he added, “since you already know mine.” And he said his name was Elinan of the Isles. Then Elinan, in great discomfort, went to King Arthur’s court and told the news. The king was very glad, and the queen had his wounds cared for. After that he was a member of King Arthur’s household, for he was a very worthy knight. When the queen learned that Hector had found Sir Gawain, she was delighted. Then she told his ladylove, who was overjoyed and greatly comforted, for no one had been able to make her laugh or play since he [420] had gone away. But it grieved the king more than anyone else that Sir Gawain had not succeeded in his quest, because of the urgent nature of his mission, and he knew no way of bringing it to a successful conclusion without him. 70. Gawain and Hector Find Lancelot; The Battle of Saxon Rock.' Now the story returns to Lancelot, who was in the tower of the Lost Island, very distressed and preoccupied, and very eager to hear any news of his lady that she might wish to send him. He had completely given up laughter and play, eating and drinking, and nothing but thinking could bring him any comfort. He spent the whole day on the top of the tower, looking up-river and down, entirely overcome. Now it happened that the day after Sir Gawain and Hector had left the causeway, they were riding along at random, having been unable to learn any news of Galehaut, when they met a maiden riding a palfrey. Sir Gawain greeted her; she returned his greeting and asked where they were going. They replied that they did not know where to find what they were seeking. “And what is that?” she asked. “My lady,” they replied, “we’re looking for Galehaut, the lord of this land, but we can’t find him.” “T’ll tell you how to find him,” she said, “if you agree to grant me the first boon I ask of you.” They promised that they would do so. “Promise me on oath,” she said, and they did. “Come with me,” she told them. Then they went up onto a high mountain, and from there she showed them the Lost Island. “I can tell you,” she said, “that he is on that island, with the fewest companions possible.” [421] Then the maiden departed, and she and the knights commended one another to God. They headed straight toward the island and saw, when they drew near, that it was completely covered with tall, dense forest, and that nothing could be seen except the battlements and the top of the tallest tower. “My God,” said Sir Gawain, “what a proud and mighty fortress this is, surrounded by this swift and broad and noisy water! There’s only one way in, for I see that the drawbridge is raised. I know of no device or ruse that will let us set foot inside, for the people are hiding as well as they can.” ICorresponds to Micha VI1i:LXXa; Sommer III:400-—414; Kennedy 532-551. Lancelot, Part IT So they remained at the end of the bridge and waited in this manner to see whether anyone would come forth. Now Lancelot was deep in thought up in the tower, but he saw the two armed knights at the end of the bridge. He called to Galehaut and pointed them out, and Galehaut sent one of his squires to find out who they were and what they wanted. “But take care,” he said, “not to say that Jam here.” So the squire went and asked them, and Sir Gawain replied that they were two knights from another land and were eager to speak to Galehaut. “My lord,” said the squire, “he’s not here.” “I know very well,” said Sir Gawain, “that he is, but tell him that, if he wishes, we’ll speak to him, and if he doesn’t, we won’t, but in that case we’ll simply wait here. And be assured that whatever comes out of there will be lost to him, [422] and you can tell him that it is most unworthy of him to have shut himself in because of two knights.” Then the squire went back and told his lord what they had told him. Galehaut considered their words supremely arrogant and said he would soon see whether they would so easily take anything of his. Then he ordered two of his best knights, the very best he had except for three, to mount and ride to the two strangers. “And if they want knightly deeds,” he told them, “be sure they get what they want.” When Sir Gawain saw them coming, he said, “Ah, Hector, it looks as if we'll have to fight, for we have met with the pride and the best knighthood in the whole world.2 I can tell you that the best knight in Britain is on this island; because of his prowess the knights of King Arthur’s household have suffered many hardships and much dishonor, and he is the one I seek. I knew I’d never get in there by my fine words, unless I sent some outrageous message; I’d rather do that than commit an outrageous deed.” Then the two knights came forth, and as soon as the bridge was lowered, they came across to Sir Gawain and Hector and told them to surrender or they would have to fight against them. “I would rather be taken prisoner,” said Sir Gawain, “in order to be inside there.” “You'll never enter there,” said the knights, “but [423] we'll imprison you in another place.” “On such a condition,” said Sir Gawain, “I won’t surrender yet. But if there were just you two to guard the bridge, I would enter there before the day is out.” “We shall see,” they said. Then each pair charged full speed at the other, as fast as their horses could go, and they struck one another upon their shields. Sir Gawain bore his opponent to the ground along with his horse, and Hector bore his over the horse’s rump to the ground, so that? Galehaut and his companions commented that the two strangers jousted very well. Then Sir Gawain and Hector dismounted and ran to attack the two knights, their swords drawn. But the one Sir Gawain had felled could do nothing to help himself, for his 2+in the whole world,” as in Kennedy 533.37 (Micha has “in Britain or in the world”). 3“to the ground, so that,” as in note 5.a and Kennedy 534.18 (Micha has “to the ground both him and the horse all in a heap, so that”). Lancelot, Part IT horse lay upon him so that his heart was nearly crushed within his breast. Sir Gawain pulled him by the helmet and tore it from his head, then turned down his ventail and said he would cut off his head unless he declared himself vanquished, which he promptly did. And Hector, quickly attacking his opponent, found him badly wounded, for the head and much of the shaft of the lance had penetrated him. Yet [424] the knight got up as best he could; Hector came to him as he was doing so and struck him on the head so that he quite stunned him, knocking him down again. It took very little time to defeat him: he begged for mercy, declared himself defeated, surrendered himself as Hector’s prisoner, and handed over his sword. Then they asked the two, on their oath, what companions were there with Galehaut, and they replied that wherever Galehaut was, there were the best knights in the world, but they maintained that Galehaut was not there. So Sir Gawain asked nothing more of them. Now Galehaut was greatly distressed because he saw his* knights taken prisoner, and he called for his armor. And Lancelot sprang forward and said that Galehaut would not arm because of those two, “but I'll go,” he added. “And who will go with your” asked Galehaut. “No one,” he replied, “until I see how it will be.” “Upon my word,” said Galehaut, “the King of the Hundred Knights will, for you won’t go alone.” Then they called for their armor and it was brought. And when they were armed, Lancelot slung Galehaut’s shield from his shoulders and came forth from the island by way of the bridge. Sir Gawain told the two defeated knights to go wherever they thought they would be most comfortable, “and return here the day after tomorrow as my prisoners.” “We won’t go,” they retorted; “we won’t be your prisoners for long, for we will soon be rescued.” Then Sir Gawain was certain it was Lancelot who was approaching with Galehaut’s arms, and he said so to Hector: [425] “Aha, Hector, here is the best knight in the world. You’ll joust with the one bearing the golden shield with the red lion, and I with the one bearing the golden shield with azure crowns. And for God’s sake, may all the prowess you ever had be present now, for never was there so great a need!” Hector conducted himself most vigorously, and Sir Gawain esteemed him highly. The knights came across, and each pair charged full speed at the other. Now it happened that Sir Gawain and Lancelot unhorsed each other, while Hector and the king jousted in such a manner that Hector unhorsed the king, but he jumped quickly back to his feet. Then Hector could not restrain his horse, and he ran into the king. The king was very strong, but he could not help falling back upon the ground; this caused the horse to stumble and fall over him. Hector sprang to his feet and drew his sword; the king did likewise, and they struck great blows and powerfully cut into each other’s shield. In the same way, Sir Gawain and Lancelot got back to their feet and dealt each other mighty blows, and the battle went on at length until Sir Gawain [426] was getting by far 4ehis” as in note 7.a and Kennedy 534.36 (Micha has “these”). Zoo the worst of it, and it was already between midday and the hour of nones. But Hector was getting the upper hand in his combat, and he was able to deal largely as he wished with the king. Because of his concern for Gawain, Galehaut came forth, and he would have been glad to separate the combatants had he known how to do so. When he arrived on the scene, he saw that Sir Gawain was in very poor condition, as was his armor, and the king was even worse off. Sir Gawain was certain he was going to die, for he had never been so distressed: in several places one could have thrust a hand right through his hauberk, and there was scarcely anything left of his shield. Nor was Lancelot completely well, for he had suffered much injury from Sir Gawain’s good sword. Then Hector ran to Sir Gawain and said, “My lord, take that one and give me this one, for I can hold out against him; though mine is causing me pain, he won’t hold out against you.” “Leave your opponent,” said Lancelot, “and I'll fight against both of you.” “Do your best,” said Hector, “and let’s all four fight together.” “The fourth won’t be in it,” said Lancelot, “but you can both fight against me.” Then Hector thought it would be considered unworthy if he did not first defeat his knight, so he attacked him anew and pressed him hard, striking him wherever he wished. Then the king’s sword broke in the middle, so he attacked him barehanded, for he was very strong, and threw Hector down beneath him. But Hector was soon up again, for he too was very strong and agile. Now Sir Gawain had been holding out for a long time, for the hour was past when he customarily grew weak;> he had somewhat caught his breath, and his strength had begun to redouble. And he said that since it could not be otherwise and he could not meet the object of his quest except by fighting the battle to the end,® [427] so be it, and let each do his worst from that point on. He remembered the words he had heard, and he felt grief and shame. Then he attacked Lancelot so fiercely that Galehaut was quite dismayed, for he saw clearly that his companion was getting the worst of it, and he knew that if they went on fighting for long, one of them was sure to die, for Sir Gawain was now fighting so furiously that all who saw it were amazed. And Hector was very glad; he laughed for joy and said the battle would have to be to their honor, for he saw clearly that they were getting the best of it. At that moment, and in accordance with God’s will, Lionel came along. When he saw Lancelot fighting, he did not recognize him, but he easily recognized Sir Gawain by his arms,’ though they were badly damaged. And he asked Galehaut, who was on the field of combat, who this was who was fighting in his armor, and he replied sorrowfully that it was his companion. 5See chapter 56, pp. [181-182]. 6«by ... to the end,” as in Kennedy 536.21 (translated, 2: 351); Micha has “by outrageous battle”). 7See chapter 64, pp. [358-364]. Oe! ‘It was to his misfortune that this battle was begun,” he said, “for he will pay dearly for it.” Then Lionel came forward; Lancelot saw him and was filled with shame that he had not long since defeated the knight. It seemed to him, when he saw him, that the queen had seen him, and he speedily renewed his attack, {428] as did his opponent, even better than he had done before, for his strength had doubled and was constantly increasing. Then Lionel cried out to him to do no more, if he valued his life, until he had spoken to him. So Lancelot checked his blew and drew back, and Lionel told him it was Sir Gawain he was fighting, “and the queen sends word that you are to do whatever he wishes, and that he has suffered many ills and many pains for you.” When Lancelot heard this, he was filled with grief and shame; he threw down his sword and cried, “Alas, what shall I do?” Then without another word he went straight back to his horse. Sir Gawain paid no attention to his, but thrust his sword into its sheath and ran after the knight, saying, “Sir knight, tell me your name!” But the other was weeping so bitterly he could say nothing in reply. And when Sir Gawain saw that he would get no answer, he ran and jumped up behind him on the horse, though he was fully armed, threw his arms around him and said, “By the Holy Cross, you won’t escape until I know your name, even if it means your death or mine!” Hector and the king had separated, and the king was in great need of this, for he was defeated. Now Galehaut was deeply concerned for Lancelot; he asked Lionel what message he had brought, and he told him everything. When Galehaut heard this, he did not know what to say or do, for he did not know whether Lancelot would want his identity known, and he would not reveal it for anything, [429] nor would he commit any base action toward Sir Gawain, since he had suffered so many ills for him. Then he went to Hector and asked him who he was, and he replied he was from the land of Logres and the queen’s knight, and that his name was Hector. “And this knight,” he asked, “who is he?” He answered that he was Sir Gawain. “God help me,” said Galehaut, “TI believe it, for he isa most worthy knight.” ‘ Thus they went off speaking together as they crossed the bridge until they reached the island; a squire followed them, leading Sir Gawain’s horse. Then Galehaut went up to Sir Gawain, embraced him, and said, “Welcome, my lord! I didn’t recognize you, but, begging your pardon, you made a grave mistake, for you very nearly caused the deaths of two of the best knights in the world, and for nothing, for you should have identified yourself.” “My lord,” he replied, “the fear of losing this gentleman whom I had sought so long prevented me from identifying myself. I was certain I couldn’t deceive your great good sense except by some outrageous stratagem.® Please forgive me.” ‘Indeed I do, my lord, and we have done you more wrong than you have done us. But do you know who this man is whom you are holding?” 8Cf. this chapter, pp. [421-422]. Lancelot, Part II “I know,” said Sir Gawain, “that this is the man I’ve been seeking.” At that point they entered the tower, and since Lancelot did not want to dismount first, they both dismounted together, Sir Gawain holding him all the while. “My lord,” said Galehaut, “now leave him to me, and I promise that I [430] will return him to your keeping.” “Most willingly, my lord,” he replied, “but understand that I’m placing my life at risk.” Then Galehaut took Lancelot into another room, after which he came back out and gave orders that Sir Gawain and Hector were to be treated with all possible honor, and he had their armor removed. Then he returned to the room and found Lancelot indulging in bitter mourning, and he asked him what was wrong. He answered that he had lost the queen’s love because he had fought against Sir Gawain, “and never,” he added, “will a shield hang from my shoulders from this day forward.” ‘Don’t be concerned,” said Galehaut, “for I will surely deliver you from all this.” “Ah, my lord,” he replied, “in that case you have restored me to life.” Then Galehaut had him remove his armor and wash his face with warm water, and he said to him, “I'll have Sir Gawain come to you, and you'll beg him for mercy as you would beg God Himself, and he will be happier than if you gave him a city; then peace will be made between you. And tell him you’re ready to do whatever he wishes.” Then Galehaut returned to Sir Gawain, took him by the hand, and asked him to come with him; he told the other knights to keep Hector company. As they made their way toward? the other room, Galehaut asked him who he thought this was. “I know for certain that this is Lancelot of the Lake, the son of King Ban of Benoic, he who brought about the peace between my lord King Arthur and you.” And Galehaut began to laugh. “Indeed,” he said, “no man ever had such great grief [431] or such great shame as he has had because of you. Now you will see how his eyes are swollen from weeping, for you have done him a great service.” Then they came into the room, and as soon as Galehaut said “Here is Sir Gawain,” Lancelot fell to his knees and begged him for mercy. Sir Gawain raised him up, and said, “My lord, I forgive you, for in truth you have done a hundred times more for me than I have done for you. But for God’s sake, tell me your name.” “It is,” said Galehaut, “the one you said to me.” “I would be very glad to hear it from his own lips.” “Tell him, my lord,” said Galehaut. He blushed and was deeply embarrassed, but nevertheless said that he was Lancelot. Then there was great rejoicing, and they spoke together of many things, including Hector. Galehaut said he had never, to his knowledge, seen a worthier knight for his age, or a better one. Then Galehaut himself went to seek him and brought 9since it becomes fairly clear that they are not yet in the other room at this point, I have modified the translation to reflect this fact. Lancelot, Part IT him there. The King of the Hundred Knights was put to bed in a room, for he was badly wounded, and Galehaut had Sir Gawain’s wounds inspected, and Hector’s as well, and placed good doctors at their service. Two days later a maiden came to see Sir Gawain, and drew him aside. “My lord,” she said, “I am sent to you by your brother Agravain, who sends you word that King Arthur is leaving for Scotland, where the Irish and the Saxons have entered;!® you are to go there and to send him word of how you have succeeded in your quest.” “Well,” he replied, “thanks be to God. Now stay here for the rest of the day.” That night Sir Gawain begged Lancelot [432] for his company, and he readily granted it and anything else he might wish. And Hector also became part of that company; all three of them swore to this because he was the queen’s knight and eminently worthy. Afterwards Sir Gawain stated that he wished to stay there the whole week, “and in the morning each of us will have blood drawn from our right arm.” Lancelot said that he had never been bled, but that he would do it for the love of Sir Gawain. The next day they were bled, and Sir Gawain had the maiden take Lancelot’s blood to his brother Agravain, who was completely cured as soon as he was anointed with it.!! And Galehaut had a shield made for Lancelot according to the queen’s command, and he brought the shield to one of his knights. And Sir Gawain told them of the army that was going to meet the Saxons, for he thought they knew nothing of it, and he asked Galehaut and Lancelot to accompany them, and they agreed. “But let us go,” said Galehaut, “in such a way as not to be recognized; let’s all bear unfamiliar arms.” And the others agreed. They stayed there the whole week. Then they set out to go join the battle, and they went along asking for news! until they met the same maiden that Sir Gawain and Hector had met, who had informed them about the Lost Island.!8 They all greeted her, and she invoked God’s blessing upon them. “My lady,” said Galehaut, “do you have any news of King Arthur?” “Yes,” she replied, “entirely reliable news, and I can tell you that you will get no news of him today or tomorrow except from me, but I won’t reveal it for free.” “In truth,” said Lancelot, “we will give you whatever you wish in exchange.” “Give me your solemn word,” she said, “that, when I summon you, [433] you will give me what I ask, even as much as a league of land from your domains.” “We will never fail you in this,” they said, and all four of them gave her their word. “The king is at Arestel, in Scotland, and as soon as you reach there, you’ll find him laying siege to Saxon Rock, I believe.” , Then she left, and they all commended her to God, as she did them. They spent their days in travel until they 10Cf. chapter 66, p. [408]. 1cf, chapter 60, p. [232]. 1267 ews” supplied from Kennedy 540.1. 13See the beginning of this chapter, pp. [420-421]. Zoo came to Arestel and found the king laying siege to the Rock, just as the maiden had said, and the Rock was so strong that those in it feared nothing except being starved. It had been secretly fortified at the time Vortigern married the daughter of Hengist the Saxon.!4 From there to Arestel was fully twelve Scottish leagues, and everything was destroyed between them, except for one castle in which there lived a maiden named Gamille. She knew more about enchantments than any other maiden in the land; she was very beautiful, and of Saxon lineage. She was as much in love with King Arthur as she could possibly be, but the king knew nothing of this.!° When the four knights reached the king’s camp, Sir Gawain asked Lancelot, “What shall I do? [434] I wouldn't dare enter King Arthur’s court until I can bring reliable news of Lancelot, for I have sworn to this.”!6 “My lord,” said Galehaut, “if you please, let’s leave that until after the battle, for you can surely wait until then to enter King Arthur’s house. Then Lancelot will go wherever you wish.” Sir Gawain granted this request, and said there were still twenty knights on this quest. “And we all swore that we would be at King Arthur’s first battle, if we were free to do so, and we made arrangements so as to be able to recognize one another.!” Now I'll go see whether I can find any of them, and then I’ll come back to you.” “We'll wait for you,” said Lancelot, “but take Hector with you.” “Indeed,” said Galehaut, “and we’ll set up our tent outside here, between the camp and Arestel, so that we won’t be recognized. And whenever we leave the camp we’ll do so by night, so that no one will know who we are.” And all of them approved this. Then Sir Gawain and Hector rode into the camp, and people looked at them with wonder, since they carried their shields with the inside outward. Sir Gawain found all his companions except for Sagremor, whose lady had detained him because she loved him so much she could not do without him. Nevertheless, he arrived before the battle was over. Then his companions asked him [435] whether he had succeeded in any way, and he replied that he had everything he sought, “but I won’t reveal my identity,” he said, “until the battle is over.” Then he told Sir Yvain that his companions should take lodging in groups of two or three, so as not to be noticed, “and Ill do likewise, with this knight, whom I cannot fail.” Then Kay asked him who he was. ‘In truth,” he replied, “this is the knight who unhorsed all four of you at the Spring of the Pine.”!8 They were mightily puzzled by this, and Sir Yvain said that he would be a fine knight, if he stayed alive. At that point they departed, and Sir Gawain said they were all to be together at the battle the next day. Then he went to where Galehaut had set up his tent, and this was at 14Reference to Merlin, chapter 2; the event is also recounted in Wace’s Brut. I5This statement is totally at variance with what is related later in this chapter, in particular pp. [436], [441], and [442-443]. 16See chapter 54, p. [137]. See chapter 54, p. [144]. 18See chapter 55, pp. [150-152]. 226 the edge of a wood, in a lovely spot, enclosed all around by a lofty palisade, which one entered through a little gate, for this was a garden belonging to one of the burghers of Arestel. There the tent was pitched, and [436] there were easily ten squires, one of whom was Lionel, who was most worthy and judicious. And every day King Arthur spoke to the maiden of the castle, begging her for her love, but she cared nothing for him, though she had so affected him that he loved her beyond all measure.!9 The battle took place the day after Sir Gawain’s arrival. Lancelot bore the black shield with a diagonal white band, Galehaut bore the shield belonging to the King of the Hundred Knights, and Sir Gawain the shield of white and azure; it belonged to the best knight of Galehaut’s household, named Galain, the duke of Ronnes. And Hector bore the white shield with the red band across it, which was the shield of Aguinier, one of Galehaut’s companions. The king himself bore arms. They did battle with the Saxons and the Irish, but the king did not have many troops, so he had to acquit himself well. In fact, he did so better than ever before, and this was more for the maiden who was watching him from the Rock than for himself. When the king himself had entered the fray, Sir Gawain and his twenty companions joined the battle, but Galehaut and Lancelot stayed behind so as not to be noticed. Then the two of them passed before the house where the queen was staying. She and the lady of Malehaut had climbed up to the battlements of the tower, and when the queen saw Lancelot, she said to the lady of Malehaut, “Do you recognize those two knights?” Then the lady began to smile, for she readily recognized them, both by Lancelot’s shield and by the pennoncel he had attached to [437] his helmet,2? and this was the first distinguishing mark ever worn on a helmet in the time of King Arthur. Then the two knights looked up, and saw what they most loved. Lancelot was so overcome that he nearly fell to the ground and had to hold onto the neck of his horse. Lionel was riding next to him, armed in a metal cap and a habergeon like a foot-soldier, and he rode with bowed head, so that no one would recognize him. But when he looked up, he recognized the queen, and she recognized him and had him summoned by a page. He dismounted, leaned the lances he was carrying against the base of the tower, and began to climb up. He met the queen upon the stair, and she said to him, “Be sure that the jousting takes place in front of here.” Then she went back to the top of the tower, and he remounted his horse and spurred after his lord, carrying the lances. He told him what the queen had said, but Lancelot was so deeply lost in thought that he could only reply, “Let it be as my lady wishes.” Then they reached the scene of the battle and saw the field covered with fighting. Lancelot charged in and began so valiantly to perform feats of arms that all who saw it were astonished. Sir Gawain was fighting some way off, but it took little time before he heard of this, as someone told him a knight was performing marvels up ahead. He arrived 19Cf, p. [433] and note 15. 20Cf. chapter 66, p. [408]. Lancelot, Part IT with his companions, and they immediately drove the enemy forces back to their camp, inflicting many casualties. When Lionel saw this, he advised Lancelot to get ready to do as he had been instructed. But he replied, “Go tell my lady that cannot be, unless I place myself on the other side; if that is what she wishes, [438] I will bring them all before the tower.” And Lionel went off to tell her. As soon as she saw him, she descended. When he had delivered his message, she climbed back up and said that she did wish it, “but let him take care,” she added, “as soon as he sees my cloak hanging from the battlements with the lining outwards, to come back from the other side, and if the king suffers any losses in the pursuit, let him be sure to make amends for them.” Lionel went back and delivered this message to Lancelot. And Galehaut called Sir Gawain and said, “My lord, I know how the king might capture the mightiest men from the other side: if we turned from there and led the king’s forces right up to the edge of the water, without stopping, and if we then turned back, we could not fail to capture or kill them all.” Sir Gawain said he would do whatever Galehaut wished, “but how,” he objected, “can I go against my uncle and my liege lord?” “Why, it would be for his advantage,” said Galehaut. “In that case,” replied Sir Gawain, “I would do it.” Then they turned toward the Saxons, twenty-three knights, all most worthy, including Galehaut. At once the king’s forces had to fall back, since the other knights were against them,?! and they never stopped until they reached the edge of the water, where the tower was situated. But they did so calmly, and with scarcely any losses, for the enemy were intent upon pursuing them and believed they had won the day, and so they took no prisoners, but drove them into the water by force. The king’s grief was so great that he was nearly [439] out of his mind, and he bitterly lamented the absence of*? Sir Gawain and his companions. Then Lancelot looked toward the tower and saw the queen’s cloak hanging, lining outwards, and declared that now they had suffered enough. “Now at them!” he cried. Then they all turned about and charged full speed at the Saxons, cutting them off from behind, with a furious attack and a mighty shout. They were thrown into great confusion, believing themselves to be completely surrounded, and the king’s men came back and met them. But Lancelot and his company were at the rear, where he performed such marvels that the queen was quite amazed, for he was striving mightily to keep his adversaries near the tower. He and his companions were at the passage to the ford, for they all had to come back through there. So many were killed and unhorsed in the ford that the water was all dammed up. And the queen observed that all his hardships at the other battle were nothing compared to what he had endured here, and she was thoroughly puzzled as to who those knights with him were, who were acquitting themselves so well. Sir Gawain and Hector and all the 2l*the other... them,” as in note 28.a and Kennedy 543.26 (Micha has “the knights are with them”). 22“bitterly lamented the absence of,” as in Kennedy 543.31-32 (Micha has “looked intently at”). Lancelot, Part I others performed marvels, and no one could get in among them without being either killed or unhorsed; they all made such efforts in fighting for one another that it was a wonder to behold. And because they killed so many knights in the ford, it was from that day on called the Ford of Blood, and it will be forevermore. Lancelot, along with his companions, took so many blows at the ford that his helmet was all split and dented, and the circlet hung down. So the queen called to one of her maidens and sent him a splendid helmet belonging to the king. “And tell him that I cannot watch this slaughter any longer and that he is to begin the pursuit, for I wish it.” The maiden [440] took the helmet to him and gave him the queen’s message; he replied, “Many thanks!” Then he removed his helmet and laced on the new one, and withdrew a little, along with his companions. The Saxons crossed the ford and took flight, overcome by fear; their losses were too great, and they fled. Lancelot and his companions pursued them, and in the chase the king’s men captured a knight named Aramont, the brother of Agleot, the Saxon king, and one of their best knights. And they captured fully two hundred other Saxons and Irishmen, all mighty lords, and killed some of the best. Three times during the pursuit, Lancelot helped King Arthur remount, for two of his horses were killed under him and the third fell and broke its neck. The king would have fared very badly had Lancelot not been there, for he was on his own, so intent were his men on pursuing their enemy and on taking prisoners. That day the king’s enemies were severely harried and driven back to their own camp. All day long the fierce fighting continued, until evening began to fall. Then Galehaut came to Sir Gawain and advised him to remain there until the forces withdrew, “and then we will leave.” Sir Gawain agreed to this. Then he and Lancelot came before the tower. The queen came down; they both greeted her and she greeted them. She saw that Lancelot’s arm was covered with blood up to the shoulder, and she feared he was mortally wounded. She asked them how they were, and they replied, “Well.” “And does your arm [441] not pain you?” “No, my lady.” “I wish to see it,” she said. She embraced Lancelot in his suit of armor, and the lady of Malehaut embraced Galehaut; the queen whispered to Lancelot that she would heal him before the next day, if he had no mortal wound, and he replied that he had no fear of death as long as she wished him well. Then she bade them mount, for she dared detain them no longer, and told Lionel she wished to speak to him. The two knights went off to their tents and removed their armor. It was already beginning to grow quite dark. As he left the battle, the king passed below the Rock. The maiden said she wished to speak to him; he was very pleased and waited for her. She descended, came to him, and said, “My lord, you are the worthiest man alive, and you give me to understand that you love me above all women. I wish to test this, if you dare do one thing for me.” “There is nothing that I wouldn’t do for you.” “I want you to come lie with me tonight in this tower.” 2a “There is no obstacle,” he replied, “if you promise I may do with you what a knight should do to his ladylove.” She promised him this, and he said he would come just as soon as he had seen his knights and dined with them. “At the gate,” she said, “you will find my messenger who will come to get you.” Then the king, full of joy, left her and returned to his knights, who saw him happier and more joyful than [442] ever before. He sent word to the queen that she would not have him with her that night and that she should rejoice, since the battle had gone so well for him. She was not at all sorrowful about this. That night Lionel came to the queen’s residence, and she told him that Lancelot and Galehaut were both to come speak to her there that night, and she showed him by what route, “My lady,” he replied, “Sir Gawain and Hector are with them. How will they get away?” When the queen heard this, she was delighted that they had found one another, “but this is not to prevent them from coming,” she added, “and I'll tell you how. They will go to bed in the presence of Sir Gawain, and when they’re sure that he’s asleep, they will get up, and then the three of you will come here”—and she showed him a garden adjoining the bailey*? of the castle—‘“and we'll be outside the bailey. Tell them to come in full armor and on horseback.” Then Lionel went back and related what he had been told, and the two knights were overjoyed. That night, when those in the king’s tent had gone to bed, the king rose as quietly as he could, and he and his nephew Guerrehet, to whom he had revealed his plan, put on their armor, went to the gate of the castle, and found the messenger of his beloved. Then they accompanied him into the great fortress and found the maiden waiting for them. She gave them a fine welcome and had the king’s and Guerrehet’s armor removed. Then the king?* lay down with his ladylove in a splendid bed, and Guerrehet lay with a2° beautiful maiden [443] in another room.?° After the king had lain a long time with his ladylove and had his way with her, more than forty knights entered the tower, fully armed and with naked swords, and forced open the door to the room. The king jumped up as best he could, clad only in his breeches, and ran to his sword in order to defend himself. The knights were carrying many burning candles, and it was bright enough to see clearly. They told him not to defend himself, and he obeyed: since he had no armor, he saw that any defense would be to no avail, and he let himself be taken prisoner. And some ran into the other room and captured Guerrehet. Then they dressed both of them and imprisoned them in a fortified 23«bailey,” as in Kennedy 546.1 (Micha has “battlements”). Emended in order to be consistent with p. [444]; see Kennedy 2: 358. 24"and Guerrehet’s ... the king,” as in note 34.b and Kennedy 546.9-10, (Micha has “had the king’s armor removed. And Guerrehet saw a very beautiful maiden. The king”). 2543” asin Kennedy 546.11 (Micha has “the”). 26¢5 90m,” as in note 34.c and Kennedy 546.11 (Micha has “bed”). 228 room where a single door was the only way in or out, and that door was made of iron. So the king and Guerrehet were in prison. Galehaut and Lancelot arose from their beds; they had before them two squires, whom they ordered not to move so that, if the others?’ awoke, they would take the two knights for squires. Then they came, fully armed, to the garden, and the squires lay down in their beds. The knights found the gate to the garden unlocked and went in. The camp was guarded only at the front, for at the rear, toward the garden, the water ran so deep that no one would have set foot there because of the muddy marsh. [444] Once inside the garden, they closed the gate and went to the bailey, there they dismounted, found the two ladies waiting for them, and led their horses to a lean-to adjoining the bailey. And in all the bailey there was only the queen and her maidens; the other people were nearby, in a very large house, for she had deliberately cleared out the bailey. When the two knights had removed their armor, they were led to two chambers, and each of them, very much in love, lay with his beloved, and they had all the joys that lovers can have. At midnight, the queen arose and went to the shield that the maiden from the Lake had brought her.28 In the darkness she felt it and found it completely whole, without a crack, and she was overjoyed, for now she was certain that she was better loved than any other woman. In the morning, shortly before daybreak, the two knights arose and put on their armor in the queen’s chamber. And the lady of Malehaut, who was very astute, looked at the shield by the light of the candles, saw that it was whole again, and said to the queen, “My lady, now we can see that the love is complete.” Then she went to Lancelot and took him by the chin, and he was deeply ashamed because he had spent many days [445] in her power and had always concealed his true feelings from her.2? Then to rescue him the queen said, “My lady, if my father is a king, so too is his, and if 1 am worthy and fair, he is More so.” Then Galehaut asked what all this meant, and she related how the shield had been brought to her, that the Lady of the Lake had sent it, and that it had always heen cracked until that time. For a long time they looked at it with wonder. And the lady of Malehaut remarked that just one thing kept the shield from being as it had been foretold,2° and that was that Lancelot was not of the household of which he was to be. Then the queen implored him to stay, if Sir Gawain asked him to do so, for she was so overwhelmed by him and by his love that she did not see how she could ever do without him. But she said this so softly that Galehaut did not hear it, for he would have been deeply saddened by it. Then they departed and arranged to come back the next night. 27The pronoun chil designates Gawain and Hector; cf. Lionel’s report to the queen, p. [442]. 28See chapter 58, pp. [206-207]. Given the verb “brought” (aporlé ) damoisele del Lac must be the lady’s messenger, and not the Lady of the Lake herself. 2°See chapters 49-52. 30By the Lady of the Lake, chapter 58, p. [207]. Lancelot, Part II In the morning, when it was daylight, the men of the Rock hung the king’s and Guerrehet’s shields from the battlements and celebrated with all possible joy. Then throughout the camp there was such sorrow as you would not believe, so that the queen, who still lay in bed, learned of it. She was overwhelmed by grief and was most impatient to speak to Lancelot, that he might think of a plan. But Sir Gawain was even more distressed, and Lancelot comforted him and told him not to be dismayed, “for either we will all be prisoners,” he said, “or we will get them back.”?! That night [446] Lionel again went to the queen, and she told him to bring Lancelot and Galehaut, for she had great need of them. He left to deliver her message, but while he was with the queen,°? a maiden came to their tent and told the four knights that she was summoning them to keep their promise: it was the maiden who had told them they could find the king at Arestel.%3 “My lady,” said Galehaut, “where do you want us to escort you? For God’s sake, don’t distress us, for we already have plenty of grief.” “You'll soon be free of that grief, if you will follow me, for there is a plan to get King Arthur out of there and take him secretly to Ireland. If you will follow me, you can rescue him secretly; he doesn’t know that they are planning to take him away.” When they heard this, they jumped on their horses in full armor and followed the maiden, who led them to a cave. She entered, and they followed. It was already night when they arrived, and one could scarcely see anything. She told them the king was to be brought through there. First of all she went to Hector. “Guard this exit for me,” she said; “there are still three others in there, and if they come this way, call out to the others.” So he stayed there, and she went on a bit farther with the others; when she had gone some way, she told Sir Gawain to remain there, and he did. Then she came to another door, passed by it, and [447] left Galehaut, and when she came to another, she left Lancelot, saying, “Wait for me here, for I think I’ll soon be able to deliver the king and Guerrehet to you.” After a long time she came crying, “Help! Help!” And Lancelot leapt forward, and she said, “Here he is!” He sprang forward and saw two knights in armor, one bearing the king’s shield and the other Guerrehet’s; he thought it was they, but it was not, for the maiden had betrayed them. Lancelot saw that these two were fighting and defending themselves against more than twenty others, and he rushed to the attack. But the two he thought to help threw their arms around him, and they all fell to the ground. Then the others sprang forward, took away his sword by force, tore his helmet from his head, and said they would cut off his head. He replied that, with God’s help, that would be fine with him, for he had no intention of declaring himself their prisoner. But they took him and held him to one side, asa prisoner. sleet them back,” as in Sommer 411.31 (Micha has “have him”). CAT queen” supplied from note 37.a and Kennedy 548.3-4. 33See pp. [432-433], this chapter. Lancelot, Part IT Then they went to Galehaut and had a knight put on Lancelot’s armor. When Galehaut saw him fighting, he shouted to the others; they came running, but they found the doors solidly closed, and neither of them could get through. They took Galehaut prisoner, then reopened the door and took Sir Gawain, but first there was a great fight, for he accomplished many feats of prowess. And then they captured Hector in turn and made all four of them prisoner. But Lancelot refused to declare himself anyone’s prisoner, so they said they would throw him into a cell from which he would never escape, but that if he wished he would be unbound on his honor. He replied [448] that he desired only death. But the others gave their word, and so they were left unbound in a room. That night the queen was very uneasy. When Lionel saw that Lancelot and Galehaut were not coming, he went to tell the queen that a maiden had led them away. He told her the story just as he had heard it. When she heard this, she sighed and said they had been betrayed, and she began to grieve most bitterly. In the morning the men of the Rock hung the four shields from the battlements with the other two. When the queen saw them, you may be sure her grief was great, and she would have preferred death to life. And that was the day fixed for battle. When the news reached the companions of Sir Gawain, there was nothiny but distress and grief. Then Sir Yvain declared that the queen must be counseled, for her grief was extreme. With the leave of the other seventeen,** he went to see her and had her come to meet him at the stairs. She came most gladly, when she knew it was he. “My lady,” he said, “I would have gone to see you inside, but I cannot enter any house of King Arthur’s until our quest is brought to a successful conclusion.» But I come to comfort you: don’t be distressed, for, God willing, you will have help. But do you have any news of Sir Gawain?” “No,” she replied. “He is in that castle, with three of the best knights in the world, but I don’t know who they are.” Then the queen fell at Sir Yvain’s [449] feet and begged him to take pity on the king’s honor and her own. He raised her up, weeping himself because he saw her weeping, for no lady was ever so well loved by her lord’s people as was Queen Guenevere. That day Sir Yvain took the place of King Arthur, for whatever he ordered was done. Kay the Seneschal carried the great banner, as was his right, and the divisions were drawn up. Then the Irish and the Saxons attacked the king of Britain’s forces, believing they had already won the day 34The arithmetic concerning this group varies slightly from one mention to another. In chapter 54, p. [142], it was twenty knights including Gawain, but in this chapter, p. [436], it was Gawain and his twenty companions. In IX: [348], Micha arrives at seventeen by subtracting the prisoners Gawain and Guerrehet, and Wain himself, from twenty. Kennedy follows the same reasoning, 2: 362. But Guerrehet was not in fact listed as one of the nineteen accompanying Gawain on his quest for Lancelot. vain was bound by the oath sworn by Gawain before setting out on the second quest for Lancelot in chapter 54, p. [137]. wey because of the king and his companions who were in prison. That day King Yder rode a horse he thought to be the finest in the world, and because he loved it so, he had it completely covered with iron before the battle. And then he did something that was criticized at first, but for which he was subsequently praised; it had never been seen before but would henceforth be a thing to be done:*° he made a banner showing his coat of arms and said he wanted it carried where a banner could not go, and he felt his horse was so good that he wanted all those broken under attack to rally to him. The banner was very fine, for the field was white with broad red stripes and was made of cordovan and the stripes were made of scarlet cloth from England. And whatever people wore at that time, the horse-blankets were only of leather or of cloth—the stories bear witness to this—so that they would last longer. [450] The king’s companions acquitted themselves very well that day, following the exhortation of Sir Yvain, for such a fine battle had never been fought without the presence of King Arthur, and there was not a single knight who did not perform many feats of arms. But whatever they did, it was nothing compared to the prowess of King Yder: he outdid everyone, on both sides, and because he had said that all were to rally to his troop, he endured so much that day that he was maimed for the rest of his life; from the moment he entered the fray he never removed his helmet from his head or retreated or fled from where he set his feet. And his horse was as fine as could be: it endured so much under him that it was wounded three times and its blanket was all cut to bits; it was so covered in blood, its own and that of others, that horse and rider were all crimson. On all sides men were crying that King Yder had carried the day. Mounted upon his horse, he prayed that God might sustain him in his undertaking without breaking faith or giving ground, and to let him die at the end, for he would never again have a day so fine or fair. King Yder endured so much that day and performed so many feats of arms, he and the companions of King Arthur, that the Saxons were routed and turned their backs. Then began a great pursuit; their losses were heavy, and King Arthur’s men pursued them furiously. Everyone marveled at King Yder’s horse, for no beast that had run all day long [451] ever ran as fast or as freely as that horse did in the pursuit. It lasted a long time, and many fell on each side. But it happened that King Yder rode over a fallen Saxon who was holding a naked sword, and he struck King Yder’s horse and completely split open its belly. It ran on quite some way, but then collapsed under the king; Yder had lost much blood, and he remained unconscious on the ground. Queen Guenevere and the other ladies came running, and they themselves bore King Yder from the field. Everyone believed he was irretrievably lost. He was borne to the queen’s chamber, and the world’s noblest ladies wept and mourned for him. The king’s forces had pursued their enemy all the way to Malaguine, a mighty Saxon fortress, and they came back with many prisoners and had killed many of their foes. Then the army camped nearer the Rock than they had 36Kennedy 2: 362 suggests this interpretation. 230 before, yet not very close, for the Rock was lofty, and they could not endure the arrows and bolts that rained down from above, nor could one besiege it from any side, for on the other side the marsh was so vast that nothing could enter it. The [452] army long remained camped before the Rock, and for a very long time the Saxons never dared attack the king’s forces, but endeavored to send for troops throughout their domain. And the king’s men came from every direction, for people everywhere knew that the king had been captured. So the army camped before the Rock and was on watch night and day: every day and every night, beneath the gate on the side toward the water, two hundred armed knights watched to see that they did not take away the king or his companions. 71. Lancelot’s Madness and Cure; Defeat of the Saxons and Irish; Lancelot, Galehaut, and Hector Become Companions of the Round Table.’ Now the story tells that Lancelot, in the Saxons’ prison, was in such a state that no one could encourage him to eat or drink, and all day long he grieved so bitterly that no one could comfort him. His head was empty of thought, and a rage and a madness arose so violently in his head that no one could withstand him, and he had inflicted two or three wounds on every one of his companions. So the jailer took him and put him in a room by himself; he could see clearly that Lancelot was genuinely mad, and he felt great pity for his prisoner. Galehaut begged the jailer to put the two of them together, but he was unwilling to do so, saying that the madman would kill him. “Don’t let that concern you, my friend,” he said, “for it would be better for him to kill me than to leave me.” But the jailer was wicked, and he refused [453] to cooperate. Word spread until the lady of the Rock heard of this and went to see for herself, she asked the jailer who he was, and he replied that the others said he had not a penny’s worth of land. “Oh, dear,” she said, “then it would be a mortal sin if we didn’t let him go. Open the lower gate for him.” That was the gate on the side toward King Arthur’s men, in the slope of the Rock, just above the water. But there was another gate that was closed by enchantment, for there was nothing to close it except the air; all those who saw it thought one could enter there unhindered, but no one could enter except the people of the castle: they went in and out as often as they liked, by the power of the enchantment. Through this postern the people of the castle sallied forth to attack the army many times in rapid succession, and as soon as they could set foot back inside, they had nothing to fear from the whole army. Galehaut heard the news that Lancelot had been freed, and his grief was so great that he was nearly out of his mind, and in such a state that he could neither eat nor drink. 1Corresponds to Micha VIII:LXXla; Sommer III:414-430; Kennedy 551-572. Lancelot, Part IT Lancelot returned to the camp, but everyone feared him and fled before him because of the wonders he had performed. At length he came before the queen’s lodgings, and she was watching from the windows. When she saw him, she fainted, for everyone was following him, as they do a man who is out of his mind. When she recovered from her faint, she told the lady of Malehaut, who was holding her in her arms, that she was about to die. “My lady,” she exclaimed, “what has happened to you?” And the queen told her. “Ah, my lady, for God’s sake, we must hide him, for it may be that he is feigning madness in order to see us, and if he is really out of his mind, [454] we will hold him until he is cured.” The queen sent her to him and then rushed into a room, for she feared she would faint because of him. But when she was there, she could not stay, but came back out in order to see him. The lady of Malehaut went to him and was about to take him by the hand, but he ran to get some stones to throw at her, and she began to scream. The queen cried out to him, and as soon as he heard her he sat down and put both hands before his eyes like one ashamed; he was unwilling to get up for anyone, and the lady of Malehaut dared not go forward. Then Queen Guenevere came out, took him by the hand, and ordered him to rise. He rose at once and she led him to an upper room. The ladies-in-waiting asked who he was, and some said he was one of the best knights in the world, but none could make him be calm except the queen. As soon as she ordered him to be calm, he no longer moved, and everyone marveled at her power over him. Then she sent for Lionel and he came, but he could do nothing: whenever he touched him, Lancelot attacked him, and so the queen did not leave his side. So Lancelot stayed in that room and lay before the queen. Every night she had all candles and torches extinguished, because the light, she said, caused him great harm; then she shared her bed with him, and grieved so bitterly all night that it was a wonder how she could go on. And everyone believed it was actually for the king. In this way the queen’s grief and Lancelot’s madness went on for a long time, until one day the Saxons attacked the camp and there was great fighting between the two sides. [455] Lancelot, who had not slept for nine nights, was sleeping at last, and the queen was overjoyed. She rose as quietly as she could and saw the two armies joining in battle. She immediately fainted, and the lady of Malehaut again took her in her arms. When she had recovered from her faint, her friend blamed her severely, saying, “My lady, why do you torment yourself?” “God help me,” she replied, “I am right to do so, for I see everyone dead, and I must surely die afterward.” Then she grieved so bitterly that no one could comfort her or calm her down; she came back to Lancelot and fainted as soon as she saw him. When she had recovered, she said, “O flower? of the world’s knighthood, what a great pity that you’re not as well as you were just a short while ago! How quickly this mortal combat would now be brought to an end!” 240 flower,” as in Kennedy 553.23, rather than Micha’s emended text (“Alas, flower”). Lancelot, Part I When he heard her lamenting his feats of arms, his jousting, and his swordsmanship, he leapt up and saw, hanging at the other end of the room, the shield that the maiden from the Lake had brought to the queen. He thrust out his hands and grabbed it, slung the guige round his neck and shoved his arm through the straps. In a bracket there was also a lance, old and sooty; he ran to it and grabbed it, then turned to a round stone pillar and struck it so violently with the lance that the head was completely shattered. [456] When he had done this, he was so weak he could no longer stand, but fell down and _ lost consciousness. And when he recovered, he asked where he was, and they told him he was in the house of King Arthur and Queen Guenevere. When he heard this, he fainted again. And when he recovered, the queen asked him how he had felt that day; he replied by asking her where his lord and Sir Gawain were, and they told him they were imprisoned in the Rock. “Oh God,” he cried, “why am I not there too? It would be much better for me to die with them than here, since my lady is not here!” Then the queen saw that he had regained his senses; she took him gently in her arms and said, “Dear friend, here I am.” He immediately opened his eyes, recognized her, and said, “My lady, now let her come whenever she likes, since you are here!” All the ladies wondered whom he was speaking of, and he said it was Death. Then the queen said to him, “Dear friend, do you know me?” “Yes, my lady.” “And do you know,” she asked, “how you were imprisoned in the Rock?” “My lady, the prison of the Rock was fatal to me, for I never ate or drank for as long as I was there.” And the ladies all began to weep. “Dear friend,” said the lady of Malehaut, “do you know me?” “My lady, I know you very well, for you did me great harm and treated me with great honor.” [457] Then all knew for certain that he was cured. They asked him how he felt and what pain he had had; he answered that he did not know, but that he could not stand up again, try as he might. Then he looked and saw the shield he bore and said, “Oh God, who put this shield on me? Take it off, for it torments me!” They took it off, but as soon as they had done so, he jumped up and was as mad as before, and he ran off down the hall. When the queen saw this, she fainted and lay unconscious so long that all her ladies were badly frightened. While the queen lay in her faint, a very tall and very beautiful lady arrived. She was dressed in silk as white as snow, and she was followed by other ladies, three knights, and some ten squires. The lady and her attendants went up to the queen’s chambers. The queen had recovered from her faint and heard the noise of people saying “Welcome, my lady.” She dried her eyes and went to meet her visitor, embraced her, and told her she was welcome. They sat down on a couch and began to converse together. 2o1 The doors to the great chamber were closed on Lancelot, and his attacks of madness resumed and he began to tear down the doors. No one was bold enough to open them to him. The visitor asked what was happening, and the queen sighed and was unable to keep the [458] tears from welling in her eyes. She replied that this was a knight who deserved great pity, for he was one of the best knights in the world, but he had now fallen into such a great madness that no one could stand against him. “Oh, my lady,” she said, “open the door and let me see him.” “Oh, my lady,” replied the queen, “he is now more violent than he ever was,” and she told her how he had regained his senses not long before, and how he had gone mad again as soon as the shield had been removed from him. “My lady,” said the visitor, “have the door opened, for I would very much like to see him.” Then the queen had the door opened, and Lancelot was about to rush out but the lady took him by the hand and spoke to him, using the name she had used when she raised him in the lake, for this was she who had raised him in the lake, and she had called him “Fair Foundling.” As soon as she had spoken this name, he stopped and was deeply ashamed. Then she asked for the shield, and it was brought to her. “Ah,” she said, “dear friend, you have so distressed me that I have come from far away to deliver you.” Then she placed the shield upon him; he accepted whatever she did, and as soon as she had placed the shield upon him, he regained his senses. Then she took him and made him lie down upon a couch; he recognized her and began to weep most bitterly, and the queen was sorely puzzled as to who she could be. When he had regained his senses, he saw the shield upon him and he said, “Oh, my lady, remove this shield, for it [459] torments me!” “No, I won’t,” she replied, “nor will it be removed as long as I wish it to remain.” Then she called one of her attendants and had her get a very precious ointment from one of her jewel cases. She took it and anointed him on both arms, both temples, his forehead, and on top of the skull. As soon as she had done that, he fell asleep. The lady returned to the queen and told her, “My lady, I'll now be on my way and commend you to God. Take care that this knight is not awakened; let him sleep as long as he wishes. When he awakens by himself, let a bath be prepared and have him get into it; then he’ll be completely cured. And see that he carries no other shield than this one, for as long as he can hold out in battle.” “Oh, my lady,” said the queen, “tell me who you are, for I have the impression you’re well acquainted with this knight, since you came from distant lands by long days’ journeys in order to cure him.” “Indeed, my lady, I should be well acquainted with him, since I raised him in his great poverty, when he had lost his father and his mother. With God’s help I raised him until he became a tall, handsome young man; then I brought him to court and persuaded King Arthur to make him a knight.” When the queen heard this, she ran to embrace her, saying, “Oh, my lady, welcome! Now I believe I know who 232 you are: you are the Lady of the Lake.” And she replied that this was true. “Dear [460] friend,” said the queen, “I beg you to remain here awhile, to please me and in order to cure our knight, for I owe you my love, and you are the lady I must most honor in all the world. Be assured that my love for you could be no greater, for you have rendered me the greatest service possible by sending me that shield. I have tested it so thoroughly that I know that everything you said concerning it is true.” “My lady,” said the Lady of the Lake, “be assured that you will see still greater wonders concerning that shield than you have seen thus far, for I knew in advance what has happened, and for that reason I sent it to you, knowing full well that I could send it to no one else who would hold it so dear. And I must tell you that because of the great prowess that was to manifest itself in this knight, I raised him until he became a knight, tall and handsome as you saw him at court. And he never knew who he was; rather I concealed his identity because of a knight whom I loved more than any man alive,” fearing that, if he found out, he would [461] get the wrong idea, and so I spread the word that the young man was my nephew. And now when I have returned, I’ll say that I came to free King Arthur from prison; he will be freed within a week, and I can tell you that this is the one who will free him. But see that he carries no other shield than this one, for you'll find in it everything my maiden told you when she brought it to you at Quimper-Corentin.4 “But I sent you one message through her that I later regretted and that gave me great sorrow, and I feared it would distress you, for I said that I was the lady who knew more about your thoughts and shared them most fully, for I loved the same person you did.> But be assured that my love for him is only that of a mother for her child, and I love you for his sake. Now I will be on my way, but I’ll tell you one thing, because my love for you is great. I beg you to keep, to hold fast, and to love above all others him who loves you above all others, and cast off all pride toward him, for he neither desires nor esteems anything except you. The sins of the world cannot be pursued without folly, but one defeats his folly who® finds right and honor in it. And if you can find folly in your loves, this folly is to be honored above all others, for you love the lord and the flower of the whole world. You can boast that no woman was ever able to do what you can do, [462] for you are the companion of the worthiest gentleman and the lady of the best knight in the world, and in your newfound power you have gained much, for first you have won him, the flower of all knights, and then you have won me, whatever I might be able to do. “But now I must depart, for I can delay no longer. Be assured that the greatest power in the world draws me away, 3 This knight, also referred to on p. [462], was not mentioned in chapters 3 or 6, when the Lady of the Lake took Lancelot to her “aquatic” abode, but he was mentioned in chapter 15, pp. [189190]. In chapter 175, p. [121], it is said that she had married this knight. 4See chapter 58, pp. [206-207]. 5This is a near echo of the maiden’s speech, chapter 58, p. [205]. 6«who” (qui), as in Kennedy 557.2 (Micha has que the meaning of which is unclear). Lancelot, Part IT the power of love, for I love a knight’ who doesn’t know where I am, though his brother came here with me. Yet I’m not afraid of his becoming angry with me as long as that is what I wish.8 But one must take great care not to distress the person one loves as much as oneself, for one is not truly loved who is not loved above all earthly things. And a person who is in love can have no joy except from the one he loves, and therefore one must love the person from whom all joy comes.” They spoke together at great length until vespers drew near, becoming well acquainted and offering each other their service, but at length the queen could no longer detain the lady. When she saw that such was the situation, the queen dared not further beseech her to stay; they commended each other to God, and the Lady of the Lake and her retinue mounted and departed. The queen was now happier than she had been for a long time; she returned to Lancelot and did not stir from his side until he awoke. When he awoke he complained bitterly. She asked him how he felt, and he replied, “I am well, but I’m extremely weak and I don’t know why.” Until he was fully restored to health, she did not wish to tell him how [463] he had been ill. The bath was prepared, and they placed him in it and did everything ladies can do for the comfort of a sick knight, until he recovered fully and regained his beauty and his strength. Then they told him how he had been out of his mind and how no one but the queen could stand against him. “And the lady who raised you, the Lady of the Lake,” said the queen, “was here, and had she not been, you would never have been cured.” He replied that he thought as much and that he had seen her, “but I thought I had dreamt it.” Then the queen began to smile broadly, and he was greatly taken aback and embarrassed, for he was now certain they had seen his disgraceful behavior, and he feared that the person he most loved in all the world would love him less as a result. But there was no need, for she had no power to do so. When he lamented to her, she comforted and reassured him, saying, “Don’t be concerned, dear friend, for—may God truly help me—you are more my master and more certain of me than I am of you, and so you should be, [464] for I haven’t taken this upon myself for the present alone, but for all the days that my soul remains within my body.” Now Lancelot was restored to health and had whatever he requested; he had his share of every joy a lover may have, and that is all the story reveals to you. He spent a week and a day? in this fashion, and by then he was so handsome that it was a wonder to behold. And the queen was so in love with him that she did not see how she could Tey knight,” as in note 14.a and Kennedy 557.13 (Micha has “one who”). 8This interpretation is somewhat conjectural; the Old French text is unclear. Our wording is suggested by Corin Corley’s translation, p. 394. 9Since jusc’al tier jor, literally “until the third day,” means “the day after tomorrow,” i.e. two days from now (“today” counting as day 1), and huzt jorz means a week, I interpret jusc’al noevisme jor, literally “until the ninth day,” as “a week and a day.” Lancelot, Part IT ever live without seeing him. It grieved her to see him so impetuous and so courageous, for she did not see how she could go on living without him, if!® he ever left court: she would have preferred there to be a little less boldness and less prowess in him. After a week and a day it came about that the Irish and the Saxons again attacked the king’s army, and the cry was raised on all sides. The king’s troops had engaged in much fighting during the week, and they behaved very much like people who had no lord to lead them. On that day they defended themselves most valiantly. The fighting was widespread, and the cry could be heard on every side, for the Saxons aimed to attack the entire army and to make them withdraw so that they could remove the king and his companions from the Rock and take them farther into their domain. When the forces were assembled on both sides, Lancelot, who was in the queen’s chamber, heard the cry, and everyone sprang to the windows [465] and the battlements. When he saw them, he was distressed not to be there; he went to the queen and begged her to allow him to participate in that battle. Because she knew no other way to protect herself against this, she replied that he was not yet fully cured, “and our men,” she added, “are not yet getting the worst of it.” “My lady, if they do get the worst of it, grant that I may go.” She granted this, though it was painful for her; he was overjoyed and quietly prayed God that his side might have the worst of it, and with little delay. “My lady,” he said to the queen, “we don’t know what is in store, but order some armor brought to me.” So they brought him handsome and excellent armor that was made for King Arthur himself. When he had put it on, he was exceedingly handsome, and there was no knight in the world on whom armor was so becoming as on Lancelot. When Lancelot was completely armed except for his head and his hands, a knight arrived who had just come from the battle; he had lost his helmet and was badly wounded in the head. When he had dismounted, he climbed the stairs and came before the queen. And when the queen saw that his shoulders and his chest were all bloody, she was badly frightened. He knelt before her and said, “My lady, Sir Yvain sends you greetings and bids me tell you he has been given to understand that not all the knights are taking part in the battle. And I can assure you they are in great need of help, for our forces are much diminished by the knights that were sent to Arestel this morning.” (Sir Yvain had sent two hundred knights there that morning, for news had reached the camp the night before [466] that the Saxons were to hasten to Arestel.)!! “And he sends word for you to send what assistance you can.” “What?” she exclaimed. “Are they getting the worst of it, then?” 10«if he,” as in Kennedy 558.19 (Micha has “and if he”). Upynctuation (parentheses around this sentence) as in Kennedy 559.18-20. 239) “My lady, we’re losing everything. The two hundred knights who have been guarding the gate on the side toward the water, so that the king would not be taken away, !* have the whole burden of the battle. I can assure you that they are in great need of help, for they are defending themselves at the back and are on their guard at the front, and many are already on foot, for their horses have been slain.” “Oh, my lady,” said Lancelot, “allow me to go there, for the need is now urgent.” Then the queen called him into a room and asked him what he intended to do against so many people. “My lady,” he replied, “ask the knight by how much their forces are diminished by the knights that were sent to Arestel.” She asked him, and he said by two hundred, and he told Lancelot in turn. “My lady,” he said, “now ask him whether they would have the upper hand if the two hundred knights returned.” She asked him this, and he said they would defend themselves well enough. “My lady,” continued Lancelot, “now send word to Sir Yvain that you'll send him enough knights to replace those who left; once your pennon is on the scene, you'll make up for all the losses they’ve suffered.” The queen told the knight this, and then she had a helmet brought and gave it to him to replace the one he had lost. Then [467] he departed most joyfully and told Sir Yvain the news from the queen. Sir Yvain was deeply sorrowful because of his knights, who were so!3 hardpressed; he could see they were badly discouraged, and said, “Oh God, when will my lady’s pennon arrive” Sir Yvain spoke thus, exhorting his knights like a skilled fighter who could hold out at length against attack, for he had long held out against great pressure, or else he would not have been such a fine knight. Now Lancelot had sent for Lionel and had had him armed like a foot-soldier as best he could. Then two horses were brought, and Lancelot mounted the better one, the bolder and the one of greater endurance, and Lionel mounted the other. When Lancelot was about to lace on his helmet, the queen took him in her arms and kissed him as lovingly as she could, then she herself laced on his helmet and commended him to Him who was placed upon the cross, that He might preserve him from death and imprisonment. She had had one of her pennons attached to a lance and had given it to Lionel. The field of the pennon was azure with three golden crowns, and it had a single tongue;!4 on all the king’s pennons there were three tongues and as many crowns as one could place, and in this way it was possible to tell one from the other. [468] Then both Lancelot and Lionel mounted; Lionel carried the pennon and Lancelot carried a short, thick lance with a sharp and shining head and a strong, stiff shaft. They rode off and went spurring toward the battle. Sir Yvain saw the pennon coming, and to encourage his 12See chapter 70, p. [452]. 13«vho were so,” as in Kennedy 560.7 (Micha has “whom he saw”). 14«1ongue,” as in Kennedy 560.24 (Micha has “eagle”). 234 men he said, “My lords, take heart, here is my lady’s pennon. Now we shall see who is a knight, for help is at hand!” And the two plunged in where they saw the thickest crowd of Saxons, and they began to cry loudly “Clarence!” This was King Arthur’s battlecry. Clarence was a very fine city adjacent to the kingdom of South Wales, which had belonged to King Thailais, the grandfather of Uther Pendragon! and the head of King Arthur’s line. Then Lancelot and Lionel arrived and plunged in where the Saxons were thickest. When his lance broke he did not hesitate to draw his keen sword; it was called “Seure” and was a sword that the king carried only in mortal combat. [469] Then Lancelot’s prowess was demonstrated, for he cut through Saxons and Irishmen, horses and heads, shields and legs and arms. Upon his horse he flew to left and right, for he could not have wished for a better one. He never paused, but charged up and down, for no one escaped him before or behind. He resembled an angry!® lion that plunges among the does, not because of any great hunger it might have, but in order to show off its ferocity and its power.!” So did Lancelot, who was a rallying point for all: his shield defended them all, his helmet was visible to all, his sword was at everyone’s service. It seemed to all his foes that all those who followed him were just the same, for they seemed to see no one but him: now here, now there, now to the right, now to the left. They feared him so much that they dared not wait for him, nor would there ever be enough Saxons; even the most valiant gave way before him, they who shortly before believed they had the upper hand in the war against King Arthur. [470] And Sir Yvain went spurring after him, delighted with the wonders he was performing, for it seemed Lancelot must be crowned king of the whole world; Yvain declared that now no one should bear arms but this one, who knew so well how to triumph over their enemy. And all the others, who just before had been broken under attack, spurred after him: the Saxons and the Irish could hold out no more; the king’s men could scarcely find anyone upon the field to challenge them, and they could see that there was very little resistance left in them. All drew courage and audacity from this, and even the most cowardly became good knights, for they performed more feats of arms than the valiant had before. Lancelot rode forward, accomplishing wonders, and turned his horse toward the noblest man, the most powerful and worthiest in all the army. He was named Hargadabran, and he was taller than other knights by half a foot and a full handbreadth, and the point of his helmet was Visible above all the others as if it were a banner, and all rallied to him. He was the brother of the maiden of the Rock, and it was for him that she had betrayed King [471] Arthur and his companions, for he aspired to take all of Britain, once he had captured the king and Sir Gawain. Uther Pendragon was of course Arthur’s father; see chapter 1, p. [6]. 16“angry,” as in note 24.a and Kennedy 561.13 (Micha has “hungry”). 17 ower,” as in Kennedy 561.15 (Micha has “speed”). Lancelot, Part IT Lancelot headed for him, sword in hand, and the Saxon, who had seen the wonders he performed, dared not wait for him, but fled as fast as he could. But Lancelot’s horse was faster than his; he caught up with him as he rode up a hillside and raised his sword to strike him on the head. The Saxon bent down upon his horse’s neck and threw up his shield to meet the blow; Lancelot struck the shield, taking off the top-half and sending it flying upon the field. The blow continued to his right thigh and cut completely through it and the horse’s padding as well, right to the flanks, and he felled both the Saxon and his horse, all in a heap, and rode on without a backward glance. He then charged at full speed toward the spot where he expected to find the thickest press, but he found none, for all had fled, Saxons and Irishmen, as soon as they had seen Hargadabran fall, for he had been their last hope. Now Sir Yvain came upon Hargadabran where he had seen him fall; he recognized him, but he did not believe he was so badly wounded. He stopped beside him and took him prisoner, for the Saxon [472] could no longer defend himself, and all his men had abandoned him and taken flight. But when Sir Yvain had raised him up, he saw that he was gravely wounded, as his thigh was cut through and his horse cut through halfway.!8 He began to make the sign of the cross and said that anyone was most unwise to wait around for a man who dealt such blows, for he was no man, but rather an instrument of God’s justice and vengeance. Thus was Hargadabran captured, and Sir Yvain sent him to the tents, but he lived only a very short time, for he killed himself with a knife, so great was his grief at being maimed. Lancelot had pursued the Saxons with few men, for they all stayed with Sir Yvain. When the Saxons had fled as far as the pass of Godelonte, then no one has ever seen as great a marvel as Lancelot performed there, for he cut so many to pieces that the stream that ran below the causeway changed its color. He found scarcely anyone to make a stand against him: more than two thousand plunged into the marshes and perished there. Those who were first crowded together went across the causeway, but many died in the crush. Lancelot killed so many that he was all covered with blood, both his own and that of others, as were his shield, his hauberk, and his horse. When the Saxons and the Irishmen had crossed, they assembled! upon the causeway to defend the passage, and [473] they saw that of all King Arthur’s forces, only Lancelot was pursuing them, for they saw no others before the causeway, and they were so ashamed that they dared not speak to one another. Lancelot was at the head of the causeway, his naked sword in his hand, the blade all red with blood. When he saw them all assembled on the causeway, he was about to attack them, but Lionel grabbed his bridle and said, “By the Holy Cross, you won’t go! Do you wish to get yourself killed in a spot where you can perform no act of prowess? And even if you did perform some act of prowess, it would never 1B cut through halfway” supplied from Kennedy 562.23. 19«assembled,” as in note 27.a (KR) and Kennedy 563.2 (Micha has “hid”). Lancelot, Part I be known. Haven’t you done enough, when you have accomplished what all King Arthur’s forces could not?” Lancelot said he would still go, but Lionel continued to hold him back. “Be gone,” said Lancelot, “let me go!” “T will not.” Then Lancelot swore with all his might that he would never love him, “and I’ll do you some injury,” he added, “if you don’t let me go.” “All right, I will,” said Lionel. Then he let him go, and Lancelot charged forth upon the causeway, and Lionel spurred after him, crying, “In the name of my lady the queen and your allegiance to her, I tell you to go no farther!” When Lancelot heard this, he reined in his horse and began to sigh most deeply. The Saxons were already making way for him, for they dared not make a stand against him. “Oh, why did you speak so soon?” Lancelot asked Lionel. [474] “You can see they are already so completely defeated that they would never have waited for me.” Then he turned back, and when he looked he saw Sir Yvain coming, who said to him, “My lord, may you be welcome!” “On the contrary, my lord,” he replied, “I am most illcome, for I return to my great shame.” “How can this be?” exclaimed Sir Yvain. “Is it not to my great shame that I dare not go forward? I would gladly do so, if I dared.” “God help me,” said Sir Yvain, “doing so would not have been boldness, but rather folly. Nevertheless, I know you well enough to say that you never give up doing anything because of cowardice.” Lancelot did not stop at these words, but became so very upset that he nearly went mad, and he could not utter a single word. In such a way he returned to the camp, and Sir Yvain spoke to him no more, for he saw clearly that it displeased him. When the Saxons had seen Sir Yvain, they again placed themselves upon the causeway, which they had not dared hold before, when Lancelot charged at them and they had made way before him. Now they did not move for Sir Yvain or for his men, because Lancelot was leaving. Sir Yvain saw that it would not be at all safe to cross the causeway, and [475] he and his men turned back. When the Saxons saw them leaving, they ran after them; Yvain’s men counterattacked, and the Saxons withdrew across the causeway. And when Sir Yain turned back, the Saxons attacked, and so the battle continued until nightfall, when both sides withdrew for the night. Lancelot had come by way of the gate beside the water, where the enchantment was in effect and the gate was closed by air.29 His shield had such power that no enchantment had any power over it. He looked toward the gate and saw the two hundred knights who stood watch night and day to be sure the king would not be taken away; when they saw him coming, they recognized him and said to one another, “There’s the Good Knight!” They sallied forth to meet him and greeted him from afar, since they 20See p. [453] of this chapter. eS) recognized him and he them. Then they went back as close as they?! could get to the gate, for they had to keep their distance because of the bolts and the arrows that were flying thickly. At that point, a knight rode forth in full armor, bearing a black shield with a white diagonal band, and this was the shield that Lancelot had taken into the castle when he was captured. The knight asked to joust with him, and Lancelot replied, “Sir knight, if you will grant me a truce until I have spoken with you, [476] I’ll come closer, for I would be glad to speak to you.” The knight granted him his safety until they had spoken together. Then Lancelot approached him and asked where he had got that shield. The knight answered that it belonged to the best knight of King Arthur’s household, who was imprisoned up in the Rock. “And what is his name?” asked Lancelot. “It’s Gawain, the nephew of King Arthur.” “You’re lying,” said Lancelot: “Sir Gawain never bore it, nor do you have the knight to whom it belonged in your prison, and woe unto you for letting him escape!” “What?” said the knight. “Do you contradict me? Now be on your guard against me, for I no longer guarantee your safety.” Then Lancelot looked at Lionel, took in his hand the lance to which the pennon was attached, put it under his arm, and spurred his horse to attack the knight from the castle. And the latter looked up and told the archers and crossbowmen who were on the walls to shoot; they did so, and wounded Lancelot and his horse in many places, but he had no wound that affected him much. He took aim at the knight and struck him right under the throat, so violently that the iron point stuck out the other side. He left him with the lance and the pennon in his throat, spurred his horse, and passed through the gate. He continued without hindrance and rode on upward through the castle, finding all the gates and posterns [477] open. He did not stop until he reached the great hall, where he found large numbers of knights putting on their armor because of the cry those outside had raised for the defeated knight. Lancelot charged them at full speed, slicing through arms, spines, and flanks, splitting knights in two and spilling the brains of all he could reach; the others fled to the safety of the main fortress. Then Lancelot dismounted and went where he knew the lady of the Rock lived, and he found her in a bed with her lover. His name was Gadrasolain, and he was a young knight, very handsome and of very great prowess. He was completely unarmed, for he was afraid of nothing, and he had other knights with him, also unarmed. Lancelot raised his sword and struck Gadrasolain upon the head so that he split him down to the shoulders; then he attacked the others, cutting to pieces every one he could reach. They started for the door, hoping to flee, but he got there ahead of them; before their eyes he closed and barred the door, then resumed his attack. They fled to rooms above and below, and he pursued and cut them to pieces, and many jumped out the windows to the ground below. 2l“Then ... they,” as in note 31.a and Kennedy 564.22-23 (Micha has “And he came as close as he could”). 290 When he could find no more of them, Lancelot returned to the courtyard, sword in hand, and went to the jailer who was guarding Sir Gawain and the others. He told him he was a dead man if he did not [478] tell him where to find the stores of arms and the prisons of the castle, and the jailer said he would take him there. Then he led him to a turret above the room where King Arthur and his nephew Guerrehet were imprisoned. He had it opened and had the king brought forth and Guerrehet as well. The king did not recognize Lancelot and was most puzzled as to who he might be. Then Lancelot and the jailer led them to the armor, and they quickly armed themselves. Lancelot saw an axe, long and bright and sharp, hanging from a peg; he took it and thrust his sword back into its scabbard. Then he and the jailer returned to where Galehaut and his companions were imprisoned; they freed them, and Lancelot led them to where the king and Guerrehet were arming themselves. They greatly rejoiced over one another. But when Galehaut had begun to put on his armor, he said, “Alas, why should I arm myself, when we have lost the flower of the whole world’s knights and the person I most loved? May God never help me if I seek to live without him or if I ever have a helmet on my head, since I have lost him.” Then he began to grieve most bitterly, but Lancelot removed the helmet from his head and said, “My good sir, don’t be so dismayed, for I am he.” At this Galehaut leapt up and ran to embrace him. Then Lancelot relaced his helmet, and Sir Gawain leapt up and said to the king, “My lord, here is the man whom we sought for so long. I found him and have fulfilled my commitment.” “Thank God!” said the king. “Who is he?” Sir Gawain replied, “He is Lancelot of the Lake, he [479] who carried the day in the two battles between you and Galehaut here.” And the king rejoiced over him. When they were all armed, the king fell at Lancelot’s feet and said, “My lord, I place myself in your power, along with my honor and all my land, for you have restored both to me.” Lancelot immediately raised him up and wept most bitterly because the king had so humbled himself before him. Thus they were all armed, and the jailer, who was profoundly afraid, helped them prepare and furnished them with their swords. Then they arrived at the great tower of the Rock, but they could not enter, for the knights inside had been careful to close the doors. And it was well stocked with provisions, and no one could hold the bailey without holding the tower. When Lancelot saw that they would not enter in that way, he took the jailer aside and told him he would guarantee his safety if he would show him to the lady of the place. The jailer led him to where he had found Gadrasolain, and then beyond to another room, and indicated her to him. Lancelot seized her by the hair and said he would cut her head from her shoulders. “Ah, mercy, noble knight!” she begged; “you have already killed my lover.” “God help me,” said Lancelot, “you are dead as well, if you do not surrender the great tower to me.” [480] Lancelot, Part II She replied that he would first have to cut off her head. He raised his sword and made as if he were about to cut it off, and she cried out for mercy and said she would have the tower surrendered to him. Then she went before the tower and told the knights to open the door, but they replied they would not. Then Lancelot swore he would cut off their lady’s head if they did not immediately let him in. When they heard that, they agreed to open up, provided the king would allow them to depart in safety. He gave them his word, then had them all disarm, and they came forth. Then the king ordered Sir Gawain to place himself inside the tower, to which he replied, “What, my lord, am I to leave you?” “You will do so,” said the king. And he ordered him to enter, and the tower feared no attack. 2? Then they came back toward the gate, and archers and crossbowmen began to shoot from the battlements and the windows. And Lancelot went to the upper gate, which was very high, and showed himself; they [481] all began to shout King Arthur’s battlecry, “Clarence!” The men of the army had been very distressed, for they feared they had lost Lancelot. And the queen had heard the news that Lionel had told her, when he had not been able to enter the castle with him; her grief had been so great that she had nearly killed herself. Now when she heard that the castle was captured, her joy was as great as any woman’s could possibly be. The castle was soon so full of people that no one else could enter. As they were exploring all the chambers and the underground vaults, Kay the Seneschal entered a chamber and found a maiden in irons. She had been beloved by Gadrasolain, and Gamille had held her in prison for three years because he had loved her, and she had said she would have to die there. When Kay had freed her from her irons, he asked her where the prisoners were. She asked him what was happening, and he said that King Arthur had captured the castle. She raised her hands toward Heaven. “My lord, did the lady of this place escape you?” “No, indeed,” he replied. “My lord,” she said, “if she carries off her books and her chests, you have lost everything, for with her books she could make water flow uphill.” “Where are they?” asked Kay. She showed him a [482] strongbox? and said they were inside it. Then Sir Kay went to it and set it on fire, burning all the books and reducing them to ashes. When Gamille learned of this, her grief was so great that she threw herself down from the Rock and was most gravely injured. King Arthur was greatly distressed by this, for he loved her dearly, but she would rather have lost any four castles than her books. So the Rock was captured, and the king and a great number of his men were inside. And Sir Gawain came forth from the tower and said to the king, “My lord, you will lose 22«what, my lord ... feared,” as in notes 38.b and c and Kennedy 567,16-18 (Micha has “‘My lord, how shall I leave you?’ The king ordered him and he went in; and there was nothing the maiden feared as much as Sir Gawain”). 23«strongbox,” as in Kennedy 568.5 (Micha has “strong cavity”). Lancelot, Part I Lancelot, if you don’t take care, for Galehaut will take him away as soon as he can; he is more jealous of him than any knight is of a young lady. But I’ll tell you what to do: order the gate to be closed, so that no one can go out except with my permission, and make me swear to this, and Kay the Seneschal and Sir Yvain and my brother Guerrehet, and we will have such a company that no one will be able to get in or out.” [483] Then the king came to Galehaut and took him by one hand and Lancelot by the other, led them to the great tower, and had them disarm; then they sat down upon a couch. The king then summoned Sir Gawain and had him swear the oath, and then Sir Yvain, Kay, and Guerrehet. When Galehaut heard this, he knew precisely why it was being done, and he gave a sigh of anguish from his heart. Then he said to Lancelot, “My dear companion, we have reached the point where I will lose you, for I know for certain that the king will ask you to remain in his household. And what shall I do, who have completely devoted my heart and soul to you?” “Truly, my lord,” said Lancelot, “I must love you more than any man in the world, and so I do, and, God willing, I’ll never be a member of the king’s household, if I’m not forced to do so. But how can I refuse anything my lady may command?” ‘I would not force you to go that far,” replied Galehaut, “for if she wills it, then so it must be without any opposition.” [484] So the two of them spoke together. And the king resumed conversation with them, and they put on a show of greater joy than they felt in their hearts. The king sent for the queen, and she came most joyfully. When she entered the tower, each one jumped up to greet her, but she left all the others and threw her arms around Lancelot’s neck and kissed him in front of all those present,** because she wanted to deceive them all, that no one might suspect the truth of what was between them. No one saw this who did not the more esteem her, but Lancelot was deeply embarrassed. She said to him, “Sir knight, I don’t know who you are; this grieves me, and I don’t know what to offer you. For the love of my lord the king, and for my honor which you have today upheld, I grant you my love and myself, as a loyal lady must reward a loyal knight.” When the king heard her speak in this manner, he esteemed her highly because she had done so without specific instructions. Then in turn she rejoiced over Sir Gawain, Galehaut, and all the companions of the quest, for all had come except Sagremor. Many questions were asked about him, and Sir Gawain related how [485] he had left him with a maiden with whom he was in love.*° Afterward, the queen related how Lancelot had been cured of madness in her chambers, and how a lady called the Lady of the Lake had cured him. “My lady,” said the king, “do you know who this knight is?” She replied that she did not. “Then know that he is Lancelot of the Lake, he who carried the day in the two battles between Galehaut and me.” 24411 those present,” as in note 43.a and Kennedy 569.7 (Micha has “all those who wanted to see it”). 25Sagremor was last seen in chapter 64, p. [392]. eo/ When the queen heard this, she pretended this was a source of great astonishment, and she crossed herself repeatedly. After this Sir Yvain related the wondrous feats of arms Lancelot had performed all that day. “My lord, my lord, we believed that not all the knights had come to the battle, and she sent him to us all alone, saying that she was sending us enough help to take the place of the two hundred knights who were at Arestel. In this my lady spoke the truth, for so help me God, if the two hundred had been there without him, we would never have accomplished what we have now accomplished, and never would the Saxons have been captured by the two hundred, the way they were by him alone.” [486] “Upon my word,” said the king, “he has performed more feats of arms in rescuing me than in all his other acts of prowess, for he captured such a castle as this, which was doing me more harm than all the other castles in the world, and I must love him above all men.” Next Hector came before the queen and said, “My lady, here is the object of my quest,” indicating Sir Gawain. The queen thanked him and rejoiced over him, and Sir Yvain showed him great honor by relating how Hector had delivered Sagremor and himself from the prison of the King of the Hundred Knights and how he had defeated the seneschal. And Sir Gawain related how Hector had unhorsed Kay and Sagremor and Girflet and Sir Yvain at the Spring of the Pine. Then there were many who looked at him, for he was richly praised, and his ladylove was overjoyed above all the others. Then the meal was prepared, and they sat down. When they had eaten, the king summoned the queen and in private said to her, “My lady, I wish to ask Lancelot to remain with me and to be a companion of the Round Table, for his great prowess has been amply demonstrated. So if he does not wish to stay for my sake, throw yourself at his feet.” “My lord,” she replied, “he is pledged to Galehaut and is his companion, so it would be well that you beg Galehaut to allow it.” Then the king went to Galehaut and earnestly begged him to allow Lancelot to join his [487] household and to remain with him as his lord and companion. “Ah, my lord,” said Galehaut, “T did all I could to help you in your time of need, and that is all I can do. God help me, I couldn’t live without him; you would take my life from me.” He said this because he did not believe the queen would blame him. Then the king looked at her, and said, “My lady, beseech him.” She immediately threw herself upon her knees. When Lancelot saw her on her knees, his heart was deeply troubled; he did not wait for Galehaut’s permission, but leapt up and said, “Ah, my lady, I will stay with my lord the king according to his pleasure and yours.” And he raised her up. “My lord,” she said, “many thanks.” “My lord,” said Galehaut, “you won’t have him in this way! I prefer to be poor and happy instead of rich and miserable. Retain me with him, if ever I did anything that pleased you; you must do this for me and for him, for I 238 must tell you that all the love I bear you comes to you because of him.” Then the king leapt to his feet, thanked him, and said that he did not retain them as his knights, but as his companions and his masters. In this way the king retained Lancelot and Galehaut and then Hector as his companions, and in honor of the two of them [488] the joy was so great in the king’s household that greater joy could not be described. And the king declared that he wished to hold high court the next day in the Rock itself, to celebrate Lancelot: it was noble and splendid, and that was the seventh day preceding All Saints’ Day, and every day of that week he wore his crown, and every day the court was larger and more splendid. On All Saints’ Day the three knights were seated at the Round Table, and the scribes who recorded the deeds of the companions of King Arthur’s household were summoned. There were four of them: the first was named Arodian of Cologne, the second Tantalides of Vercelli, the third Thomas of Toledo, and the fourth Sapient of Baghdad. These four wrote down all the feats of arms of King Arthur’s companions, and otherwise their great deeds would never have been known. First of all they wrote down the adventures of Sir Gawain, because that was the beginning of the quest for Lancelot, and then those of Lancelot, Part IT Hector, because they formed a branch of that story, and then the adventures of all the other eighteen companions. All this was the story of Lancelot, and all these others were branches thereof. And the story of [489] Lancelot formed a branch of the story of the Grail, when it was integrated into it. The king and his company continued this rejoicing every day of the celebration, which lasted until two days beyond All Saints’ Day, and then he left the Rock, leaving a contingent of guards behind, and set out at a leisurely pace on the journey back toward Britain. When the king reached Carlion,?6 Galehaut took leave of him and begged him to let him take Lancelot with him to his homeland. Very reluctantly the king granted this, but the queen agreed, telling him that they would soon be in Advent. She succeeded in persuading the king, on condition that they solemnly promise [490] to come to him on Christmas Day. He told them he would be staying in the city where he had knighted Lancelot.?’ In this way Galehaut and Lancelot departed and headed for their land. And the king and his company returned by easy stages to Britain. 26Cf. chapter 54, p. [133]. 27This was Camelot: see chapters 22 and 47, pp. [277-278] and [441-442]. LANCELOT, PART III translated by Samuel N. Rosenberg Lancelot, Part III 72. The Nobility of Galehaut.' Now, riding away with his companion, Galehaut was both happy and unhappy: happy that he had _ his companion with him and unhappy that he had become part of King Arthur’s household, for he was sure that he would thereby lose him forever. And he had given him his heart with a love greater than loyal companionship alone could make a man feel for someone outside his family. But no proof of this is needed here, for in the end, as our story will go on to show, it was clear that the grief it caused him swept away all joy and brought him death. But his death ought not be spoken of at this point, for the death of sucha worthy man as Galehaut is not a thing to bring up before its time. And all the stories that speak of him agree that he was in every way the most valiant of all great princes, after King Arthur, with whom no man living in those years can be compared. Nevertheless, the book of Tantalides of Vercelli, which speaks of Galehaut’s exploits more than any other, claims that even King Arthur was not more valiant by much and, if Galehaut had been able to live out a full life with all the robust courage that he had when he went to war against King Arthur, he would have outdone all those who themselves had outdone all others. [2] He himself confided as much to Lancelot, saying that when the war began, he was set on conquering the world; and that was quite plain, as he was a knight at the age of twenty-five and then conquered twenty-eight kingdoms and at the age of thirtynine was dead. But Lancelot held him back from these ambitions, as was clear when Galehaut turned his great honor into his great shame by begging King Arthur's mercy at the very time he had the upper hand,? and again, after that great moment, when the two men of his clan closest to him, once he had crowned them kings, rebuked him in private for the shameful peace he had made for the sake of a single man.? Then Galehaut answered, saying that that had brought him greater gain and greater honor than ever, “for riches,” he said, “lie not in land or goods but in worthy men, and land does not produce good men, but good men make land productive; and a truly rich man must always strive to have ' Corresponds to Micha I:1; not in Sommer. Here and in following notes, “Sommer” denotes vol. IV of Sommer’s edition, unless otherwise noted; “Micha variants” are those reported at the bottom of the relevant page of Micha I; and “Lecoy” refers to the review of Micha I in Romania 99 (1978), 264-268. *See chapter 52. 3The allusion is no doubt to the King of the Hundred Knights and the First Defeated King, for whom see chapter 52, p. [77]. However, the text narrates neither their crqwning nor their rebuke. ear what no one else has.” In this way, Galehaut saw wisdom and gain where others saw loss and folly, and no one would have dared make bold to love good knights so much as he. 73. Galehaut and Lancelot Return to Sorelois, Where Galehaut Hears Alarming News.’ But at this point the story leaves off speaking of his fine qualities and goes back to telling how he and Lancelot, accompanied by only four squires, rode along downcast and thoughtful. They were both upset, Galehaut because he feared losing his companion to the king’s household to which he now belonged, and Lancelot heavyhearted over the lady he was leaving behind and heavily burdened by the suffering he was causing Galehaut. They were so worried about each other [3] that they both lost all appetite for food or drink, and they were so caught up in brooding that their faces paled and their strength was sapped. Each, out of loyal friendship, was so concerned about the other that neither dared to utter a word that might prove hurtful, as if they felt they had wronged each other in some way. But no sorrow could match Galehaut’s, for he had put into his love for Lancelot everything a man could put: heart and body and, most precious of all, his honor. He had so given up his body to him that he would rather have seen himself die than Lancelot; he had so given him his heart that he could have no joy without him. And out of his great love for him he had cried mercy to King Arthur even though he had overcome the king and almost dispossessed him. They rode along like this until they drew near to the kingdom of Sorelois, and Galehaut was so far along that all he could think of was death. The night before coming to Sorelois, they reached a castle belonging to the king of the Franks that was named the King’s Fortress, for the kingdom of the Franks bordered Sorelois on the northwest, which is where the Humber flows. That night Galehaut was very sick, though he put on a better face than his heart would have dictated. Lancelot, who was sorely pained by his sickness, did his best to soothe him, but to no avail; nor did Lancelot dare [4] ask the reason for his suffering, because he remembered how graciously Galehaut had endured his suffering, without asking a thing, when they became companions.” On the other hand, Lancelot thought too that he could not go on like this for long but would have to seek the truth from him, for he could not bear the thought 1 Corresponds to Micha I:I]; Sommer IV:5-10. 2 See chapter 52. Zoe that Galehaut might be burdened on his account; and he had little doubt that the trouble lay indeed with him. When Galehaut was in bed and thought that Lancelot was asleep, he began to grieve and between groans and tears kept saying, “God! How he betrayed me, that man who was so honorable!” Galehaut’s lament went on right through the night, but while he lay in pain, Lancelot lay at ease, sleeping until day. In the morning they mounted their horses and left the castle, taking the straight road to Sorelois. Galehaut, his hood half-covering his face, was riding behind the others but then, head bowed, spurred his horse forward to the utmost and pulled ahead of Lancelot and the squires. Then they came into a forest named Glorinde, which stood between the land of the Frankish king and Sorelois, over there where the Humber flows. Galehaut rode along so sad and downcast that he never said a word to Lancelot or anyone else; his palfrey, meanwhile, was covered with sweat. Then he started down [5] a stony path. The knight, tall and heavy and full of sad thoughts as he was, was a great burden for the horse, and the pace of their movement was a further trial. The animal stumbled on one of the stones thickly scattered along the path, falling to its two front knees as the reins flew out of Galehaut’s hands and startled him out of his thoughts. Vexed by the horse’s fall, he struck the animal so hard with his spurs that blood spurted from both flanks, and the horse reared and rushed forward with all its strength. Galehaut, unable to seize the reins dangling from the horse’s neck, lost his grip in the rush forward and went flying out of his saddle in a rough somersault that badly wrenched his neck. Galehaut, tall as he was, was hurled out of the saddle, and his back hit the stones with such a thud that his heart nearly burst in his chest. When Lancelot saw him fall like that, he feared Galehaut was dead; he jumped down from his horse and ran toward where he was lying. When he saw that not one limb was moving, he cried out in the loudest possible voice, “Holy Mary!” Then he bent down to embrace him, and the stabbing pain he felt in his heart lest Galehaut be dead chilled him through; he fell to the ground in a faint and lay stretched out alongside his companion. In the fall he hit his forehead against the sharp edge of a stone, which cut through skin and flesh above the left eyebrow all the way to the skull. The four squires were all shocked, thinking that both men were dead. They wrung their hands and pulled out their hair and carried on so that their grief could not have been greater. But it was not long before Galehaut stirred and groaned [6] loudly and, opening his eyes, stared in wonder at the men around him. But at the sight of Lancelot and the blood streaming from his wound, he was deeply pained, even more than by his own injuries. When he saw him come to, he asked him what had happened, and Lancelot told him through his sighs how fearful he had been for Galehaut’s life. Galehaut, astonished by all this, turned to treat Lancelot’s wound himself; then a squire brought him up a fresh palfrey, as the first had died. He mounted and the two started off again, and so did the squires. Lancelot, Part IT Lancelot’s wound so frightened Galehaut, though, that he put aside all his brooding and began talking with Lancelot more than he had done before. Lancelot said to him, “My lord, it’s an awful thing for such a noble man as you to have an accident like the one you just had! You almost died, and all because you didn’t have a firm grip on the reins. It would have been a terrible misfortune if you had died or been maimed that way.” Then Galehaut answered, saying, “The truth is, my lord, misfortune has not yet struck me. Of all the knights in the world, I have had the greatest good fortune, and it is only reasonable if things start going wrong now, for I have had as much good luck as anyone can have. You see, God was one day so good to me that he gave me what I wanted, and whoever has what he wants has nothing left to gain but can only lose. And I have started losing.” These words troubled and upset Lancelot, as he suspected what they might be all about. So he asked Galehaut, and begged him in the name of whatever he held dearest in the world, to tell him truthfully why ill luck had started to befall him and why he had been brooding so long, for he had never before seen him so downcast as on this trip. “Please, my lord,” he said, “if I have ever done anything to please you, tell me [7] the truth without holding anything back. You shouldn’t keep any secrets from me, because you well know that I love you more than any man who has ever lived; and I am right to do so, since I owe all my success to you.” “No,” said Galehaut, “I can’t hide my heart from you. I'll tell you what I have never dared tell anyone else. The sadness and anguish that I have been feeling all this while go back to two cruel and frightening dreams that I had not long ago. It seemed to me, as I slept, that I was in my lord King Arthur’s court, together with a great company of knights. Out of the queen’s room came a serpent, the biggest I had ever heard of, and it was coming straight toward me, and all the fire and flames it was belching forth made me lose half of my limbs. That’s what I dreamt the first night. In the second dream I seemed to have two hearts in my chest, so alike that they could hardly be told apart. And when I looked at myself, I lost one of them. And once it was gone from me, it turned into a leopard and threw itself into the midst of a great pack of wild beasts. With that, my heart and my whole body suddenly dried up, and I dreamt that I was dying. Those are the two dreams that made me brood so much, [8] and I'll never rest until I know for certain what they mean, though I do know something about them even now.” “My lord,” said Lancelot, “you are too wise a man to believe in dreams! A dream can’t reveal any truth. It’s as false in the dreaming as in the foretelling, and you have nothing to be afraid of! No man in the world is powerful enough to overcome you; you are the most powerful man alive today!” “There is no way I can be harmed,” said Galehaut, “except by one man; and if he wants to harm me, I am beyond help. But if there is any learning that can teach me what my two dreams mean, I will find out, for I have never had so great a desire to know something as I have now. Even when you, armed in red, turned out the winner in my Lancelot, Part IT confrontation with King Arthur, I didn’t have a greater urge to meet you than I now have to know their meaning.” “My lord,” said Lancelot, “I don’t believe there is any learning that can tell you what is to come.” “There is,” said Galehaut. “Didn’t King Arthur find out from those learned men the truth about his dreams and everything they meant? Didn’t they tell him he was bound to lose all earthly honor?”3 Thus Galehaut and his companion went on talking until, at the end of the road, they reached the Ausurne and crossed a bridge that joined two kingdoms and a duchy: the kingdom of the Franks, the kingdom of the Lands Beyond Galone, and the duchy of Rivel. Once across the river, Galehaut took a path to the right which led to a castle of his that he [9] had lately fortified. It stood on the most unassailable site in all his holdings, and he himself had named it the Proud Fortress, because of its beauty and its strength, and he had boasted that there he would hold King Arthur captive. The castle stood on solid rock high above a swift and noisy stream that less than four leagues away flowed into the Ausurne; the stream was called the Cerance. To that castle Galehaut now turned, since he wanted to spend the night in the beautiful apartments that he had there; it was barely one Welsh league away, and they could all see it plainly, with its tower rising high and strong above the rock and the enclosed area, strong and thick-walled and densely crenellated. Lancelot was the first to speak, saying, “It’s clear, my lord, that a noble design gave rise to this castle: I have never before seen one so grand or beautiful.” Galehaut sighed, “My dear friend, good, dear companion, if you knew with what pride it was begun, you could surely say that. At the time I undertook the building, I was indeed set on winning lordship of the whole world; and Ill admit to you right now a remarkable thing that I am very foolish to talk about, for as soon as arrogance asserts itself, it’s brought down. What I had in mind was excessive and boastful, and much of it stayed right there. In the enclosing wall and in the tower there is a total of one hundred fifty crenels, and I wanted to see [10] to it that I would have lordship over one hundred fifty kings. Once I had defeated them, I would have brought them all to this castle and then I’d have had myself crowned, and all the kings would have worn their crowns to do me honor. I would have held a splendid court worthy of a king, so that the world should speak of me after my death. And I'd have done something else, too: atop every crenel in the castle there would have stood a many-branched silver candelabrum as tall as a knight, and at the top of the tower I would have put a gold one of my size. Then, on the day of my crowning, from the midday meal on, the crowns of my subject kings would each have sat on its own candelabrum, and mine would have been affixed to the one atop the tower that you can still see over there. The crowns would all have stayed like that until nightfall. Then on each branch a thick taper would have been lit with a flame no wind could put out, and they would have burned like that until day. My court would have been so rich and splendid that it would 3See chapter 44. eae have been spoken of forever; and as long as it lasted, the crowns would have stayed on the candelabra and, at night, the tapers. I can tell you this, too, that since the castle was built, I have never entered it so downcast that I wouldn’t come out restored. And that’s why I am going there now, because this time I have a greater need for God to send me joy than ever before.” Thus the two companions rode along talking, and Lancelot was very surprised by what Galehaut had just told him. “God!” he thought to himself, “this man should really hate me, for all these things I’ve stopped him from doing! [11] I have turned the most vigorous man into the most sluggish. That’s what I’ve done to him!” Lancelot was deeply pained and wept so hard that the tears fell from his eyes onto his front saddlebow, but he took care not to let Galehaut notice. At last they faced the castle, and at that moment an extraordinary thing happened to Galehaut that overwhelmed him more than anything else he had ever seen: the tower, set into the enclosing wall, cracked right down the middle, and all the crenels on one side crumbled. Galehaut stopped short, too shocked to say a word. He crossed himself in an instant at the sight of such a wonder and, starting forward, had hardly gone a stone’s throw when the whole side of the wall and tower whose crenels had collapsed now came crashing down as well. And the fracas was so great it seemed the whole earth had split apart. When Galehaut saw his castle crumble, it’s no wonder if he was grieved. Indeed, he was so overwhelmed that he almost fell off his horse. When he could speak, he sighed, “Ah, God! what a cruel way for my downfall to begin!” Then he pulled on the reins and started off across the fields, to the left. Lancelot spurred after him, so troubled that he did not know what to do. Nevertheless, he made every effort to comfort Galehaut, saying, “My lord, it is not fitting for such a noble man as you to be upset if something terrible befalls his property, [12] as long as he himself and those dear to him are safe. Only a man of no account can fear harm to his goods more than to his person, because all his worth comes from his goods alone, and a heart of no account can’t grow any worse. Besides, you can see that God has shown you a sign of love, since you were not inside.” When Galehaut heard these words, he looked at him with the hint of a scornful smile and answered, “Really, my dear friend! Do you think I am crushed if my castle falls? Even if it were worth as much as all the other castles in the world put together, I would not be more upset than I am now. Let me teach you this about my heart: no one has ever seen me crushed or daunted by any loss of land or goods I may have suffered. Nor have I ever rejoiced or reveled in any gain, save one: your companionship. What troubles my heart is the doom it forebodes.” “My lord,” said Lancelot, “it often happens that a man’s heart is more distressed at one time than at another, and from the heart’s distress comes the body’s. Nor do I find it worthy of a noble heart to yield to its forebodings; it must meet them boldly and strive to overcome them.” “My good companion, the forebodings in my heart concern only two possible fears, for you and for myself; and 244 I would greet the misfortune of one of us just as I would the other. Moreover, I have [13] framed my love in such a way that if you died I would pray God to let me not live another day. I am very much afraid I will lose you soon, afraid we’ll be parted by death or some other separation. I'll tell you, too, that if the queen were as kindhearted toward me as I have been toward her, she wouldn’t strip me of your companionship and offer it to someone else, even if I had done no more for her than fulfill her great desire and bring you your great joy. Still, I mustn’t blame her if she wants to please her own heart more than another’s; she even told me once that you can’t be generous with something that you can’t give up. And I have realized as much. So I want you to know that when I lose you, the world will lose me.” “Please God, my lord,” said Lancelot, “our bond will never be broken! You have done so much for me that I would never dare do anything against your will. And it’s only because you wanted it—and my lady, too—that I belong to King Arthur’s household, since if my own heart had had its way, I’d have never stayed there.” Thus the two of them went on talking, and Lancelot offered whatever comfort he could, until Galehaut showed more cheer than had long been the case. Then Lancelot asked him where he would want to stay that night. “We’ll go,” said Galehaut, “to the fields that lie below Tesseline.” That was the name of a castle of his that stood by a broad river, and the meadows all around were very broad and lovely. Galehaut ordered his four squires to go ahead to the castle and make ready whatever food and other things they would need. “Then let me [14] find it all in the religious house at the edge of the woods, the place where I had myself bled last year; and I’ll follow you slowly, with my companion. But be off now, and make sure that everything is ready!” With that, the squires rode off as their lord ordered, and the two knights followed slowly, speaking about their private matters. When they reached the religious house where they were to stay, it was in fact time to stop for the night. Everything they needed they found ready, but the monks were puzzled to see their lord almost alone, since they had never seen him travel without a large party of knights. That night Galehaut was a little more cheerful than he had been and ate more than he had been eating since leaving the king’s court. Still, for Lancelot’s sake, he was straining to show a better mood than he felt in his heart. The next morning he sent one of the squires to Sorhaut, the main city of the kingdom of Sorelois, to tell his men waiting for him there that they should come out to meet him the next day at Alantine, which was the first city along his route. Rising in broad daylight, with the sun already high, Galehaut went to hear the Mass of the Holy Spirit and the Mother of God. [15] Then he crossed the river that ran alongside the forest at the ford below the religious house, because, being without an escort, he did not want to take the highway. That day they remained without eating until evening, and they spent the night with a vavasor of Galehaut’s, whose house was by that very river. Lancelot, Part IT The next day Galehaut rose late, since Alantine was no more than fifteen English leagues away. Once he had heard Mass, he rode out and reached Alantine between nones and vespers. Two leagues from the city, he was joined by the steward in charge of his land and by his other knights. The steward had been his childhood tutor and was one of the staunchest and most loyal men in the world, a kinsman of Galehaut’s. He began to weep at the sight of Galehaut and kissed him with sadness in his face. Galehaut was very surprised and asked him what was wrong, telling him, by his faith, not to lie. “My lord,” he said, “I have had the greatest fright I’ve ever had for you, and this morning I would not have believed any report that you were not dead or maimed, for this week far worse luck has befallen you than you think.” These words startled Galehaut. He pulled back on his reins, and he was so afraid of hearing bad news that his color drained away and he was left speechless. When he could speak again, he said to his steward, “My good man, what can have gone wrong? Tell me! Have I lost any kinsmen? By the faith you owe me, don’t hide anything from mel” “No, my lord,” said the steward, “you’ve not lost any of your kin.” [16] Galehaut struck his horse with his spurs and started off; and as he rode past his knights, he greeted and embraced them and pretended to be happy, for he did not want them to see what was on his mind. Returning to the steward and his words, he shook his head and said, “My good man, until today I always thought of you as hardened to everything, but no longer. How can you believe that any loss would weigh upon my heart, unless it were a thing of the heart? It’s plain to me that I have lost either land or goods, and you should know me well enough to know I have never rejoiced in material gain or been crushed by loss. So go right ahead and tell me what I’ve lost, for I know it doesn’t really matter.” “My lord,” said the steward, “the loss is in fact less heavy for you than it is extraordinary, stranger than anything I’ve ever heard of. In the whole kingdom of Sorelois, you see, half of every castle has collapsed in the last twenty days.” “That’s one thing,” said Galehaut, “that doesn’t trouble me much. I myself witnessed the fall of the fortress I loved most in the world, and it didn’t grieve me. I’ll tell you why—now, with all my men right here. I have been the most remarkable man who’s ever lived, with a heart so remarkable that, if it were lodged in a small body, I don’t see how it could last long. [17] In no undertaking have I ever found it cowardly or sluggish, but always eager and determined, and much more so than my reason would dare expect. And that’s how a heart must be that yearns to outdo all others in great works, and that heart must know that all others are paltry in comparison and stingy of ambition. Don’t marvel if the greatest wonders that you’ve heard of occur where I am in charge, for just as I have been most remarkable, the most remarkable things are bound to happen to me.” That is how Galehaut spoke to his old tutor on the way to Alantine. There the people of the town ran up to greet him, glad of his coming, because throughout the land the Lancelot, Part III extraordinary things that had happened made everyone fear for him. That night, Galehaut tried hard to look cheerful. In the morning he dictated letters to his learned clerks, and he sent word to all the barons who held land from him that, as they prized his love, they should join him before Christmas in his castle at Sorehaut, each bringing along the best advisors he could find, whether men of learning or knights. Next, he sent a letter to King Arthur, asking him, as his lord and his friend, to please send him the wisest men in his land, the very ones, in fact, who had interpreted Arthur’s own dream; he said he now needed such help more than ever before. But now the story leaves off speaking of Galehaut and his companion and turns back to King Arthur and Queen Guenevere. [18] 74. Guenevere Is Accused of Imposture..: Now the story says that King Arthur was at that time staying at Camelot. When Galehaut’s messenger brought the letter, the king was very glad to receive it, and the queen and the lady of Malehaut were more pleased than anyone else. But it did not take long for their delight to give way to great alarm, for once the man had given all his news to the king, a voung lady arrived at court and walked boldly up to the king as he was sitting with his knights; and there was a great escort behind her, more than thirty knights and men-at-arms making up her party. The damsel was very beautiful; she came before the king smartly dressed in tunic and cloak of rich silk cloth and wearing her hair in one long, thick braid, lustrous and light. Seeing her come along, the knights made way, and no baron, however noble, failed to leap to his feet; everyone who saw her was sure that she was the most noble lady in the world. When she came before the king, she pulled off the wimple still covering her head and threw it to the ground, and there was no dearth of men to pick it up, since she was surrounded by the people in her large retinue and others as well. The wimple removed, they were all amazed by her great beauty, [19] and she spoke loudly enough for them all to hear as she said boldly, “God save King Arthur and his knights (saving the honor and the rights of my lady)—King Arthur, worthiest man in the world if not for just one thing!” “My lady,” said the king, “whatever I am, God grant you good fortune! As for the honor and the rights of your lady, I want them to be safe, wherever she may be. Now, though, I would be grateful to you for telling me what failing I have that keeps me from being the worthiest man in the world. After that, you can tell me who your lady is and how I may have wronged her, though I don’t think I have ever misbehaved toward any lady young or old, nor would I ever want to.” “King,” she said, “if I were not able to make you see both my lady’s rights and the failing that keeps you from perfection, I would have had no reason to come to your court. But I have not come without a reason. Indeed, I am here because of the strangest and most extraordinary thing Corresponds to Micha I:III; Sommer TV:10-17. VA ever to have happened in your household. Like you, your people will be more shocked by it, once they’ve learned the truth, than: by anything else they have ever heard. First, let me tell you that the name of the lady who has sent me to you is Queen Guenevere, daughter of King Leodagan. But before I disclose what rights she claims, I must give you a letter I have here, sealed with her seal; it is meant to be read aloud in front of all your barons.” The young lady looked around, and an old, whitehaired knight sprang forward. He handed her a very handsome box sparkling with gold and precious stones. [20] She took the box and opened it, then took out a letter hung with a gold seal and said, “My lord, have this letter read aloud asI have stated, but with the understanding that it will be heard by every lady and maiden at this court; I have a right to ask that. A letter as important as this must not be read in private. You see, even if the largest court that you have ever held were brought together here, there would be no person too insensitive to be shocked by it. You would do well, then, to take up this extraordinary matter with a large group of worthy men.” The king stared dumbfounded at the young woman speaking so boldly, and all those with him were just as stunned. He sent right away for the queen and all the ladies and maidens scattered through the rooms, and sent a Crier through all quarters to make sure that every knight and man-at-arms came to court forthwith to hear the strange news. Once they were all gathered, the young lady spoke and asked the king to have her letter read. He handed it to the clerk whom he knew to be the best spoken and the most learned of all. The man unfolded the parchment and, scanning the letter from top to bottom, was so alarmed that the tears of his eyes ran down his face and fell onto his chest. The king stared at him with greater wonder than he had felt before, and everyone there [21] was frightened by the sight. “Speak!” said the king. “I am more eager to hear this letter than I’ve ever been.” The clerk looked at the queen, who was leaning against the shoulder of Sir Gawain, and when he saw her, his whole heart turned cold with anguish and locked so tight inside his chest that even to save his life he could not have uttered a word; and he began to totter. Sir Yvain, who was very kind and gracious, saw what was happening and thought he had detected some threat to the king in the letter; he jamped forward to catch him, and the man fainted in his arms. That astonished the king and made him wonder what the news could possibly be. He sent at once for another reader and handed him the letter. This one scanned it too and broke into sighs and bitter tears; he dropped the letter onto the king’s lap and turned away in utter grief. Walking past the queen, he said, “Ah, my lady! my lady! It’s such woeful news!” Thereupon he flung himself into another room and grieved more bitterly than he had ever done. The queen was dumbfounded. The king could hardly take the matter lightly. He sent for his chaplain and, as soon as he appeared, said to him, “Sir chaplain, read me this letter. I urge you, by the faith 246 you owe me and by the Mass that you have sung today, to tell me whatever you find in it and not hide a thing.” The chaplain took the letter and, when he had scanned it all, sighed deeply and said to the king, “My lord, am I to read this letter aloud?” “Yes,” said the king, “you are.” “The truth is,” said the [22] chaplain, “I am very sorry, because what I have to say will grieve and anger all the members of your coutt. If it were possible, I would ask you to please have someone else read the letter, but you have called on me to do it and I mustn’t stand back.” “My lord,” said the king, “you have no choice.” The chaplain, speaking loudly enough for the whole court to hear him, began. “My lord,” he said, “Queen Guenevere, daughter of King Leodagan, greets King Arthur, as is proper for her to do, together with his whole company of barons and knights. King Arthur, I am hereby lodging a complaint first against you and then against all your barons. I want everyone to know that you have behaved disloyally toward me, while I have behaved loyally toward you. Indeed, you do not deserve to be king, for it is not proper that a king should live with a concubine, as you do. The truth is plain: I was joined to you as wife in true wedlock, anointed and crowned as queen and consort of the kingdom of Logres in the church of Saint Stephen the Martyr in the city of Logres, the head city of your realm. “But that high honor lasted only a short while, for I was queen but a day and a night and was then taken away and cast out, either by your doing or someone else’s. Then in my place was put the woman who was my maid and servant, the very Guenevere you hold to be your wife and queen. She sought my death and destitution, whereas she should have been ready to sacrifice her own self in order to save me. But God, who never once forgets those who wait upon His mercy, [23] sent me a deliverer to whom I owe greater love than anyone else in the world. And though once banished and disinherited, I am now, by God’s mercy, restored to my position and my inheritance. So I ask you, out of loyalty and for the sake of right, that, by the judgment and finding of your court, this act of disloyalty be avenged and the woman who has kept you so long in mortal sin be made to suffer torment and die, just as she wanted to make me die. “That is what I want my letter to make known to you. But inasmuch as in the writing I could not recall every single thing that might have some bearing, I am sending you my first cousin, Clice, the bearer of the letter, to be my heart and my tongue. I urge you to trust whatever she tells you in my behalf, since she knows as much about my troubles as I do, and what she knows she knows properly. Together with her is a man who is even more to be trusted than she is or I: Bertelay the Old, the staunchest knight of his age in all the British Isles.” With that, the chaplain stopped speaking; he handed the letter to the king and walked away downcast and dismayed. The king was dumbfounded by the news; all the others present were stunned and mute. Then the king looked at the young lady who stood before him, and said, “My lady, I have now heard your mistress’s [24] message, «British Isles”: literally, the “islands of the sea.” Lancelot, Part III and if the letter was not read well, you can now make clear whatever is not so, for it seems you bear the heart and tongue of your lady. As for the knight, I would gladly meet the knight who is the staunchest and the most renowned in the world.” At that, the damsel stepped back, took the hand of the knight who had given her the letter, and led him up to the king, saying, “My lord, here is the knight whom my lady sends you to bear witness and to defend her cause.” The king looked at the knight, who struck him as quite old, for his hair was grey and white, and his face pale and lined and covered with scars, and his beard hung down onto his chest. Yet he had long arms and well-shaped shoulders; all his limbs were in fact so well made that you could not have imagined better. He was remarkably tall and robust and stood bolt upright and was more impressive than you could have expected such an old man to be. “I must say, my lady,” said the king, “this man is so remarkably advanced in age that he could surely never be involved in anything disloyal or treacherous.” “My lord,” said the young lady, “you would say that even if you knew him well. But there is no need here for any proof of his worthiness, for God can tell easily enough who is a good man. But let me tell you what the letter doesn’t speak of: the message that my lady sends through me. I believe you have understood that my lady’s complaint is that you should be a loyal husband but are not. It is well known that, when you [25] were crowned king of Britain, news came to you of King Leodagan of Carmelide, who was at that time the most valorous man in the world; he was at home on all the islands of the West and best maintained his knights in high esteem and in great honor. “My lord the king’s renown was great, but it was surpassed by what you heard of the great beauty and virtue of my lady his daughter, who was rightly the most esteemed of all young women. You said that you would not rest until you had seen why the king and his daughter were so admired in all lands. You left your land in the care of others and traveled to the kingdom of Carmelide disguised as a squire, as were the knights traveling with you. There you served my lord the king from Christmas to Pentecost, and that day you carved the peacock at the Round Table and earned the praise of the hundred fifty knights who sat there. Each was served his fill, and you thereby gained the most worthy lady alive, my lady the queen. And my lord the king gave you the noblest wedding gift ever given, the Round Table, which is honored by so many men of valor. “After that, you took my lady to Logres, your city, and there she was wed, as the letter recounts, and that night you went to bed with her. But when you rose to go to the privy, my lady was betrayed and tricked and thrown out by the very people she trusted the most, and from then on you were coupled with that lady I see there for whom I have such dislike, that Guenevere who [26] betrayed her mistress and threw her into prison and thinks she was killed there! But inasmuch as God was unwilling that the betrayal remain hidden, it has now come out in front of her. My lady, you see, escaped from prison by the will of God and with the help of this knight here; he became a robber for her sake and risked death to carry her out of the tower on his shoulders, which was very dangerous. Lancelot, Part IIT “Thus my lady was a long while in captivity, together with her attendants, until, thank God, her barons freed her and gave her back her land and her inheritance. If my lady wished, she could be married very handsomely, as no man under heaven, however highborn, would be stopped by birth or office from accepting her. But her feeling is that, if she loses you who are meant to be her true husband, she will give up wedlock altogether, for it seems to her that she would make no man a good wife but you, and you no woman a good husband but her; and if you were together, you would be a couple without peer, you the most worthy king and she the most worthy queen. That is why my lady urges you to acknowledge the faithful bond that you promised when you wed her, and to satisfy her claim against the woman who sought her doom and whom you have kept against God’s will. “If you do not agree, my lady forbids you, in God’s name as in her own and her clan’s, to keep from this time forward the noble gift that you received with her hand, that is, the Round Table. [27] Send it back to her as well endowed with knights as when you received it, and take care that no Round Table ever again stand in your house, because it is such a lofty thing that there must not be more than one in all the world. “To you, my lords called Knights of the Round Table, I say that you must give up that name until it is rightfully conferred on those who deserve the honor, for you might well come to such a pass that the proudest among you would be hard pressed to merit it. “And you, my lord,” she said to the king, “if you or any other person in your house should claim that my lady was not betrayed as you have just heard, I am ready to prove it either in your court or in another, right now or at some fixed time. The evidence will not be a bundle of lies or furnished without a trustworthy witness, but presented by a knight who heard and saw the whole affair. And whoever wants to gainsay him will have to.know equally well the cause he tries to defend, for in so important a matter as this, that is how evidence and challenge must be treated.” When the young lady finished speaking, no one uttered a word, and the king was dumbfounded. He gazed upward and crossed himself again and again, astonished at what he had just heard. He was so distressed and so shamed by the damsel’s charge that he almost took leave of his senses, and the look on his face made it plain that his heart was in turmoil. “My lady,” he said to the queen, “come forward. It is only right that we should hear you speak. Clear yourself! So help me [28] God, if this young woman’s accusation is true, you are more deserving of death than all other women who have ever sinned, and you have gulled us all into thinking you the most valiant lady in the world. You would be the falsest and the most disloyal, if it turned out true!” At that, the queen stood up, showing no hint of fear, and the king and counts and other lords started toward her. But Sir Gawain stepped in front of her, his switch in hand and so overwrought with anger that it seemed red blood was about to gush from his face. As the queen remained standing before the king, Sir Gawain took it upon himself to speak, saying to the young woman who had brought the news, “My lady, we want to Za7 know if your charge is made against my lady the queen, here present.” She answered, “Not against the queen, as I see no queen here—but against that lady over there, who betrayed her mistress and mine!” “My lady is innocent, so help me God, of any betrayal,” said Sir Gawain, “and she will be proven so! And I want you to know that you have almost driven me to behave as no other woman has ever made me do! If not for the shame it would bring to my lord even more than to me, I would make you realize that you have committed the greatest folly that you could have ever undertaken, for even if your story were sworn to by all the people in your country, it would still not be true!” [29] Sir Gawain went on, “My lord, here I am, ready to be my lady’s champion against one knight or more, as you decide, and I am prepared to prove that she is not guilty of the betrayal she has been charged with, and that she is your wife and consort, rightly anointed and crowned as queen.” “That indeed sounds like a challenge, sir knight,” said the young woman, “so it is only right that we should now be told your name.” He answered that his name was never hidden from any knight and certainly not from any maiden, and he said he was named Gawain. That made the lady smile and say God keep him. “Now I feel better than before, knowing your name, because I know you to be such a noble knight and so loyal that you would not take the oath for the whole kingdom of Logres; and I know too that you would not for the whole world do battle after the oath. Still, many men receive more praise than they deserve, which is what I will soon see in whoever takes up the defense. Let anyone who does it beware! And even if you had more skill in battle than you have, you will soon be in hand-to-hand combat, if you dare take up the defense!” Then the young lady took the hand of the knight named Bertelay the Old and led him up to the king, saying, “Bertelay, for your sake and your lady’s, settle this matter in combat with Sir Gawain or [30] another knight, if any there be bold enough to champion the accused against you!” He fell to his knees in front of the king and offered to do battle, just as the young lady had said. Sir Gawain, looking on, was vexed to see how old he was, and Dodinel the Wildman, sitting at the feet of the king, was filled with scorn when he saw how old the knight was; he said, “Sir knight, do you want to do battle at your age? Shame on any famous knight who rides against you! Bring out your country’s best knight instead, and Sir Gawain will fight with him! If you wish, we’ll give you still another advantage: if you present the three best knights in your land, Sir Gawain will face them seconded only by me; and I am the worst of the one hundred fifty knights of the Round Table!” “Sir knight,” said the young lady, “I have brought this knight because I believe he is the best in my country; and if you are afraid for Sir Gawain, then you fight in his stead!” Then Dodinel stood up and swore that, by God! he would not fight with that man any more than he would with a corpse. “Nor,” he added, “will you ever find me in a place where Sir Gawain is fighting with him!” 248 With that, Dodinel turned and spat around him out of scorn. After a moment, he turned back and, coming up to the king, said, “My lord, I have thought of the man to do battle with that knight: Raoul of Chaux, who is not at all too young. Why, he was renowned on the field before your father was a knight, and it’s been more than ten years since he was last out of bed! [31] Let the two of them face each other, and you’ll see a match of the dead.” These words made everyone who heard them laugh, while all along the old knight remained on his knees before the king, claiming his battle. But the king wanted to settle the matter as quietly as he could, so he raised him up by the hand and, turning, said, “My dear young lady, I quite well understand the complaint that your lady has lodged through her letter and what you have said. But I do not want to bring such an important case as this to a close without thought and deliberation, as I would not care to be blamed for sparing the queen or wronging your lady. I will set a date when all my barons will join me, and it will not be far off. Tell your lady that she will have her day at Candlemas.? On that day I’ll be at Bredigan, on the border between Ireland and Carmelide, where I will hold my court and have with me as many advisors as I can gather in the land I rule. Let her bring all hers with her, because I want the matter to be settled then and there by the judgment of our two courts. But tell her this from me: that she should take care not to make any charge that she cannot prove, because, by all the faith I owe the Creator, the woman found guilty of breaking her oath in this case will not escape my hand at any price; I promise punishment fitting the crime, so great that it will be spoken of forever after my death. “And you, my lady,” he said to the queen, “be ready to defend yourself.” She answered that she had nothing to think about but was ready to rely on the judgment of his court, and she trusted that God would safeguard her honor as truly as she was innocent. [32] Then the messenger took her leave to go back to her country, and all those who watched her go cursed her and prayed that please God she might never come again. The king, though, remained astonished, as did the people, close to him, for no one who had heard the accusation could still the fear that it might be true. The next day Galehaut’s messenger took his leave, and the king gave him the ten wisest men of learning that could be found in his land. The messenger then left, taking them with him. Now the story leaves the king and goes back to Galehaut. 75. Galehaut’s Plans and the Interpretation of His Dreams: Lovesickness and Destiny.’ Now the story says that Galehaut had been staying with his companion in the kingdom of Sorelois when the messenger came back from court and told him the news of 3“Candlemas”: February 2. 'Corresponds to Micha I:IV; Sommer IV:17-34. Lancelot, Part II the accusation that had been made against the queen. Hearing it, he felt both sorrow and joy: sorrow because he knew that Lancelot would feel sorrow and anger as soon as he heard the news, but joy because he could surely keep Lancelot with him for a longer time if the queen were separated from the king. Nevertheless, he forbade all [33] his people to disclose the news to Lancelot, since he was very fearful of upsetting him. But it could not be kept from him for long, and indeed he heard it and was more deeply pained than he had ever in his life been. He ran to Galehaut and, taking him by the hand, pulled him into a private room. It was plain, to look at his face, that he was sorely troubled, and Galehaut, seeing it in his expression, said, “My good, dear friend, what has upset your” “My lord,” he said, “I’ve heard news that I think is going to kill me.” That was enough for Galehaut to know that he had heard the news of the queen, and he was deeply distressed, for he would gladly have kept it from him if at all possible. Nevertheless, he asked him what news he had heard, as if he did not know a thing. Lancelot repeated it to him from beginning to end, just as the event had occurred. “Yes, my dear friend,” said Galehaut, “T had known about it for a while but hadn’t dared say anything to you; knowing your heart as I do, I was sure it would pain you deeply. Still, if there is anything you should welcome, it is the separation of the king and queen, for in that way you and she could be happy together for the rest of your lives.” “Oh, my lord,” said Lancelot, “how could I rejoice over something that brings distress to my lady?” “No,” said Galehaut, “I don’t mean that you could be happy if she were not; but she is as truthful in her heart as she is in appearance, and I know she would rather reign over a little kingdom with you than [34] be queen of the whole world without you. And if you and she are willing, I will give the best advice that I can ever give. I can tell you this: that what has happened to you is better than what has ever befallen two lovers, and if you care to follow my advice and trust my plan, I will pull you through.” “There is no doubt,” said Lancelot, “that I need help desperately; and whatever harm my lady suffers, I won’t ever fee] at ease unless she is at ease first.” “Listen then,” said Galehaut, “how she can be helped if the king divorces her, which God forbid (though you should welcome it)! I will give her the finest and most prosperous kingdom in the whole land of Britain or in my holding—I mean this kingdom where we are; and I will assure her of it by taking an oath on holy relics the first time we see her. Then, if things happen as we've said, let her come here and be lady not only of Sorelois but of all the land of which I am lord. Then you could often be together and openly enjoy the contact that must now come late and in secret. And if you wanted to go on enjoying your happiness without blame or sin, you might marry; no one, in fact, could find you a better wife, nor could she wed a better knight. Well, that is my plan to make your love last forever.” “My lord,” said Lancelot, “that is the plan I’d like best in the world, as long as it were as agreeable to my lady as to me. But there is a great [35] danger that worries me very Lancelot, Part II much: the king has sworn on holy relics to put her to death as soon as she has been found guilty. I am all ready, though, to see she doesn’t die alone, please God in whose care I’ve put myself! And you, please help me, for His sake first and then for the sake of my lady, who has loved you so much, and in the name of; the great love that you have devoted to me, that love so grdat that you let it cost you in one day the mastery of thirty kingdoms that you had as much as conquered.” With these words, he broke into tears and could say no more; he clasped his hands and fell to his knees in front of Galehaut. Galehaut, who could not bear what he was seeing, put his arms around him and raised him as his own tears flowed; and the two were so wracked by their common pain that they fell onto a couch and lay there in a faint for a long while. When they came to, they went on with their grieving; but Galehaut, who was more mature and better able to control himself, tried to comfort Lancelot, saying, “My good, dear friend, be calm now and don’t worry about anything we’ve spoken of. I will act as carefully as any mortal can; and anything you want will be done, whether it takes cunning or force, even if I have to lose all my lands, then all my kinsmen and even my own life. “Now, you know for a truth that nothing matters to me more than you. You must reassure me, then, and make every effort you can to save my life; and if you’re willing to do it, you will. Let me tell you how. It is true, and [36] you know it, that I have done many things for you that people have deemed more shameful than honorable and more foolish than wise. But there is nothing that I would undo, for, as God is my witness, I have never done anything for you that I don’t consider an honor and a gain, and I would give up all the lands under heaven rather than lose your companionship and your love. Indeed, if I can count on your commitment, I can easily overcome any woes; but if I lose you, I can only die. “That is why, by God, I beg you to make every effort to preserve our love; and when you’re with my lady the queen, urge her, as I’ve said, to let us stay together, and I will urge her, too. Besides, if you love each other at all, you should want to have her with you forever; and then we would all be together, never to part. Let me tell you, at the risk of upsetting you, I had thought of something I might do soon, though I have never in my life been guilty of villainy or treachery; but this I would have done, because fear of death and the strength of my love would have made me do it. I’ll tell you what it would have been. “{ had planned that the first time King Arthur traveled toward this part of the country, I would ride as fast as possible, stopping neither by night nor day, to catch him unawares, before he could have any news of me. I would go into his household with a hundred of my best knights, while leaving the rest close by in the woods just in case I needed them; and the men with me would have their weapons hidden under their cloaks. Then I would [37] carry off the queen without being recognized and bring her to this land. In that way I would have both you and your heart right here with me forever. “But then I realized that such a breach of faith would be too vile and that, if it happened to make my lady angry, 249 you would go out of your mind and surely die, for I know your heart well enough to know that nothing could kill you so easily as her anger.” Then Lancelot answered, “Good God, my lord! You would have killed me, if you had done that! A plan like that can’t be carried out without her leave, because if it troubled her, I could never be happy.” “So help me God,” said Galehaut, “I can’t ever blame you for that. If I hadn’t seen the harm it would do to you, I would have found it hard not to go ahead; in fact, no thought for anyone would have stopped me. And all the good I’ve ever done would have been wiped away by this one misdeed. But a heart that’s sorely troubled often risks a great wrong to find some rest.” The two companions spoke at length of their woes, each comforting and reassuring the other as much as he could. Later, Galehaut called the learned men that King Arthur had sent him to come and speak with him about his concern. When they came in, he led them into his chapel, and no one else was there but Lancelot. Once the doors were shut, he addressed them as a man of great intelligence and one of the most eloquent and [38] well-spoken. He said, “My lords, King Arthur has sent you here about my concern. I am grateful to him, as you, too, must be, I because he has sent you here to help me in my need, and you because he deems you the wisest men of learning in all his kingdom. He has shown you the greatest honor he could and me the greatest favor, for at this time I need nothing but guidance, since there is hardly anything else that I lack. I own woods and lands and a mass of wealth worthy of a better man than I am; I am strong in body and brave, but troubled, in heart; I have the noblest of kinsmen. But all these riches of mine harm me more than help me, and if I had only the twentieth part of them, I would be less uneasy than I now am; for I have a sickness that no wealth can help. “This sickness is different from all others. As you can see, I am tall and strong, and my whole body, I'd say, is sound and healthy; and anything that takes bodily strength I can still do as easily as ever. Into my heart, however, a sickness has crept that is destroying me. I have lost all craving for food and drink, and can find no rest in bed. Nor do I know where this sickness has come from, though I think it came over me only lately, when a certain fear overtook me as well. Yet I don’t know for sure which came from which, the fear from the sickness or the sickness from the fear; it all happened to me at once. “This is why I have sent for you. This is the guidance I mentioned that I need so much. Please give it all your thought, for the sake of God, of course, and for love of King Arthur, too, and for the sake of great rewards, but also to bind to yourselves forever a man of my kind.” [39] With that, Galehaut stopped speaking and Master Elias of Toulouse, a wise and learned man of great age, began. “My lord,” he said, “you will not easily find anyone to help you through this sickness without understanding it first. It oftentimes happens that the heart suffers a sickness that no manmade remedy can heal, and in such a case we must resort to godly remedies, such as prayers and pleas, alms 250 and fasting, openness to Our Lord and the guidance of the religious. “There is another sickness, however, that can be treated with earthly means, and that is rancor. The sick heart is cured by avenging the wrong done to it, and then it is wholly changed and returned to health. Imagine that someone tomorrow mocked and insulted you: your heart would not find peace until it was freed of the shame, and that, by giving hurt for hurt. If it were avenged, it would be rid of the filth and poison clogging it, just like a man freed of worry and anger. When the heart is filled with rancor, it takes upon itself all the shocks and blows received by the body, for if the body is drubbed, the heart is not so easy to humble; it is so proud that it takes upon [40] itself all the shame done to the body. The body is no more than a house for the heart, much as we deem a house honored for the worthy man in it or stained by the coward. If the body has been beaten and trounced, it will remember no longer than it takes to be healed. But the heart remains wounded, and its shame is an ever-present mirror; nor will it ever be healed unless it is freed as I have said. That is the strength and the scope of the heart. “But now I shall describe the third, and worst, sickness affecting the heart. It is an illness that strikes shallow people, and it is so powerful that sufferers do not even want a remedy. It is called love-sickness. Love is a thing that comes from delicacy of heart and by way of the eyes and ears. When the heart is so charmed by these two that it enters into love, it chases after its quarry and, if it catches it, the heart will either be wholly cured or else die. Turning back is not an easy matter, for once it has caught its quarry, it is doomed to lie as tightly bound in prison as if the chase had failed, except insofar as [41] imprisonment is welcome and brings with it such comforts and joys as sweet words and good company and the expectation of desire fulfilled. Whatever the feelings of the heart, the body can do no more than hear and see. But in the midst of all these joys, the heart is often overcome by suffering and pain, for it dreads losing what it loves the most and is afraid of false accusations. Those are the sufferings of the heart that keep the body from healing. “Now I have described the three sicknesses of the heart. The first is cured with alms and prayers and the second by taking revenge. But the third is the most dangerous, because it often happens that the heart would not want a cure even if it could have one; and so a sensitive heart finds it very hard to recover, because it loves its illness more than health. “Since you say that you are sick at heart, I have described these three types to you, knowing that you must be suffering from one of the three. But now enlighten us about your illness and your symptoms. If it is such that our knowledge can be of any help, we will have relief to offer you with no delay, since I do not doubt that the men gathered here are among the best and most learned [42] even from as far away as the coast of Britain and among the most reliable for their upstandingness and knowledge.” “As God is my witness, good master,” said Galehaut, “I do believe you, and even if I heard you say nothing more than the remarkable things you have just explained, I would put my life and death into your hands. I will describe Lancelot, Part II my sickness, then, and how it came to me, first to you and then to the others. But you must swear on holy relics that you will disclose the truth to me without hiding the slightest thing you may discover through the power of your learning, whether it gives me pain or pleasure.” They took the oath just as he had said, and then he went on, “My lords, I have been greatly frightened by a dream that I have lately had two times.” And he related it to them just as it has already been recounted to you. When they heard it, they were astonished and said it was indeed a strange dream, and Master Elias responded, “My lord,” he said, “to understand such an important thing takes careful deliberation and attention to the possible outcome. For that reason, we need to be granted time to probe the dream’s meaning, so as to avoid blundering through haste; the fact is, there is no philosopher in the world, however learned, who would not have to ponder it at quite some length.” Galehaut asked them how much time they wished to have, and they said only nine [43] days. He agreed, “with the understanding,” he said, “that at that time you will tell me without delay what you have found.” The learned clerks promised him as much and left the chapel. Meanwhile, the day was drawing near when Galehaut’s barons were to gather. The clerks took great pains to pore over the matter. Each withdrew to a quiet, empty room far away from the noise of people; and they had many remarkable insights and approached the dream with many kinds of augury. On the ninth day, they all gathered, and each gave his view and reported his interpretation to Master Elias, who then declared himself satisfied. That held them until their deadline, when Galehaut sent for them and asked them what they had gleaned. The first answered that he had found nothing that could fit the true meaning of the dream. “No,” said Galehaut, “I won’t let it go at that. You know quite well that you swore on holy relics to tell me the truth about your findings without hiding anything. That is the oath you swore, and you will all honor it; otherwise, I will consider you all forsworn.” Then the first speaker said that his craft had let him see a quite wondrous thing, “but the truth is,” he said, “I don’t know what to make of it, because my vision was indeed a wondrous one, as I shall tell you. It seemed to me that I saw [44] a large lion coming from the islands accompanied by a great many other animals, while from the lands to the east came another lion, wearing a crown, and he too was accompanied by all kinds of animals, but he did not have nearly so many as the one coming from the west. When the animals were gathered, the two sides clashed, and those from the east were losing when suddenly a large leopard, proud and haughty, came down from a mountain and rushed against the animals from the west; and he had no sooner appeared than he was able to stop them all by himself and hold them back. The lion that was their master? came up to the leopard and acclaimed him as 2See chapter 2, p. [7]. 3Literally, “the lion that was master of the other animals.” This reading appears to identify the lion in question as the one Lancelot, Part II warmly as one animal can do another. Then he went straight off to the crowned lion and kissed his neck; and the crowned one stepped upon him and his animals did likewise to the others. That is what I saw, but with all my probing I could not find out who the two lions and the leopard were.” “Now, as you have sworn,” said Galehaut, [45] “tell me if you saw anything else.” “Yes, my lord,” he said. “I saw that the lion who was so powerful and yet humbled himself before the smaller one took the leopard away to the land that he had come from, and they were together for a long time, until the leopard left. The lion was then so distraught that he swelled up and died. That is what I saw, and that was the end of the vision.” He stopped speaking. (This was Boniface the Roman, a very fine cleric.) Galehaut was lost in thought for a long while, as if in a swoon, not saying a word. When he did speak, he turned to the cleric sitting beside the first, Master Elimas, born in Radole, in Hungary. “Tell me, master,” he said, “what you have found.” And he answered just as the first had done. “But I know,” he said, “who the crowned lion was. It was my lord King Arthur, and you were the lion that came from the west. But I could not understand who it was that appeared as a leopard, though I do know what will become of your friendship with him, which is why I want to ask that you please release me from my oath, so that I won’t have to say anything more.” “That can’t be,” said Galehaut. “Tell me the rest.” ‘I tell you, then,” he said, “that in the end your death will come through him. That is how it must be, or else my learning has never taught me a thing.” Those were his words, and he said he had found nothing further. [46] Next came another who was very wise and spoke just as the one before had done, and so it went on through seven speakers. The eighth, however, said more. This one had been born in the kingdom of Logres, in a castle only seven English leagues from the place that Merlin calls the castle at Oxen Ford, where he says all knowledge will descend when the end draws nigh. The castle was named Sindenort, and the learned clerk was Petronius, the master who set down Merlin’s prophecies in writing and had the first school at Oxford.‘ Petronius was well versed in all seven arts but particularly given to astronomy, because it spurs man to learn of hidden things that exist or are to be. When the seven had finished speaking, he began, saying to Galehaut, “My lord, we have pored over your dream and understand it as well as our learning allows, and you have heard from these good clerks that one of the two lions is my lord King Arthur and you are the other. About the leopard I will tell you what I know. It is true that the from the east (Arthur), whereas the rest of the dream, both superficially and allegorically, makes it clear that he is the lion from the west (Galehaut). ‘The prophecy reported here is not mentioned by Geoffrey of Monmouth; nor does it appear in Les Prophécies de Merlin, ed. Lucy Allen Paton, 2 vols. (New York, 1926-27). As for Petronius, Paton states (2:303, fn.3), “It is scarcely necessary to point out the anachronism that makes the scribe of Merlin the founder of Oxford University. The first known master at Oxford is said to have been Richard Pullus, who came there from Paris in 1134.” Zo leopard is, after the lion, the proudest beast alive and, with its teeth and claws and lissome body, the most dangerous. The man whom the leopard stands for is the one who made peace between you and [47] my lord the king; and it is clear that he caused your men to be humbled by ours. And just as no animal is as noble as the leopard except the lion, so no man can be a better knight than this man except one alone, one yet to come, who will issue from the son of the king who died of grief.° That is the leopard seen in your dream. “But I have seen something else as well. In one moment of time he took your heart away and in another your honor; in still another he will take your life, unless you are guarded by the serpent who took half of you away. You may know that the serpent is the queen or else a lady or maiden in the queen’s circle. Now I have told you all I know.” Next spoke the ninth, who was from Cologne, a man of great learning named Master Agarnices. “My lord,” he said to Galehaut, “Master Petronius has spoken very well and given you a very clear explanation of your dream. But because everyone must honor his oath, I will tell you something I have seen that the others have not mentioned. I have found that you must cross a certain stream on a bridge made of forty-five planks; and as soon as you have passed the last plank, you will have to jump into the water beyond it, which will be deep and far from shore; nor will you be able to turn back, because all the other planks will have been removed. No sooner [48] fallen into the water, you will sink to the bottom never to rise again. I understand this to mean the end fated for your life. “IT do not know, though, whether the planks each stand for a year or a month, a week or a day, but they do represent one of these four lengths of time. Nevertheless, I do not deny that you may live beyond that time, because I saw in my probing that the bridge stretched all the way to the other side of the stream. But the leopard in your dream removed many more of the planks than remained, and it seems to me that just as he carried them away, so he could put planks in place.” Galehaut was dumbfounded by these words and Lancelot no less. Then the tenth man spoke, Master Elias of Toulouse, who was wiser than all the others and had more knowledge of many things. “My lord,” he said to Galehaut, “you have now heard the wisest men in the whole land of Britain. If our guidance can be of any avail to you, you are, in the whole world, the man with the greatest need of it. You have heard in what circumstances you will die, but you have not learned exactly when; nor will you easily find anyone to inform you, because no mortal mind could be astute enough to know or speak the whole truth about the object of his study. Indeed, the Holy Scriptures tell us that the judgments of Our Lord are so veiled that no mortal mind can know them and no mortal tongue express them. “Nevertheless, through the power of learning we can make God reveal himself to us, who are created in His image and can glimpse through the Scriptures [49] what may happen to one group of people or another—oh, not 5The reference is to Galahad, son of Lancelot and grandson of King Ban of Benoic. ye all, only some, for no one can know everything but the One who can encompass all.” “Master,” said Galehaut, “I believe that these others have told me what they know and that they have lived up to their oath, but from you I have not heard what you know, and the truth is I have a greater desire to hear your point of view than all the others. As I told you the other day, I would rely on you for guidance concerning my life or death more than I would on all the other learned men in the world; for just as no one was able to describe my sickness as well as you, so it seems to me that no one could give me better counsel than you. For that reason, I want you to tell me the truth about your findings and tell it on the strength of your oath, as the others have done. Then, once you have told me your findings, it will be time to hear your counsel, provided God has instructed you enough to advise me. And if we see that such help is of no avail, well, then, that’s the will of God, and no force can hold out against Him. In any case, it seems to me much easier [50] to accept my ruin or rescue, whichever, if I hear it from your lips.” “My lord,” said the learned man, “insofar as you trust me more than the others, you will be more upset if you hear something damaging from me and more delighted if in my words you see your advantage. For that reason you are better off suffering the terms you have heard, while I would gladly give you good news rather than bad if I had it to give.” “Speak,” said Galehaut; “you can’t give me anything worse than news of my death, and I have already heard a good deal of that.” “My lord,” said the other, “I will speak to you in private first, with no one else in the room.” Then he himself ordered all the clerics to leave, and not one of them remained. “My lord,” said Galehaut, “don’t you want my companion here to stay with us?” (He was speaking about Lancelot.) “My lord,” said the learned man, “when you want to treat a man’s wound, you don’t attend to it as his heart would like but as the treatment requires, since healing comes not from the heart’s desire but from good medicine. For that reason you need to follow my instructions; if not, you will be denying my skill. In no way will I have the two of you listen to what I want to say, even though I know that you would not like to [51] hear anything that this knight could not hear as well. But I will not be swayed: no one is to hear our conversation but God and the two of us alone.” He stopped speaking, and Galehaut looked at Lancelot. Lancelot rose at once and went out of the chapel, so anguished and pained that he did not know where to reach for comfort. He flung himself into a small room, closing the door behind him, and there gave vent to his immense grief, for he was quite sure that Galehaut expected his death to come through him. While Lancelot was grieving, Master Elias said to Galehaut in the chapel, “My lord, I believe you are one of the wisest princes of our time in the whole world and I am sure that, if you have behaved foolishly, it was more out of goodness of heart than lack of intelligence, so I'll give you a very useful little lesson: take care, as far as you can, never to say in front of any man or woman with whom you are in love anything that would trouble his or her heart, for Lancelot, Part IIT everyone should do his utmost to keep anger and distress away from the one he loves. I say this because of the knight who has just left us. I know that you love him with all the love that can exist between two true companions, and would have wanted him to share in this discussion. But it would have been wrong, as he would have risked hearing words that would have burdened his heart with shame and sorrow, and he would perhaps have been more pained than you will be. Of course, you could never care less for his happiness or his welfare than he could, but you are [52] more sensible and reasonable than he.” “Master,” said Galehaut, “it seems you know him well, to judge by what you say.” “IT do,” he answered; “I think I know him, though not through any personal report save that I have heard that the man who made peace between you and King Arthur is the finest knight alive. He is the leopard that appeared in your dream and in our findings.” “Master,” said Galehaut, “is a lion not a prouder animal than a leopard, and more powerful?” “Yes,” he answered, “of course.” “Then I think,” said Galehaut, “that the man who is the finest knight of all should look like a lion, not a leopard.” “By God,” said Master Elias, “you are sharper than many another, and I will give you a reasonable answer that you can readily understand. I know quite well that he is truly the finest knight among those living now. But there will come one better than he, just as foretold by Merlin, who never makes a mistake.”® “Master,” said Galehaut, “do you know his name?” “I know nothing about his name,” he answered; “I have not tried to learn it.” “Then how can you know,” said Galehaut, “that there will be a finer knight?” “Tt is clear to me,” said Master Elias, “that the one who completes the Adventures of Britain will be the finest knight in the world and will take the [53] last seat at the Round Table; and his emblem will be the lion.” “But this fine knight that you speak of,” said Galehaut, “do you know what his name will be?” The other answered that he did not. “Then I don’t see,” said Galehaut, “how you can know that my companion will not be the one to complete the Adventures of Britain.” “I know for a truth that that cannot happen,” said Master Elias; “he is not fit to try the Adventure of the Grail or to complete the Adventures or to take the seat at the Round Table where no knight has ever sat without risking life and limb.” “But, master,” said Galehaut, “what are you saying? There is no great knightly virtue that he doesn’t have! And why do you say that he is not fit to try the Adventure of the Grail? Why, he has the daring to complete more than any other knight even dares to think about!” “That is all to no avail,” he answered, “and I'll tell you why. He cannot regain the qualities needed by the one who will complete the Adventure of the Grail. Above all, that 6The reference is to Lancelot’s son, Galahad. For Merlin’s alleged prophecy, see Paton, Les Prophécies . . .. 1:193 and 2:243— 244, Lancelot, Part IT man must be, from birth to death, so utterly virginal and chaste as never to feel love for a woman, married or not. For your companion it is too late, for I know more about what goes on in his mind than you think.” [54] Hearing that, Galehaut turned red with embarrassment and said, “By God, master, do you believe that the man who wins the seat at the Round Table will be a better knight than my companion in skill at arms?” ‘Tl give you an answer to that,” said Master Elias. “I well know that your knight is the finest of those now living and even of all who have ever lived in Great Britain; and I daresay no one could overcome him in hand-to-hand combat. But Merlin, who has never yet lied, tells us that out of the chamber of the Maimed King of the adventure-filled Waste Forest, on the edge of the kingdom of Lists, will come the wondrous beast that will astound the fields of the Great Mountain. This beast will be different from all other animals, for it will have the head and face of a lion, and the body and legs of an elephant; it will have the kidneys’ and navel of an untouched maiden, and a heart of hard, dense steel that will be proof against swaying or softening; and it will have the speech of a serious woman and the will to make right judgments.® “That is what the beast will look like, and all others will make way for it and welcome it gladly. Then the Adventures of Great Britain and the perilous wonders will come to an end. In all of this you can glimpse the knight who will complete the Adventures.? Through this beast you can understand that no man will be his equal in pride, since no animal has so proud a look as the lion. The body lets you know that no other man [55] could bear the burden of arms that he will bear, since no other animal has the strength of the elephant. The kidneys and the navel let you know that he will be a virgin and chaste, just like an untouched maiden. The heart tells you that more than any other man he will be bold and venturous, free of cowardice and fear; and like the serious woman, he will be spare of speech. You may well understand that his exploits will hardly resemble those of other valorous knights.” “Yes,” said Galehaut, “he will be of truly great prowess if his exploits are greater than my companion’s; and I never thought that anyone could be better than my companion! But tell me now if you know any prophecy about that good knight.” “Yes,” he said. “Merlin said that from the king who would die of grief and his sorrowful queen would come forth an extraordinary leopard who would be fierce and bold and brave, spirited and gay, and he would show greater pride than all animals in Britain who had shown pride before him, and he would be more warmhearted and sought-after than any others. If you know who fathered the knight who has just left this room, then you can easily understand that the prophecy is about him, as he has made it clear that he is better than all the men of Britain who have borne arms before him.” 7kidneys”: that is, the sensuality. 8This prophecy is much more elaborate than the one cited in Paton, Les Prophécies . . .; see note 6. °This sentence translates: Par ces coses poés conoistre le chevalier qui achievera les aventures, which is found in four mss. belonging to the same family as the ms. furnishing Micha’s text. a “I know for a fact,” said Galehaut, “that his father was king of Benoic and died of grief and that his mother had all the sorrow of a woman [56] who in one day lost her land, the king her husband, and her son still in his cradle. What I also know is that this knight is the most charming and warmhearted and sought-after of men, and that his deeds of arms are such that he deserves to be called the leopard of knights. You know much more about him than I thought, and I see that you are the flower of all learned men, just as gold is the flower of all metals.” “Furthermore,” Master Elias went on, “I find something in the prophecies of Master Marabon,!® who lived before there were Christians in Great Britain and who said, ‘If the leopard does not have weak kidneys,!! he will surpass all other earthly beasts, lions as well as the rest.’ I know that this prophecy concerned your companion and that if he had kept himself pure, the whole world would have marveled at his feats.” Galehaut was downcast and lost in thought. Master Elias went on, “Do you know,” he said, “what Merlin said before the Lady of the Lake had come to know him? He said that from the prideful leopard and the line of Jerusalem would come forth the lion feared above all other animals, and the lion would sprout wings that would cover the world. That’s what Merlin said, and I certainly do not see who that leopard could be, except your knight.” (57] “By God, master,” said Galehaut, “he could well be the one! But tell me something else from the prophecies of Merlin—I am listening very gladly; tell me if there is any prophecy that touches on me.” “Yes,” he answered. “Merlin tells us that from the Islands of Jedares, from the home of the Fair Lady,!* a wondrous dragon will break forth and go flying left and right over all countries, and wherever he appears everyone will tremble before him. The dragon will fly on to the Adventurous Kingdom, and there he will have grown large and massive and have thirty heads of gold, each finer and more splendid than his original head. Merlin said that there he would be so large that the whole land would darken under the shadow of his body and his wings. He would reach the Adventurous Kingdom after having conquered almost everything, but the wondrous leopard would stop him and push him back and put him at the mercy of those he had just been so close to defeating. Afterwards, the two would love each other to the point of considering themselves a single thing, each unable to live without the other; but the golden-headed serpent would come draw the leopard away and take him from his companion and besot his mind.!3 Merlin says that this is 10The prophecies of Master Marabon are apparently an invention of the writer. That is, if he does not succumb to sensuality. 1274 Bele, the Fair Lady, is no doubt to be understood as la Bele Jaiande, the Fair Giantess, identified in chapter 11 and elsewhere as the mother of Galehaut. In other sources, various names are given to these islands, viz., les Illes de Coing (Soing) a la Bele Sente, les Daerraines Illes, les Dereines Isles de la Grant Bretaigne, les Isles d’Orient. 134 far less elaborate account of the prophecy occurs in Paton, Les Prophecies... ., 1:89. Zoe how the great dragon will die.!4 I know for a truth that you are the dragon, and the serpent who will take the knight away from you is my lady the queen, who loves or will love him as much as a lady can love a knight. But you know, don’t you, [58] that you love the knight with such love that your heart cannot long endure that change.” “No, master,” said Galehaut, “I can endure it for a while, but I couldn’t go on that way forever. I have given him the deepest love; no other stranger have I ever so loved with all my heart. But I don’t see how he could bring about my death, unless he were to die himself. After his death I don’t think that I could live, because I would have nothing left in this world that could bring me any pleasure. No, I am sure I couldn’t live on after him. ‘But there is something that surprises me: it is what you said about the queen. As far as I can tell, he doesn’t think about any woman at all; if he did, I would know about it right away.” “I know for a truth,” said Master Elias, “that everything is bound to happen as I have said, once she puts her mind to it. In fact, I think she has already started, and she will certainly do her utmost. But let me add that you will also see one of the most astounding things ever to happen in your day: the queen stands accused of the basest wrongdoing that a woman can be charged with. And I believe it stems more from her sin than from any other wrong, for she was so untrue as to dishonor the most honorable man in the world. It was to tell you that that I sent out the knight whom you love so much, for I would rather have you hate me for speaking ill of him [59] than let him hear it himself, and I know you to be so honorable and wise that I am sure my words will not be repeated. Indeed, I beg you, in the name of your honor and your rank, not to disclose to my lady anything I have told you that might be to her shame, just as you would want me to keep any secret you might tell me. I have told you many things, you see, for which I could be charged with hate and treachery if they were known. I beg you, then, to safeguard my honor and my welfare, just as you would want me to safeguard yours.” “My dear teacher,” said Galehaut, “there is no need to point that out. Whatever you have shared with me that should remain between us will never be repeated. Moreover, I will always remember the lesson I heard you teach; I won’t ever say anything to anyone, man or woman, that I know would be upsetting, unless I should want not to hide their shame or harm. No, you have taught me to keep these things from the queen and from the companion I love, to spare him. I know his heart very well; if he knew that [60] there were talk of him and the queen, he would never again be seen in the king’s house, because he is free of any shameful thought, and no man is as fearful of shame as he or so open to slights.” “Let’s leave all this now,” said Master Elias, “and let events show what they will. But you are right to say what you say, and I know a good part of what is happening. I am sorry that I know so much and that what will be cannot be 1M4Our translation reflects not Micha’s reading, vendra (“will come”), but that of several other manuscript sources, morra, which seems to us more convincing in the context. Lancelot, Part IIT changed. But just as you would rely on me in an important matter rather than on someone else, so I have told you what I would never want to tell the king or queen or your companion himself.” “My dear teacher,” said Galehaut, “you have shown me the reason behind all the things you have spoken of, but, by God and by your soul, advise me about the thing I want to know more than any other—I mean the forty-five-plank bridge that I will have to cross, as foretold by the last speaker before you. He told me that he knew each plank stood for a year, a month, a week, or a day, but did not know which of the four lengths of time was meant. And so I ask you, my good teacher, to please tell me the truth, if you will,” “That,” said Master Elias, “is a matter that you should not dwell on. No man born into our world down here would ever have an hour of happiness or peace if he knew the time fixed for his death. [61] Nothing, you see, is so frightening as death; and since the death of the body is so dreaded, one should all the more fear the death of the soul.” “Master,” said Galehaut, “in the name of everything I owe you, that is why I am asking you when my body will die: because I want to do whatever I can to avoid the death of my soul! I want to watch out for the death of the body in order to avoid the death which is truly frightening, the death of the soul. And be assured that, whatever torment my body may undergo, my soul, please God, will accept it gladly. I would strive more to behave the right way, and more urgently, than if I were just to live out a usual life. It would help me, since I have committed many wrongs in my life, destroying cities, killing people, dispossessing and banishing people. . .” “Yes, I know,” said Master Elias, “that it would help you to change your life, for any man who has conquered as much as you have must have a heavy burden of sins, and it’s no wonder. Furthermore, if you knew the day of your death and tried [62] to save your soul, it would be all to the good. But there is a great danger that could arise from this, as has already happened elsewhere. Indeed, we read that in Scotland there was once a lady of great wealth who had for a long time led a very wanton life. In the same land, not far from her, there was a very holy hermit; he lived his very religious life in the depths of a forest. The lady became acquainted with him and would often go to see him, and the hermit spoke such uplifting words to her that she reformed her life. At length, it came to the hermit in a vision that the lady had only thirty days more to live. He warned her to pay greater heed than ever to living the right way and told her the day when her life would end. “Hearing the day she would die, she felt such fright and trembling in her flesh and was so overcome with fear that her body yielded and she forgot her soul’s salvation. She went astray out of hopelessness; the Devil took hold of her as soon as fear for the flesh made her forget the saving of her soul. When the good hermit found out, he began to weep and cry out to Our Lord for mercy as he held Him in his hands, and he prayed that God not suffer the Devil to have power over the sinful woman whom He had called to His service. God, who is always ready to succor those who call on Him sincerely, heard the good man, and a voice Lancelot, Part III [63] came down to the chapel saying that God was granting him the favor that he sought, and he had only to touch the woman and she would be healed. “The good hermit came to where she lay bound, and she began to scream when she saw him. That was the work of the Devil, who was tormenting her because of the good man’s arrival. But as soon as the hermit had made the sign of the cross over her and touched her flesh, the Enemy rushed out of her, bellowing and howling so madly that the whole land shook. No sooner had the lady regained her senses and recalled what her lack of belief had brought about than she renounced this world at once; she had her beautiful locks shorn off, put on a nun’s habit, and went off with a single woman companion to a high place between two cliffs, where she remained in her garb of poverty until she died. “Now you can understand that there is great value in uncertainty and none in hopelessness, for as soon as she lost hope, she was emptied of the Holy Spirit and filled with the Devil. Likewise, Saint Peter sank in the sea as soon as he felt fear, and that is the danger that can come of knowing the day of your death. And so one must not be eager to learn it, because the flesh is so impure and weak that that knowledge makes it fall into fear, and from fear the body falls into hopelessness. So my advice is that you give up such a rash pursuit; and as God wills, so let it be with you. And strive to live the riglit way as if you were sure that your life would last another thirty years.”15 [64] “Master,” said Galehaut, “I am not afraid, please God, of falling into hopelessness if you tell me the time of my death. I am not so lacking in belief; indeed, I could only welcome the chance to make my life better. God has allowed me until now to have more power and wealth than anyone of my age has ever had, even born into a greater line. And so it seems to me that God will be showing me much love if He allows me to enjoy the pleasure of this world and then look forward to the joy that has no end. And the closer I am to my death, the more I will strive to deserve the everlasting life. So I ask that you counsel me in accordance with what you know of me, for you would not be a loyal counselor if you didn’t tell me everything that touches the salvation of my soul. “If you hide the truth from me, I will call on the Savior of the world to be my guarantor and put your soul in the place of mine if I sin as a result of your failing or the failing of what you teach—because I am relying on your guidance in all matters, and God is a righteous judge who judges every man according to his works. Now take [65] care, then, with your soul at risk, to enlighten me honestly and not foretell a longer time for my life in order to make me feel better. Remember that I would be less bent on living the right way if I thought I had long to live.” Then Master Elias began to weep and said, “My lord, now that you have put my soul at risk, there can be no hindrance to my telling you the truth. In a way I am pleased and in another way I am sorry: pleased because I know you to be so wise that you could only become a better man thereby, and sorry because a man as worthy as you are or 15Sommer 31, like several mss. cited by Micha, gives, “your life would last only thirty more days.” 50) might be should never have to die before reaching true old age. Nevertheless, I will not tell you the day or hour of your death, because I find no particular moment that you might not well live past. If you went beyond the day I had foretold, you would hold me to be a liar, which is why I won’t tell you. I will, however, go far enough for you to know the day beyond which you could survive in only one way—but you could [66] hasten the day as well.” With that, he rose and went over to the door of the chapel, which was freshly whitewashed. With a piece of coal, he drew forty-five small black circles, each the size of a penny, and wrote over them, “These represent years.” After that, he drew forty-five smaller circles below the others and wrote, “These represent months,” and below those he drew even smaller circles and wrote in smaller letters, “These represent weeks,” and at the bottom he put even tinier circles, with letters saying, “These represent days.” Having done that, he said to Galehaut, “My lord, what you see here represents the forty-five planks standing for the rest of your life. This will show you whether they stand for years, months, weeks, or days.” Then he pointed to the four groups that he had drawn on the wall, explained what each meant, and then said, “My lord, take care not to be startled by anything you may see, as I am going to show you one of the most remarkable things you have ever witnessed. Well, then, if these circles remain as untouched as they are now, you will live exactly forty-five years; but if any are erased, that many years will be cut from your life, and you will see them erased before your very eyes. The same is true of the months and weeks, but when it comes to the days, [67] you will surely have as many of them as there are planks.” Thereupon he reached into his robe and pulled out a little book; opening it, he said to Galehaut, “My lord, here is a little book which treats the meaning and the mystery of all the great spells that can be cast with words. With the explanations given in it, I would know the truth about all the things I am now uncertain of, if I made a point of studying it; I could even pull trees out of the ground and make the earth quake and make water flow uphill. But the truth is, whoever attempts such things puts himself at great risk. When my lord King Arthur could not find any help in understanding his dreams, all his learned clerks rushed toward this little book. They opened the cupboard where it was kept, since I was at that time in Rome, and the man who took it from the cupboard to interpret the king’s dream did not know what care to take with it and was unaware of the meaning and the power of what had to be done. In the very act of reading, then, he lost his sight and his mind and control over his limbs. That happened just as he was trying to figure out the meaning of the water lion, the drugless doctor, and the prompting of the flower.!® For that reason, I warn you not [68] to be startled by what I am going to show you, which will be a more extraordinary thing than you have ever seen. You may be sure, at least, that you will not leave here unshaken.” With that, he went up to the altar and took a splendid cross made of gold and gems and the box holding the body of Our Lord. Keeping the cross, he handed the box to 16see chapters 44 and 49. 256 Galehaut and said, “My lord, take this box, which encloses the holiest thing in the whole world, and I'll hold the cross, which is the next most noble. As long as we hold them, we need not fear any untoward event.” Then Master Elias sat down on a stone bench, opened his book, and began to read. He went on at length, until his heart grew very warm and his face became flushed; from his forehead sweat trickled down his cheeks, and he began to weep and could not stop. Galehaut looked on and felt uneasy with what he saw. Master Elias read until he was tired and worn out, and he sighed deeply out of great sorrow. When he had regained his calm, he took up his reading once again and trembled with fear. Then, in almost no time at all, such thick darkness settled over the chapel that you could no more see anything there than if it were an abyss. A voice called out, so hideous and shrill that in the whole city of Sorhaut there was no man or woman who did not hear it. Galehaut, stunned by the voice, put the box down in front of him and flattened himself face down on the ground. After a moment, he picked it up again with both hands and held it [69] tightly right before his eyes, as the darkness made him unsure of himself and the piercing voice so stunned him that he could not hear or see a thing. Not far from him, near the altar, lay Master Elias in a faint, with the cross lying on his breast. Then the darkness faded away and the light of day came back. Master Elias came out of his faint, heaving sad sighs and looking all around. He asked Galehaut how he was, and he answered that all was well now, thank God. But only a moment later the ground began to quake. “My lord,” said Master Elias, “lean against that seat over there! Your pecy can’t support nou as itself through the wonders that you’re about to see.’ Galehaut leaned against the seat, and his master against a stone pillar; and all along Galehaut held on to the box. Soon it seemed to the two men that the whole chapel was spinning. When it stopped, Galehaut looked up and saw nearby, coming through the tightly shut door, a hand and arm that went back as far as the shoulder. It was wearing a wide sleeve of purple satin that trailed down to the floor; the sleeve came down a little below the elbow, and from that point forward to the wrist the arm was covered with a kind of white silk. The arm was extraordinarily long, and the hand was as red as live coals and held [70] a sword just as red, which was dripping red blood from the hilt to the point. The sword came right up to Master Elias and looked as if it were about to run him through and kill him. In his terror, he held the cross out in front of him, and the sword began to circle him, still threatening to kill him; he kept moving the cross around to face it down. In a while, he became aware that it was moving away from him and straight toward Galehaut. Galehaut held the box out in front of him, just as he had seen Master Elias do, and went on like that until the sword moved away from him as well. With the arm and hand that gripped it, it went up to the wall where the black circles were drawn and struck so sharply into the stone that half a foot of it came away, removing three of the circles and part of a fourth. Having Lancelot, Part III done this, it turned back to the door it had come through and disappeared. [71] Galehaut was more astonished than he had ever been in his life. When he could speak, he said, “You have really kept your promise to me, master. You have shown me, as far as I can tell, the greatest wonders that have ever been witnessed, and you have let it be clear to me that I still have three years and more to live. I feel more at ease now, and would like you to know that my life will be all the better for it, for no man of my age has ever done as much good as I am going to do in the next three years. I assure you, besides, that I will never let any sadness show that might betray what I know, but will rather do my best to display more cheer than I have done until now.” “Now I'll tell you,” said Master Elias, “that I was very worried about your death when I showed you those symbols of it. You might yet live beyond the end indicated, but that depends upon my lady the queen. And if you could somehow have your companion remain with you, you would indeed live beyond it, because your death will only come from his absence. So all you can do is keep up a good appearance until you see how things are going. And remember not to disclose your secret to him or to any other, for one mustn’t expose one’s inner truth to anyone.” 76. Galehaut Makes Plans to Leave Sorelois in the Hands of Bademagu; Portrayal of Bademagu’s Son Meleagant.' With that, their meeting came to an end, and they left the chapel. Galehaut looked very cheerful, but Master Elias seemed weighed down with tiredness and [72] worry. Then Galehaut came home and found Lancelot by himself, absorbed in his sorrow. Hearing him come in, Lancelot jumped up, wiping his red and swollen eyes. Galehaut, who knew him well, asked at once what was wrong, and he answered, “Nothing, my lord.” “Ah, my dearest friend,” said Galehaut, “don’t be upset about anything. I have just heard some news that has made me very happy, and you’re bound to be glad of it as well, since I know that you are only upset about me.” Lancelot was delighted to see Galehaut so cheerful and was sure that he was telling him the truth. “By God, my lord,” he said, “tell me what turned out to be the meaning of the forty-five planks and what that last meeting was all about that I had to leave. I have the feeling that something was said there that I would not have been glad to hear, and I am very much afraid that Master Elias knows something about the queen and me.” “My lord, that’s not why you were asked to leave,” said Galehaut, “and not a word was said about my lady; the conversation never touched on her. Nevertheless, he knows who you are just as much as I do, and said that you are the son of the king who died of grief and the Queen of Great Sorrows; he told me a number of other things, too, which had nothing to do with you. But the reason you were not part of the last meeting is that I wanted to make my Corresponds to Micha I:V; Sommer IV:3442. Lancelot, Part IIT confession, since he said that otherwise he couldn’t tell me what I wanted to know. Now, thank God, I feel more at ease than when you left, because I have learned from Master Elias that I still have forty-five years to live.” He said that to cheer Lancelot up. “And at the end he told me [73] that the serpent I had dreamt took half my limbs away stood for death, which would come take away a man or woman of my kin.* And you have never seen anything happen in such a timely way as this, which is why I believe everything he said to me. I had barely come out of the chapel when I met a messenger bringing me news of my mother’s death. That was the member of my family I was supposed to lose! Even if you never did anything more for me than you have done already, I could never appreciate you enough, for I would be overcome with grief and beyond any chance of happiness if not for you. But I forgot my grief as soon as I remembered you, though I had never loved anyone as much as my mother before I came to know you. Well, now that you see my worries are past, you should feel better!” Lancelot answered that nothing could make him happier than all this, and he had no misfortune left to fear. Thus Galehaut tried to find comfort within himself but, while he showed good humor on his face, he did not feel it in his heart and acted only to put his companion at ease. In this way they drew out their stay in the city until the day when Galehaut’s barons had been called to gather. The evening before their meeting, once Galehaut knew that all his men had come, he called Lancelot into a private room and said to him, “My good, dear friend, I love you so much that I can’t hide anything from you, so I am telling you, on my word of honor and by my love for you, that I have never, in all the time I have had your friendship, kept you from knowing any inner thought of mine, unless of a kind to leave you grieved or shamed and powerless to change matters. [74] A wise teacher of mine taught me in my youth that to any man or woman I might love I should never bear news that would bring shame or sorrow, for it is wrong to trouble your friend or bring up a problem that the two of you cannot settle together. I may have hidden just such a thing from you, and I'll tell you why I speak of it now. I called the barons of the land to gather on a particular day. You didn’t know why, but now I'll tell you, because without your backing I cannot and must not do a thing. The truth is, you are a nobler man than I and of higher birth, since your father was a king and mine a poor prince. And since you have made me your companion and I have made you mine, I cannot have any right over you nor you much right over me; but if any wealth or honor should come to us, you have to be the first to enjoy it, because you are of higher birth than I. “But now Ill tell you what I have thought of. I wanted to crown myself king, which is why I sent for my barons. But in no way would I be king if you were not king first. I beg 2Micha’s text reads, la mors qui me prendroit ou me toldrott charnel ami ou amie, which is ambiguous, meaning either “death, which would take me or take away a male or female relative” or “death, which would take or remove from mea...”. In view of the context, esp. Galehaut’s announcement of his mother’s death a few lines below, we prefer the reading in Sommer 35, which has only the verb toldroit. 27) you to be, and to want to be. I will give you half the lordship over all the land that I hold and have you acknowledged by all my barons. You will receive their oaths of fealty and their promise to help you guard against anyone wishing to harm you; and they will do homage to you as to me. We will be crowned together this [75] Christmas when my lord King Arthur holds his court, and the day after our crowning we can leave with all our troops to take back your lost kingdom of Benoic from King Claudas of the Land Laid Waste. You have taken too long to avenge your father’s death and your destitution and your mother’s great sorrows. “If we can find King Claudas, he won’t remain in that land or in any other; and if we can get hold of him, we’ll give him the kind of justice that a traitor and murderer should have. You know, I’m sure, that ever since I met you, I have had no desire to make war—but no longer. Revenge has waited too long! “Now tell me, my dearest friend, that you will accept my plan. You will have my land, with all its riches and beauty, and lordship over twenty-nine kingdoms. And out of love for you I will win back your inheritance, and I will love it better than my own and all the land of King Arthur.” “My lord,” said Lancelot, “I cannot do homage to anyone® without leave of my lady the queen, and she forbade it. How doI dare do homage to someone else if she would not have me do it to King Arthur? As for winning back my inheritance or taking anyone else’s, I will not accept help, however attractive it may be; I have in mind to win it back much more easily and with much greater [76] honor.” “My dear lord,” said Galehaut, “how do you plan to do it more honorably? I don’t know of any greater honor than taking back one’s inheritance by force.” ‘T’ll tell you how,” said Lancelot. “My aim is to become so valiant, with God’s help and yours, that I’ll have no foes bold enough to dare hold on to a square foot of my land; instead, fear of me will make them run away before I reach them!” “I pray God,” said Galehaut, “that He let you carry through your plan and let me see it happen. But I’ll do more than that for you, after all; if I can, I will convince the queen to let you act as I proposed. Still, I know your feelings and hers so well that I am sure she would not want you to be master of the world, because then she wouldn’t have you at her beck and call the way she has you now, and she would be afraid a thirst for riches and honor would rob her of your company. And I know your heart very well: you would hardly like a measure of authority that would make you lose her love.” “Yes, my lord,” said Lancelot, “in this you know my heart very well. I would much rather always remain just what I am today than become a king and gain honor and wealth if it meant my losing the queen or her losing me. Nor do I want to have any more power than I have unless she [77] approves. But you have loved me so much that I am ready to do whatever you wish, as long as my lady 3Galehaut having spoken of barons doing homage to Lancelot, Lancelot can now speak of his doing homage to them, for one implies the other, the doing of homage being a bidirectional act. 258 agrees, and I think I know her well enough to say that there is nothing she would refuse you if you asked her in all earnestness. But I assure you, in any case, that I will not accept the crown you want to give me unless you accept it first or unless some force compels me that I cannot withstand.” With that, their conversation came to an end. That night, the hall was filled with merriment, as all the great barons ate with Galehaut; and there were thirty kings there and more than a hundred princes. After Mass the next day, Galehaut called all of them together and explained why he had sent for them. “My lords,” he said, “as my liegemen, you are bound by oath to help me in my every need. I have gathered you here because of the greatest need I have ever had, one that touches my very life. There are two points to consider, in that I was afraid of ruining myself and my friend and I was of a mind to undertake something that I will tell you about in a moment. Two very worrisome dreams that I had threw me into an awful fear, and that’s why I sent you word that you should bring the best advisors you could find. But now, thank God, I have had the counsel of the wisest men in the world, who explained my dreams [78] so clearly that all my fear has faded away. Nevertheless, I still require your advice about something else, an urgent need that I will now tell you about. “As you know, I had it very much in mind to overthrow King Arthur, until by God’s will peace was made between us. When I sent for you recently, I was of a mind to have myself crowned at Christmas, when King Arthur will hold his court. But now I have changed my mind and will not be crowned before I have seen to a certain matter of mine that I cannot disclose right now; it is not a thing to speak of before the fact, but in due time you will hear about it. Well, then, you know that I am on good terms with King Arthur, the noblest man alive, whose house is the world’s home of valor and prowess. I would like to live there awhile, according to the changed ideas I now have. It will make me a much better knight, as no one can be a man of great prowess without spending time at King Arthur’s court. And so I want to be back there, in touch with all the worthy knights. A “Once I have seen to the matter that I cannot now disclose, I will be crowned and at that time you will hear about it. I ask you now and urge you, in the name of your allegiance to me and the love that binds us, to come together at that time in great numbers, as you know I like. “Furthermore, inasmuch as my lands stretch far and wide and I will not be able to visit them as often as I have done, I need to find a good man of ripe age, wise and [79] loyal and virtuous, who hates wrongdoing and loves justice. I will entrust him with my lands, and he will carry out my tasks and responsibilities in my behalf and in the interest of his honor. But because I am not so knowledgeable as to know everything you do, I am calling on you to guide me.4 4Micha reads, Et por ce que je ne sui mie si sages que je ne puis mie savoir quanque vos fetes (“And because I am not so knowledgeable that I cannot know everything you do”), which is clearly unsatisfactory. Our translation expresses the meaning obviously intended and also reflects Sommer 37-38: Mais pour ce que iou ne Sui mie sages asses et que iow ne puis savoir ce que chascuns de vous set Lancelot, Part IIT Take care to choose one man among you who will prove honest and good for me and the land, a man free of envy, for it is ruin and death for property to be in the hands of an envious steward. Furthermore, I want you choose a man who is rich, whom I could call to account for any great wrongdoing.” The vassals could not come to an agreement, some of them voting for the King of the Hundred Knights and the others for King Penor. Then the duke of Cloyes took the floor. He was so old that he could no longer mount a horse, but he was so strongminded and bighearted that he never wanted any important matter to be settled without a word from him. So he would have himself borne in a litter to important meetings where he knew that serious counsel might be of use, and he had so much knowledge that only a man knowing Latin could have more. This knight was very sorry to see all the barons so divided. He stood up as well as he could and, leaning against a long table, spoke loudly enough for everyone to hear. “What foolishness I see here! [80] You look at all the foolishness around you, and you fail to see it! You speak, but you don’t know what you're saying! If I had the youth and strength of one of you, your wrangling would soon be over, because, my peers, I would let you all consider me for the task at hand. I would like my lord to know that in his whole realm he has only one wise man and half of another, but the one who is just a half has so many other qualities that it is only right to take him for a whole wise man. If you are willing to take my advice, I’ll tell you his name. I am sure that he fits what my lord is asking for and that none of you could do any better.” No one would have dared take a stand against this offer, since the duke was too honorable a man and anyone taking issue with him would hardly have been regarded as very wise. So they all fell into agreement with him and promised to abide by his counsel. Then the duke had Galehaut called back and, when he came in, said to him, “My lord, the good men gathered here have charged me with the matter at hand, inasmuch as I have seen and lived through more than all of them. They want me to choose a man fitting your description, and I will name you someone whom you and all the others will agree to. Do you know who he is? He is wise and a man of serious counsel, such as befits a fair judge; he does not bend the law for any man or abet wrongdoing in anyone’s interest; he is strong and determined and untempted by idleness, and brooks no offense against honor.” “Good God!” said Galehaut, “that’s a long list of fine qualities! Tell me his name, and I'll take your advice.” “In God’s name,” said the [81] duke, “I am speaking about King Bademagu of Gorre.” “So help me God,” said Galehaut, “I have never failed to think of him as one of the worthiest men of my land, and I cannot be anything but happy if such an outstanding man takes charge of this kingdom!” At once he called upon King Bademagu, who then came forward. “Into your hands,” said Galehaut, “I place my whole domain, and I ask that, for the sake of my life and (“But because I am not knowledgeable enough and do not know what each of you knows”). Lancelot, Part IIT your honor, you act in keeping with the duke of Cloyes’s endorsement.” “My good lord,” said Bademagu, “I have no need for any greater charge than my own land, and I do not oversee that land nearly as well as would profit my soul. If I can barely manage mine, which is a small estate, I would be a poor overseer of yours, which is much larger.” “At this point,” said Galehaut, “no such qualms count. I want you and, since it is a matter of what I want, you have no power to refuse. It is a thing you can and must do.” “My lord,” said Bademagu, “your land is filled with fierce and headstrong people, and I could not administer it as I would wish.” “I promise you,” said Galehaut, “that if anyone defies your authority, I will make him pay for it as you wish, however bold he may be; with four good men to help me, I would be ready to ride against any [82] of the lands this throne controls! Now you, my lords,” he went on, “my liegemen gathered here, I order you to back him against anyone save myself. Then, because I do not know what the future may bring and, once abroad, will perhaps never again set foot in any land of mine, I want King Bademagu to swear in front of all of you that he will behave loyally toward me and my people and, if I happen to lose my life, will freely pass my holdings on to Galehodin, my nephew and godson. And I want you to swear that, if he went against his oath, you would take action against him and would help my heir to assert his rights, as vassals are duty-bound to help their liege lord.” Thereupon Galehaut had the holy relics brought in, and King Bademagu took his oath first, and all the others followed. Next, the King of the Hundred Knights took the oath, as well as all his kinsmen; they swore that they would claim no part of his inheritance after his death. They all spoke the words he wished and then swore. In this way Galehaut received the oaths of his liegemen and gave his lands over to King Bademagu’s stewardship. Bademagu, now, was lord of the land of Gorre. This was a land that bordered on the kingdom of North Wales and was the most secure land of its size in the whole realm of Great Britain, inasmuch as it was enclosed on [83] every side by deep water and by bogs so soft that nothing could survive sinking in. On the Welsh side it was enclosed by a river called the Dark, which was broad and deep and full of mud. In that land there was an evil custom that lasted as long as the Adventures lasted. Indeed, no knight of King Arthur’s court could ever leave that land once he had entered, until Lancelot, through his prowess, freed them when he braved the danger of the Sword Bridge to go rescue the queen, as is recounted in the true Story of the Gart? That evil custom started in the first year of the Adventures, when King Arthur’s father went to war against King Urien, the uncle of King Bademagu, because he wanted him to be his vassal and King Urien would not agree. The war lasted a long time, and Uther Pendragon lost more in it than Urien did. Meanwhile, King Urien set out for Rome to make confession to the pope, traveling 5See chapters 107-121. Zo? disguised as a poor pilgrim in tatters; but he was spotted and captured and was brought before Uther Pendragon, who put him in prison. He, though, refused to give up his land, however harsh his treatment might be, until he was brought before one of his very own castles. There King Uther Pendragon set up a [84] gallows to hang him if he went on refusing, but he said he would never be his vassal and that he would rather die defending what was his by right than live in poverty and shame. But his nephew Bademagu, who was inside the castle and was known to be his heir, could not endure his uncle’s death, so he gave up the land to save him; and that was the act that, once known, made him widely admired, for it was a beautiful thing for a young man not to accept his uncle’s death out of craving for his inheritance. Thus the land of Gorre fell to Uther Pendragon, who ravaged it and swept it clean of most of its people. Later on, King Urien retook it with the help of fugitives and hanged all those whom Uther Pendragon had left there. Not long afterwards, he crowned his nephew Bademagu and gave him the whole land in recognition of the loyalty that he had shown him and the love that he had for him. As soon as Bademagu had been crowned, King Urien took leave of the world and withdrew to a hermitage far from home, and Bademagu became a proud, strongminded king. He wondered how he could repopulate the land and decided in his own mind that he would do it with Uther Pendragon’s people, just as it had been ravaged by them. And so on the border between his land and the kingdom of Britain he had two narrow bridges built, with a high, round fortress on his end of each bridge. These two towers were manned [85] by knights and men-at-arms whom the king kept there, and as soon as a knight or lady, married or not, crossed over, as long as they were from Britain they were arrested and then made to swear on holy relics that they would never go home until the coming of a man able to win them back by his knightly valor. In this way many people of Britain stayed on in the kingdom of Gorre in exile and in servitude; and when King Arthur came to be overlord after the death of Uther Pendragon and planned to set things right, he became embroiled in a number of wars so demanding that he could not give any thought to Gorre. By the time the Adventures began, the land of Gorre was thus repopulated, thanks largely to people displaced from Britain. Then King Bademagu had the two bridges torn down and two others put up that were quite extraordinary, as one of them, made of wood, was only three feet wide and spanned the river under water, lying halfway between the surface and the riverbed. The second bridge was much more extraordinary, as it was made of a [86] steel beam fashioned like a sword and as gleaming and sharp as a sword could be. The bridge was only one foot wide and was held in place at each end by being embedded in a large tree trunk; it was turned edge up, so that rain ran right off. The Underwater Bridge was guarded, from the beginning of the Adventures until the time the queen was rescued and the exiles were freed, by a very brave knight; and the Sword Bridge was guarded by Acadoes, a very fine knight, but he died a while before Galehaut had the dream you have heard about, and from 260 then on it was guarded by a son of King Bademagu named Meleagant.® Meleagant was a tall knight, well built in body and limb, red-haired and freckled. He was so arrogant and unscrupulous that he would never forgo anything that excited him, whether good or evil; nor did he welcome being rebuked. He had turned his back on all kindness and refinement, and no one was more ruthless and cruel than he; nor could he bear seeing people enjoy themselves. On the day when Galehaut put his father Bademagu in charge of his land, Meleagant was present, eager to see Lancelot because of the wonderful things that people had said about him. That was in fact his only reason for being there, for he hated all good knights he ever heard about, feeling quite sure that no one could be better than himself. When he saw Lancelot, he was hardly stirred to admiration, and that evening, while his father was full of praise for the young knight, he, on the other hand, made a statement that well became an envious scoundrel. He said [87] that Lancelot was not big enough or well enough built to prove his match in a fight. At those words, his father shook his head and said, “My dear son, with all due respect, size of body and limbs is not what makes a good knight, but greatness of heart. And if you are bigger and better built than he is,’ that doesn’t necessarily put you ahead or do you any honor, for he is much braver and more skilled than you; and no wonder, since nowhere in my lord’s domain or in King Arthur’s is there a knight who can match him in great feats of arms.” “I have no less renown in my country,” said Meleagant, “than he has in his, and God grant me to live long enough for great crowds of people to see which of us is the braver and more skilled! If it weren’t for you more than for other people, it would be seen soon enough; but you have never let me act as I’ve wanted, and as a result I have lost much more of my fame and renown than you think.” “You may yet have a chance, and soon,” said his father, “to test yourself against him and others as well. As for being renowned in your country, that is all the renown you have. He, though, has more, since he is renowned in his own country and in yours and in others, too.” [88] ‘If he has such great prowess,” said Meleagant, “why doesn’t he come to our land and set the exiles free?” “Stranger things,” said Bademagu, “have happened, and this one is not so odd that it couldn’t happen, too!” “God forbid,” said Meleagant, “that he or anyone else should free them as long as I am there, healthy and sound!” “Let’s put an end to these words now,” said Bademagu. “When you have seen as much of life as I have, you'll be more coolheaded than you are now.” With that, the exchange between King Bademagu and his son came to a stop. The next day, Galehaut made plans for his trip to King Arthur’s court and decided which 6The tale of Urien, Bademagu, and the two bridges is also recounted in the Livre d’Artus, one of the three continuations of the Merlin. The description of the bridges there is considerably more detailed; see Sommer VII:144. 7Micha reads, It se tu es ausi grans de cors com il est (“And if you are as large in body as he is”), which, with its comparison of equality, ill fits the context. We have therefore translated the reading in Sommer 41: Et se tu es plus corsus quil nest. Lancelot, Part IT barons would go with him, and since he was in command, there were no objections. The next day, once they had heard Mass, Galehaut, his companion, and the barons mounted and left Sorhaut as planned. 77. Lancelot Is Wounded by Meleagant; Guenevere Is Confronted by Her Accusers; Arthur Is Captured and Succumbs to the Wiles of the False Guenevere. Now Galehaut and his great retinue were on their way to court, and he and his companion often rode apart from the others. Lancelot was very glad that Galehaut was looking much better than before and so felt sure that what Galehaut had given him to understand was indeed true. But Meleagant could not take his eyes off Lancelot because of the great affection that Galehaut showed him; he was jarred by it and made envious, and it set his heart on edge. Thus they rode on, day after day, until they drew near to Carduel, which the king had reached the day before. When the king heard that Galehaut was coming [89] with such a grand following, he mounted, together with all his knights and the queen and her suite, and they rode out more than two English leagues to meet him. They all greeted one another with great delight, but the warmest welcome was the one shown Lancelot and Galehaut by the queen, and by the lady of Malehaut, too, who was as happy as could be. But the queen was especially overjoyed, and she gave no further hint of her plight now that the two knights had come who would put body and soul into belying the charges of shame and wrongdoing against her. That night, they were very uncomfortable at Carduel, there being too many people there; nor had so many ever been seen together in that place, for almost all of King Arthur’s knights had come, Christmas being only four days away. So the king said that he would hold his court at Camelot, as that city was large and well provided with lodgings, and everyone would be more comfortable there than at Carduel. That night, the king spoke to Galehaut about the news that had been brought by the damsel from Carmelide. Galehaut defended the queen as best he could and said that the king should not believe such reports until they could be proven true. In the morning, they left Carduel and went to Camelot, where all the fields were covered with tents and pavilions, [90] for the great vassals were all lodged in the castle, and the men who could not be accommodated with them were all scattered through the fields outside the walls. The king’s Christmas court was splendid, and he made a special effort in view of the high nobility that Galehaut had brought with him; he even gave more gifts that day than he had ever given on a single day in his whole life. On Christmas day, after the morning meal, the quintain, as was the custom, was set up and Galehaut’s knights asked him to allow them a contest with King Arthur’s knights, though with no more equipment than lances and shields. He agreed. 'Corresponds to Micha I:VI; Sommer IV:42-51. Lancelot, Part III Word of this soon reached Lancelot, who asked Galehaut to please let him take part, and Galehaut did not refuse, seeing he was so eager. There were then three hundred of them, all young men of the same age and longing for success; there were just as many on King Arthur’s side. They were all ready with their lances, but Galehaut did not take part, because he was afraid no good would come of it and he would be sorry afterwards. When they were all on their mounts, they rode out to the fields beyond the town and began their set of jousts. The King of the Hundred Knights broke countless lances; [91] he was one of the world’s best lance-breakers. Then Lancelot came into the ranks and began to joust so skillfully and well that everyone recognized him at once. He knocked down horses and riders and whatever he touched, but the horse he was on was a little too highspirited and not wholly broken to the saddle, and a number of times it carried him somewhat beyond where he wanted to go. But with such swiftness and drive, he toppled every man he ran against, and he enjoyed the jousting so much that he was in no hurry to dismount, for he was afraid of losing face if he did not go on. And with the horse he had, he went on knocking down whatever he encountered, both horses and riders. Then it happened that the King of the Hundred Knights came to joust with him, and Lancelot struck him such a blow that he and his horse fell to the ground in one heap. In the fall the king was badly wounded in the left thigh, and he lay senseless on the ground for a long time. Then Meleagant headed toward Lancelot and broke his lance against his shield; and Lancelot struck him such a blow that he and his horse went sprawling across the road. (This was the beginning of the great hatred that he had for Lancelot [92] for the rest of his life.) Then, barely hurt, Meleagant jumped up and called for a heavy, solid lance, had it sharpened at the end (which he would not have done had he been a true knight), and charged toward Lancelot, carefully planning where to hit him. The truth is, Lancelot was going after another knight and was heedless of Meleagant’s sly attack. Meleagant came up to him and dealt him a side blow that sent his lance right through the knight’s thigh and into the saddle blanket, so that it hit the rear saddlebow and the lance splintered apart. Lancelot remained with the more than yard-long shaft in his thigh, while blood was dripping down his leg and dying the green grass red. When the men of Galehaut’s household saw Lancelot wounded, they were frightened for their lord, because they knew how much he loved him, They unslung their shields and threw them down on the ground, saying that they would joust no more that day. And when Galehaut heard the news, he fainted, since he was told that Lancelot had been struck right through the body. King Arthur was worried, and the queen was so despondent that her heart almost burst. At the window of the brattice where she had been watching, the queen fainted and fell, and in falling [93] she cut herself on a sharp stone. Meanwhile, Lancelot, out in the fields, pulled out the shaft and bandaged his thigh before the king reached him. And all along, Galehaut kept weeping and swooning, and whenever he came to, he would clap his 261 palms together and say, “Ah, God! Send me the death to which I am doomed here!” Then. he asked for news of Lancelot and was told that he was all right, but he refused to believe it and mounted his horse; but then he saw Lancelot coming along, with King Arthur beside him. Lancelot was begging the king not to tell Galehaut about his injury, “because I know,” he said, “that it would drive him out of his mind; and my wound is not really dangerous.” With that, they reached Galehaut, who was overjoyed to see Lancelot and ready to believe he was not wounded. Meanwhile, the jousters had taken their leave and were on their way back to the castle. King Bademagu, however, was very worried about his son, who had caused Lancelot’s injury, and he was afraid that some ill might come to him from it. And so, with many arguments and warnings, he sent him all unwilling back home. Once within the walls, Lancelot begged the king to please make sure that Galehaut would know nothing about the wound, and the king said that he would be sure to keep it in mind. Then they came to the queen, whom they found with a badly hurt head. The king asked what was wrong, and she said that she could not see the melee for all the knights taking part in it and was therefore coming back from the brattice where she had been watching, when she heard the news that Lancelot was dead; thinking [94] to sit down, she fell, but she said that she was not badly hurt at all. Then the king whispered to her that she should keep Lancelot with her and have his wound attended to, as he did not want Galehaut to know anything about it. At these words, she felt a chill in her heart and “Oh, my lord,” she said, “is he injured, then?” “Yes,” said the king, “a little, in the left thigh.” Then they left the queen; that is, the king left with Galehaut, the queen saying that she wanted Lancelot to stay with her awhile. She showed him into a room where doctors were standing ready; they looked at the wound, said that it presented no great danger, and dressed it carefully. And through the two weeks it took to heal, Galehaut never learned about it. The next day, Galehaut sent all his men home, so that no one remained with him but his personal household. But before the barons left, he ordered them to appear, equipped with their arms, ten days before Candlemas, at a castle of his called Videburgh, which stood at the edge of his kingdom in the Far-Off Islands, on the Irish side. Thus Galehaut and his personal household remained with King Arthur. A week [95] before Candlemas, they set out for the place where the king had summoned all his barons for that day. Meanwhile, Galehaut had sent word to the barons who were awaiting him at Videburgh to go 2The queen’s explanation is not quite consistent with the account given by the author a couple of paragraphs above. In the absence of any narrative-based reason for the difference, one may claim a scribal oversight and replace Micha’s reading of the queen’s statement with the simpler one in Sommer 44: Et elle respont quele estoit venue veoir la bohourdis. Et quant tou me quidoie descendre de la fenestre ou iou seoie, iou chai mais iou ne sui pas granment blechie. (“And she answered that she had come to see the jousting. ‘And when I decided to leave the window where I had been sitting, I fell, but I am not badly hurt.’”) 262 directly to Bredigan, the last castle before Ireland. And so, a week before Candlemas, the king went from Logres to Bredigan, where he met the great throng of Galehaut’s knights and then awaited news of the young lady of Carmelide. Through the week, he weighed how he should behave toward her and sought the advice of the wisest men and greatest barons he had, because he felt quite sure that she had good grounds for her claim and had indeed been disinherited just as he had been given to understand. That was not the case, however, and the lady was instead guilty of making a grossly wrong plea, as you will soon hear. The truth is that King Leodagan of Carmelide had a seneschal whom he was very fond of and who was married to one of the most beautiful women in the world. The king fell in love with her, and the story tells that she had a beautiful daughter with him, the very woman who was now claiming the Round Table from Queen Guenevere and who was also named Guenevere. The two half-sisters looked so much alike that the people who brought them up could hardly tell them apart; and when Queen Guenevere left home to become King Arthur’s bride, the other traveled with her and planned the very kind of betrayal now taking place. [96] She was stopped in time, however. People who became aware of her plan accused her of treason, but she ran away lest she be put to death and spent a long while in foreign lands. Then, urged on by Bertelay, the old knight who came to King Arthur’s court, she undertook the deed after all, since he promised to help her in whatever ways he could, even putting his own life at risk. And so he took her back to the kingdom of Carmelide and gave everyone there to believe that she was Guenevere, the daughter of King Leodagan, and that the king had thrown her out in favor of the seneschal’s daughter. The barons believed the story and, on the advice of the old man, acknowledged her as their lady. Bertelay had worked toward this end because of his bitterness toward King Arthur, who had once stripped him of his inheritance after a murder he had committed; King Arthur, though, did not remember it and knew nothing about it. On Candlemas Day, once the king had heard Mass, which was fittingly high for this day that celebrates Our Lady, the young woman arrived with all the knights and advisors she could gather. This was not the one who had come earlier, but rather the woman who had sent that messenger to the king. She was gowned splendidly and had thirty young ladies with her who were dressed as elegantly as she. She came up to the king and spoke loudly enough to be heard by everyone. [97] “God save Guenevere, daughter of King Leodagan of Carmelide,” she said, “and God confound all the foes of either sex that I have in this hall! King,” she said, “I am called here today to denounce and prove to you the betrayal that I have suffered, as you know from my letter and my messenger; and I am ready to prove my case, as you will decide, either by a knight defending me in single combat or by all the people of my land, the land you stripped me of and drove me from, though I was your true wife and the daughter of the most noble king of Carmelide!” Lancelot, Part III At these words, Galehaut stood up and, with the king’s leave, spoke in behalf of the queen, who had asked him to do so. “My lord,” he said to the king, “we have heard what this lady asks; but it would be right for her to tell us in so many words whether she herself was the victim of the betrayal and who was the agent of it.” “Sir knight,” said the lady, “I am the person who suffered the betrayal, and I add that the Guenevere whom King Arthur has until now considered his wife, was the agent of the betrayal. I am sure, moreover, that she is the woman whom I see over there!” At that, the queen stood up and, coming before the king, stated that she had never had anything to do with such a scheme, “and I am ready,” she said, “to defend myself before your court either by a knight engaged in single combat or by ordeal.” Then Galehaut called upon King Bademagu; he came up, and Galehaut asked him what he thought of the matter. He answered, “My lord, this matter is [98] so grave and so important that it must not be handled without thought and deliberation. And however the proof may be had, whether by battle or by ordeal, the question must first be judged by the present company. It is perfectly reasonable to look into this matter and be sure that this young lady will abide by the judgment of this court whatever it may bring her, whether honor or disgrace.” At that, the knight who had earlier offered to do battle stepped forward and said to the king, “My lord, my lady will ponder whether to accept or reject your judgment.” The king answered that he agreed. Then the accuser withdrew with her advisors, and they spoke together at length. When they came back from their talks, the knight said to the king, “My lord, my lady asks you for a postponement until tomorrow. That is not too long a delay.” The king, with the approval of his barons, granted it, and the lady left the court with her retinue and rode as far away as she could that day. That night, she took counsel with her barons, and the old knight Bertelay said to her, “My lady, if you accept the judgment of King Arthur, you may soon have grounds to regret it, because he would like to be sure tomorrow that you will abide by whatever his judgment entails. And I am sure that the judgment will be that, if the queen wants the ordeal, [99] she may have it. If she goes through with it and is proved innocent, you will be put to death, because you are subject, if she is innocent of the betrayal, to the same punishment that would be meted out to her if she were shown to be guilty. And the judgment of the court will be in favor of the ordeal, even if it is not the right thing to do. Nor is it an easy thing to overturn a judgment handed down in front of all the barons; you would have to proceed by way of a champion in battle, and if a battle were granted you, you would not do too well. “For these reasons, you need to think of another way out; and if you take any advice into account, I would like you to listen to mine more than any other, because once such an important project has been undertaken it must not be abandoned for fear of sin. And I do not see how you could succeed in this undertaking without some kind of betrayal or other disloyalty. But I would rather betray Lancelot, Part IIT someone than fail to carry through and thereby lose what I have always wanted. I’ll show you how to make this effort succeed!” “Tell me, dear friend!” she said. “I advise you,” he said, “to send word to the king in the morning that you are not well and that you are not as fully enlightened about your situation as you need to be. [100] Ask him for a single day’s postponement, and he will grant it, as he would hardly be violating any rights thereby. Then send one of your knights to him with a message that I will dictate. You may be sure that, barring some extraordinary event, I will tomorrow evening hand the king over to you as your prisoner. “Now, do you know how you'll trap him? You will send him word that there is a wild boar in these woods larger than any ever caught. But the messenger will not let him know that he comes from you; he'll say instead that he is a local man, bringing this news to please the king. The king, you see, is a more eager hunter than anyone else and is happiest when he hears such news; so I know that he will go out hunting right away. Meanwhile, you will have sent some thirty knights of yours into the woods. We’ll capture him and take him off at once to the kingdom of Carmelide, and you will make a prisoner of him, but a quite happy one, if only you care to capture him before he can escape you. That is what I advise you to do, because you cannot have your way with him by force nearly so well as by cunning.” With that plan the lady and her advisors were in agreement. She sent out three of her knights to ask King Arthur for the postponement, and a fourth was supposed to take him the news of the wild boar. They rode into Bredigan early in the morning and asked the king for the delay, just as they had been ordered. He consulted his advisors and then agreed, [101] but with the warning that if the lady did not appear the next day, nothing she might say would ever again be believed. With that, the three messengers left and as soon as they were out of the town, the fourth appeared at court and, coming up to the king as if on an important mission, spoke loudly enough to be heard by everyone. “God save the king and his knights!” he said. “King, I bring you unusual news from the woods. In the forest of Bredigan I have seen the largest boar ever glimpsed, and so fierce that no one is bold enough to dare attack it. It has so harried the countryside all around that no one dares linger outside a fortress. If you do not save us, you cannot be called our rightful king!” During this time, Lancelot was sitting beside the king. He was overjoyed to hear the news of the fierce animal. He jumped up and, joining Galehaut outside on the balcony, repeated to him the news of the boar that was so fierce and large that no one dared attack it. Then Galehaut stood up and went to join the king, who, as soon as he saw him, said, “Galehaut, have you heard the news?” “Let’s go, my lord!” he said. “It’s wonderful news! And whoever kills the boar will certainly earn great honor! Iam sure the lively [102] young knights in here are all ready to try.” He said that because he saw quite clearly that Lancelot was longing to go on the hunt. The king immediately made ready to go to the woods. His horse was brought in; he mounted and rode off, 263 flanked by Lancelot and Galehaut. Sir Gawain went, too, together with Sir Yvain, the son of King Urien, and many others ofthe household. The messenger went ahead, leading them all into the forest; once they were there, he said to the king, “My lord,” he said, “I am afraid we may lose the boar because of all the noise the knights are making.” The king then ordered the knights to halt, while he went on with no more than two huntsmen and two archers. The messenger led them to a stretch of open country not far away. Glancing around, the king saw himself surrounded by over thirty knights, all helmeted, one of whom seized his bridle and warned him not to defend himself, “because you would die at once,” he said. Then the king plainly saw that he was powerless, and he realized that he had been betrayed. Yet he drew his sword and defended himself as mightily as he could, but the knights killed his horse right under him, and they captured the hunters and tied them up; then they captured the king as well, but took care not to hurt or kill him. After that, they sat him on a horse and hurried him away, while far off, in another part of the woods, the knight who had guided him took up a horn and blew it as loudly as he could. Hearing it, Galehaut, who had been very upset by the king’s delay, said, “Good God, [103] that’s the king! I hear him calling us!” With that, they all spurred their horses in the direction of the sound, but as soon as the knight had blown the horn, he dashed off as fast as his mount could carry him toward another spot, where he thought he could better throw them off the track. A bit farther along, he blew the horn again; in this way he led them madly back and forth through the woods all day long, until night fell. Then he rode back to the castle where his lady was staying, and found her very pleased with herself. Meanwhile, King Arthur’s men were very worried to have no reliable news of their lord and the hunters. At last they turned back and found the queen and a crowd of barons at the windows of the great hall, waiting for the king and unaware of anything wrong. When they were told, they were deeply troubled, and the queen said that she was very much afraid the king had been betrayed, “for he has far more enemies,” she said, “than we know.” The news left the queen and all the others looking cheerless, but Galehaut, always stout of heart and knowing how to cope with any misfortune, comforted them all and said to the queen, “My lady, you mustn’t think that anyone would dare do harm to my lord the king. You mustn’t think he is dead. But he loves hunting, and I am sure he found the boar just as big and remarkable as had been reported. He rode after it to kill it, since he was hardly going to wait for anyone else, because he wanted to be able to laugh [104] later on at the knights who had bragged that they would do it. But the woods are broad and deep, with many hills and valleys and impassable places where he might be. Wait for tomorrow to be dismayed if he’s not found, for we are going to scour the whole forest, searching for him everywhere.” With that, the barons left and went back to their quarters, but Galehaut remained speaking with the queen, while Lancelot sat on the other side of the room with the 264 lady of Malehaut. The queen was going over the story of the charge leveled against her, and said, “My dear friend, how can J ever win my case, if everyone believes the charge is true and my lord the king has lost respect for me and looks askance at me?” “My lady,” said Galehaut, “I am going to say something rash, but my great desire to do what you want makes me say it: I promise you that you have nothing to fear, for you are more safely guarded than King Arthur is. Now, if you agree, I won’t let anyone stop me from finding and capturing the damsel, wherever she may be; and even at the risk of dishonoring myself, Pll have her handled in such a way that she will never come back here to make any more claims!” “No,” said the queen; “I will not, please God, allow that. I don’t seek to be defended against her accusation by anything but the law, and I won’t ever, please God, be tempted by sinful means but will wholly accept the king’s judgment. I beg you, in the name of God [105] and the love you have for me, to make every effort to safeguard my honor in all things; and you see how serious the situation is. You and your companion will not be able to speak with us as freely as you have done until this matter is settled, but you will have to bear it, and everyone will have to live with this burden.” That is how the queen spoke to Galehaut, who understood her meaning and agreed to abide by her wishes. And so they passed the night. The next day, the damsel of Carmelide came to court just as she had the first time, but she found neither the king nor anyone else to greet her except King Bademagu, whom Galehaut had named to speak in the king’s stead. When the lady came before the barons, she asked for King Arthur just as if she had had no news of him, and King Bademagu stood up and said, “My lady, my lord the king is not here now but is attending to important matters that he cannot leave for this case. He has so much trust in us that he has left us in his stead, and we are ready to act with as much justice as he.” The lady, who knew quite well what was happening, answered that she would accept a lawful ruling only from the lips of the king, “because he instructed me to appear today before himself.” “You will accept my ruling,” said King Bademagu, “with the following promise. I will give you all the many knights present in this castle as hostages [106] to guarantee that my lord will honor whatever is decided here.” The lady answered that she would treat with no man on earth except King Arthur himself, “because I am sure,” she said, “that your ruling would not be as just as his; the matter, after all, concerns him more than anyone else.” Then she turned to leave the court, saying to all the barons present that she was going away convinced that the king’s court was bereft of justice. But as she was going, her advisors recommended that she wait until the usual time for pleas—indeed, until the end of the sitting—and she agreed. Then, having waited until the hour of nones had passed, she left, saying to all the knights that it was clear King Arthur was hiding from her and that she could not hope for justice under his roof. King Bademagu and the other barons offered her all the warrants they could, but she would have none of them, however urgently they Lancelot, Part IIT pressed her. Instead, she left, making a great show of disappointment and anger. So she went home and found King Arthur in her prison at Chains Castle, just as she had ordered. She was happy to know that she now had what she had always longed for. Elsewhere, Arthur’s knights were sorely troubled, having searched for the king throughout the woods and found no trace of him but his dead horse. [107] Seeing that, they had been as shocked as if they had seen the king himself dead before their eyes. They rode back to Bredigan overwhelmed, and then the whole court was so upset that they did not know what they could do; there was no one who doubted the king had been killed. They searched through all the lands of the world to find some news of him, but they could learn no more than if he had fallen into an abyss. Then the young woman came to the king and, according to the story, tried to frighten him, saying, “King, I have managed by force and cunning® to capture you. Now you may be sure that you will never leave my prison until I have all the men of the Round Table in my power, just as my father had; and since you are not gracious enough to grant me justice, it is only right that I should take it into my own hands, and I will do it so strikingly that it will be talked of long after my death.” Thus King Arthur remained with the woman, and his people never found out what had become of him. She often came to see him, and he found her courteous and pleasant to speak with. At length, he forgot his love for the queen, and throughout the time he stayed in prison, the damsel slept with him every night. [108] At Easter, once winter was past, the king said that he could not bear his imprisonment any more and would do whatever she ordered, for he would not last much longer, he claimed, in captivity. “And I am more concerned,” he said, “about my people, who have had no news of me, than I am about myself; they surely think I am dead.” “So help me God,” she answered, “I will never risk letting you out of my prison, for I don’t doubt that if I let you go back to your land, I would lose you forever. It’s because you were the most valiant knight of your age that my father gave me to you, and I want to keep you as my lord—that is, my husband—and companion, just as decreed by the Holy Church. And because you are the worthiest man in the world, I seized you by force when graciousness was not enough. No one could satisfy me as well as you, and I would rather you were somewhat less important but mine than master of the whole world but lost to me.” “So help me God, dear love,” said the king, “I love you more now than any other woman alive; and there is no doubt I truly loved the wife I had, but you have made me utterly forget her. I love you so much that I’ll do whatever you wish; just tell me what you want me to do.” “I want you to pledge,” she said, “in front of all your vassals, to make me your wife and regard me henceforth as 3“cunning” translates not Micha’s reading, aventure (“risk, chance”), but the ms. variant engin, which makes better sense in the context and also echoes Bertelay’s final point on p. [100]. Lancelot, Part IIT spouse and as queen. Before I let you go, you must swear on holy relics, in front of all my knights, that you will uphold your obligations to me.” The king promised to do so. “But,” he said, “I do not want to be rebuked by my learned clerks or my barons, and for that reason I want you to do something for me. Have the most important of your barons [109] gather before me to bear witness, as men who know the truth of the matter, that you are the daughter of King Leodagan and the one to whom I am bound in true marriage. They will make this statement in front of all my barons, whom I will have sent for in time to gather before you and who will become your liegemen.” Guenevere* answered that she was ready to do this, “and I want it to be,” she added, “on Ascension Day; but before sending for your men, you must take an oath to uphold your promises to me.” Then the relics were brought in, and the king took the oath in front of all of Guenevere’s knights. After that, she dictated a letter that went out to the whole of Carmelide, summoning all her barons, on Ascension Day, to Zelegebre, the head city of the kingdom. For his part, the king sent word to the kingdom of Britain, first to Sir Gawain, his nephew, and then to his other friends, telling them that he was in sound health and doing well and that they should all come to Zelegebre on Ascension Day, as he had business with them. But at this point the story stops speaking about the king and the damsel and turns to the barons of Britain, who thought they had lost their lord forever. [110] At 78. Arthur Returns to Court and Proclaims the False Guenevere Queen.’ At this point the story says that when the king was lost in the woods of Bredigan, the barons went home overwhelmed with grief, and the queen went away to Carduel so upset that she would never move from the place before hearing some news of the king. Now, seeing their land without a master, the barons began to war with one another, though this was unbearable to the worthy and noble among them who sought only the general good. They came to Sir Gawain, who had been staying with the queen, along with Galehaut, Lancelot, Sir Yvain, and Kay the Seneschal; these five good men never left the queen but stayed by her side all the time, every one of them doing his best to share her burden. One of the barons who came to Sir Gawain was King Aguisant of Scotland, together with the kings of Ireland, the Franks, the Borderlands, and Wales, and others; there were twelve all together. Once in the presence of the queen and Sir Gawain, they came to the point and said that they would not allow the land to go on any longer without a protector. Galehaut, who was very wise, said, “My lords, you have been friends to my lord King Arthur and will be as long as 4«Guenevere”: that is, the false Guenevere. 1 Corresponds to Micha I:VII; Sommer IV:51-56. 265 he lives. The crown is to be defended not only by him but by all of us, for he is just [111] one man, as each of you is. With that in mind, the queen asks you for a short delay, and Sir Gawain, who is the king’s closest kinsman, urges you to wait for the king’s return until Easter. With God’s help, we will have good news by then, but if not, you should go ahead with your plan to call a meeting of the lords of the land.” At Galehaut’s prompting, a postponement until Easter was agreed on, at which time all the kings came back to court, together with other chief vassals. Seeing that the king had not returned, they said that they did not want to leave the land any longer without an overlord; and the queen and Sir Gawain answered that they would not go against the will of the group, but would consent to whatever they decided to do. Thereupon the great barons met by themselves to ponder whom they might make king. Some said that it should be Lancelot, because he was young and such a fine knight that he had the prowess to conquer the whole world. Others said that that would not be right, for if he were crowned and King Arthur returned, Lancelot was not a man to hand him back the crown at any price. “But let us name Sir Gawain, his nephew, king; he is more levelheaded and will more readily hand back the crown if the king returns.” They all [112] agreed and chose him for that honor, then asked him to accept. He said that he would never— Heaven forbid!—accept that honor or any other unless he had reliable news of his uncle’s fate, “for a man would have to be a hotheaded fool,” he added, “to put himself in the place of such a worthy ruler as my uncle. But I’ll tell you what you can do if you believe it is right: put in charge of the land the worthiest man you find among you, for a period of one year, in the hope of hearing meanwhile whether the king is dead or alive.” But they answered that they would do nothing of the kind and that if he wanted the crown, he should take it; and if not, they would soon choose someone else. At that, Galehaut drew Sir Gawain aside and, with the queen, Lancelot, and Kay the Seneschal present as well, spoke like the wise man he was. “Sir Gawain,” he said, “it is plain to me that these men are not very warmhearted toward King Arthur or toward you, and I am sure that they offered you the crown because they believed you would not accept it. I beg you to accept it, however—I very much want you to—and once you have it, we'll seek a postponement until a certain time; within that time we'll find out whether my lord the king is dead or alive. And you may be sure that if he is dead, we will know it soon enough.” After more such urging by Galehaut, Sir Gawain reluctantly agreed. He told the barons that he would accept the honor that they had offered him, because he did not want the kingdom to fall into foreign hands through his withdrawal. [113] Then King Aguisant of Scotland spoke up. He was a cousin of Sir Gawain and, of all the barons, the one who would most have liked Sir Gawain not to 266 accept the crown;* both land and clan made him very powerful, and he was no more than forty-five years old. When he heard the terms under which Galehaut wanted Sir Gawain to accept the crown, he thought it was all very sensible and said, “Good cousin, accept this honor according to Galehaut’s terms.” Sir Gawain wept so much as he answered that it was hard to understand what he was trying to say; in any case, he accepted the crown as offered, and even the most hardhearted man had to weep at that point. Hearing himself named king, Sir Gawain said that he wished God would take away his life so he wouldn’t last as such until evening; and the knights of the king’s household were so overcome with grief that no one could comfort them. But the [114] queen grieved more than anyone else. She locked herself into a little room where no one could see her and cried out in a voice that could be heard in the great hall, saying, “Dear Lord God, now all prowess is gone and all joy turned to sorrow!” She said those words at least seven times, and she fell into a swoon each time. Hearing what was going on, Galehaut was very upset, and Lancelot, who had been weeping alongside Sir Gawain, jumped up from his seat. They went to the door of the queen’s room, and, finding it locked, Galehaut pushed against it so hard that it shattered. The queen jumped up and ran into an alcove, where she sat down and wiped her eyes. As soon as she saw Galehaut, she rose to greet him, but his answer was a rebuke for all her grieving. “My lady,” he said, “you’re going too far, mourning like this. God willing, my lord the king is still alive and well wherever he may be. Of course, if you knew for certain that he was dead, it would be a mistake for anyone to chide you for mourning.” “It’s because I am not convinced that he is dead,” she answered, “that I am grieving like this, hoping that God will perhaps soon give him back to me; I know that God has often listened to greater sinners than I am. But, you know, his loss is to be lamented not only for himself but for the woe it has brought to everyone else as well; for a great man hardly needs to be lamented when he dies at the height of his honor and fame, which is in fact a better time for praise than [115] during his lifetime. The only thing that makes me wonder is how kings and knights could feel any happiness after the death of so great a man.” Queen Guenevere’s grief was great, and the king’s knights were no less stricken and in tears. But the queen was careful not to let too much sorrow show when Lancelot was near, because she knew that he was so deeply pained that it would almost craze him. Many a time he would have set out in search of King Arthur, but the queen said to him one day, “My dear friend, do you mean to kill me?” “No, my lady,” he answered. “Then don’t go anywhere,” she said, “because with the loss I have had, you would be killing me. You are my only comfort,” she said. They remained in that woeful state until after Easter. 2Sommer 52 adds the explanation, quar elle li estoit promise . aussi tot comme mesire Gawuain lauoit refusee (“because he had been promised the crown once Sir Gawain had rejected it”). Lancelot, Part [IT That’s when the messengers came whom the king had sent from Carmelide, the two huntsmen who had been captured with him in the woods. They asked for news of Sir Gawain as soon as they reached Carduel, and they were told that he was staying with the queen in the palace. They rode straight toward the great hall, where Sir Gawain was in the company of a throng of knights. Seeing them come in, he jumped up to greet them before they even spoke and, embracing one after the other, begged them, by God, to give him good news. The first to speak answered, “Sir, my lord greets you [116] as his liegeman, as his dear nephew, and as the man he loves more than any other; and he sends you word that he is in sound health and doing well in the land of Carmelide. An important matter has lately arisen, however, for which he needs to gather his barons together. He wishes you, then, as you prize his love, to summon them in his behalf to appear on Ascension Day at Zelegebre, the chief city of the kingdom of Carmelide.” Hardly had the two messengers reached the palace when the news of their coming spread to the queen’s quarters. At the first word, she rose to go see them, rather than wait for them to come to her. Galehaut, who was always by her side and shared her woes and sorrows, went with her to the place where Sir Gawain was still sitting and listening to the two bearers of news. When Sir Gawain saw the queen, he ran up and embraced her, saying, “My lady, come hear the good news!” Delighted and eager to hear it, she sat down on the couch next to Sir Gawain, and he started again at the beginning, but what he told her of the king in Carmelide was not the whole truth, as he feared to upset her. The huntsmen told from beginning to end how the king had been captured and carried off and how his barons were to meet him on Ascension Day; and to prove the huntsmen were trustworthy messengers, “I will give you,” said one of them to [117] Sir Gawain, “tokens of good faith that come from the king.” And Sir Gawain recognized them as tokens known only to the king and himself. There were no such tokens for the queen, however, which made her suspect that the king no longer felt toward her as he used to feel and that the woman who had him in prison had gained some sway over his heart. This made her very uneasy, but she showed a smiling face nonetheless because of the news just brought. Sir Gawain sent messengers throughout the lands of Britain, summoning all barons in the name of the king to appear two weeks before Ascension Day in the same place where they had met at Candlemas, in other words, Bredigan castle; from there they would have to go to the king, who was staying some seven days’ riding away. He wanted them to know, too, that the king was safe and well and in thrall to no one. So Sir Gawain called together all the barons of the kingdom. The queen, speaking in private with Galehaut, said to him through her tears, “As God is my witness, Galehaut,” she said, “I need your advice now more than ever. Please help me! I am sure that what that damsel has done to King Arthur in her prison is going to bring me no little trouble; yet I have no doubt that it will come to me through my own sin, because I behaved so badly toward the Lancelot, Part II worthiest man in the world. But the power of the love that led me to do it was so great that I could not resist it; and besides, what was calling me was the valor of the [118] finest of knights. “Still, 1am not so afraid that the king will leave me as I am that he will have me put to death, because if he let me live, there would never come a day when I would be in want, since I cannot be poor as long as he lets me live. But if he had me slain, it would be a terrible loss, for along with my body I could well lose my soul! You are the only person I can turn to, though many people would be sorry to see my downfall, just as you would, who have always stood beside me.” “My lady,” said Galehaut, “don’t be afraid you will die. A thousand knights would have to die before you could be put to death. If the king wanted to do away with you, he would not be able to do it, for I promise I will send for my whole army, and everyone will be ready for battle on the same day Sir Gawain has told the barons to gather. And even if it brings me King Arthur’s hatred forever, you can count on being rescued if you are indeed sentenced to death; for I would rather give up life and limb than let you die. “Feel perfectly safe, then; you have no need to worry about dying like that as long as I remain alive. Moreover, if it happens that the king casts you aside, I will give you a kingdom, the finest and best of all my holdings, and it will be yours for the rest of your life. Don’t worry, then, about death or divorce, for you may very well never see either of them happen, and in any case you will have strong backing.” In that way Galehaut comforted the queen. Meanwhile, the day of reckoning was drawing near, and the queen set out for Bredigan with Sir Gawain and the people of her household. Once there, [119] they spent two weeks waiting for all the barons to arrive. Galehaut’s horsemen came, too, which surprised Sir Gawain and made him ask why such a force had been sent for. Galehaut answered, “Because, if the king were being held prisoner somewhere and needed help, we would have to tear down a fortress to reach him. Besides, it is only right that everyone should come with all the backing he can; we need a great troop of men to search for so worthy a man as my lord.” After that two-week stay, they left for Carmelide and reached Zelegebre three days before Ascension. Meanwhile, Guenevere’s accuser had spoken to all her barons and they had assured her of their support, certain in their belief that she was their lady. They had for her the love that they were duty-bound to have for their lady, and they had as much deadly hatred for the queen as the royal vassals had great love for her. On Ascension Day, when all the barons were gathered, the king spoke to them very softly. “My lords,” he said, “I have sent for you as my loyal barons because it would be wrong to settle an important matter without your advice. You all heard the complaint that the lady brought to my court at Candlemas, in which I for one believed her [120] to be wrong. But things have since moved ahead to the point where I am now sure that she is right and that she was betrayed by the woman who has long been queen dishonestly. You will hear all the people of this realm bear 267 witness that their lady is the daughter of King Leodagan and the queen his wife and that the woman who has lived with me is the daughter of their seneschal. That is why I have sent for you, for I have wantonly sinned out of ignorance. Now I ask that you help save me and advise me as best you can.” These words left them so shocked that no one could speak, and Sir Gawain wept with such feeling that he might have been looking at the queen already dead. Galehaut, however, was not to be silenced, but strode forward and spoke in front of all the barons. “My lord,” he said, “you are held to be the worthiest man in the world, and it would not be fitting for you to do something for which you would be blamed or considered mad and then, too late, be sorry. But how has my lady come to be charged with this betrayal?” “It seems to me, my lords,” said the king, “that you do not know the truth as well as the good men of this land. They report that King Leodagan was very wise and intelligent and was surrounded by many worthy men; and the people who used to spend every day with him know the truth better than strangers can.” “It is true, my lord,” said Galehaut, “that you are held to be very wise, but it does not seem reasonable that something that has been in place so long should suddenly be impugned. No claim until now was ever made in this country or in any other, nor was anyone ever seen to deny my lady’s rank as queen.” “I know how matters stand,” said the king, “and were it not for the great sin of it all, I would love her more than any other woman, but if I kept her as my wife, I would be keeping her against God’s will. For the divorce there will be no ordeal or battle: the good men of this realm will simply decide who will be queen.” [121] With that, the discussion was over, and those who backed the queen were called upon to make themselves known. With the queen standing to one side and her foe to the other, the king said to the barons of the country, “My lords, you are my liegemen, bound to me by an oath of fealty. A conflict between these two ladies has now come before me, inasmuch as the one who holds this land claims to be the daughter of your late lord and his wife and to be married to me, while the one whom I have always looked upon as my wife makes the same claim. I have brought you together here because only you can know the truth of the matter, and so I want you to swear to me on holy relics that in speaking out you will not be swayed by love or hate and that you will recognize as queen the lady who is queen by right.” Then Bertelay the Old stepped forward and, laying his hand on the relics that had just been brought in, said that, as God and His saints were his witnesses, this Guenevere over here was the daughter of the king and queen of Carmelide, wife of King Arthur and anointed queen; and while so swearing, he held the lady by the hand. After him all the great barons of the land took the same oath, as did the old knights who had been attached to Leodagan’s court. On the queen’s side there were, of course, many people who had been part of her household ever since she had become queen, but not one of them was recognized or heard, because the king was set against them. 268 In this way the queen was cast aside by her lord, and the woman who had no right to be was acknowledged as queen; and that’s the thing for which King Arthur received the greatest blame. The day was one filled with joy for the local people, while [122] those from the kingdom of Logres were no less filled with sorrow. Then the king spoke to his men and asked what they thought should be done with the woman who “passed for queen so long but had no right to.” Galehaut, seeing what the king had in mind, recommended that he wait until Pentecost and “by then you will have decided what to do, for something as startling as this cannot go unavenged.” He put it that way so that the king would think him an ally, and the king was grateful and said that he would listen to his advice. Then, turning to Sir Gawain, he ordered him to take charge of the queen until the day of Pentecost, “and take care that you surrender her to me at that time, for by all the relics in that place,” and here he pointed toward a chapel, “you will never again have my love if you don’t bring her back to me. It would be a breach of loyalty, since I am handing her over to you on the strength of everything you hold from me.” “My lord,” said Sir Gawain, “I will keep her well. I have often taken care of her since the time you came to this country.” With that, he and Galehaut went up to the queen and with a great escort of knights took her back to her quarters. Galehaut said to her with a laugh, “My lady, may God grant that Sir Gawain keep close watch over you, as everything he holds from his uncle the king is at stake!” [123] She looked as carefree as if there were nothing wrong and answered with a smile, “Indeed, my lord, he'll have no trouble guarding me. So help me God, if this thing is to bring about my death, Id like it to be now, so that no one would be hurt but me. If I died just as Iam right now, there is only one thing that could bring me any comfort.” 79. Lancelot, as Guenevere’s Champion, Defeats Three Foes; He Breaks with Arthur.’ Thus the queen remained in the custody of Sir Gawain until Pentecost, when she was brought before all the barons. The king spoke to them, ordering that, as his liegemen, they should rightly judge what punishment was to be meted out to the woman who had so long made him lie in mortal sin. The men whom he ordered to pronounce sentence were from the land of Logres, and he was convinced they dared not refuse; and he would have liked them to condemn her to death. Indeed, the other woman had bewitched him with drugs and spells, and that very day had fallen to his feet and begged him to condemn her rival if he ever wanted to find happiness with her. When, as you have heard, he had ordered his barons to decide, they withdrew to ponder the matter together. Sir Gawain, who had always had great love for the queen, was the first to speak, saying that he would never endorse a death sentence; and all the others agreed. 'Corresponds to Micha I: VII; Sommer I'V:56-72. Lancelot, Part II Galehaut spoke next. “We will have to be very tactful with the king,” he said, “since, as far as I can see, he would like to have my lady put to death, whereas it is clear that you do not want [124] that to happen. For that reason, it would be useful for you to ask for a postponement of the sentence until some later date. In the meantime, my lord the king and all of us will go our separate ways, and it may well happen that the man who has plunged us into this madness will lose some of his ardor for his new love. If the delay is denied, tell him that it is not right to pass sentence on such an important holiday before everyone has had enough time to ponder and reflect.” They all agreed, then came back to the king and asked for the postponement; their spokesman was Galehaut himself, who knew how to argue the case and set forth the difficulties that should make the king grant the delay. The king would readily have granted it, but the new mistress of his heart had so cowed him that he swore there would, so help him God, be no further postponement, and in fact, by the faith they had sworn him, they had better do as ordered. “And if you refuse,” he said, “it won’t be hard to find someone else to do it!” The men answered that, urged like that, they would do nothing, since they realized that the sentence would entail the lady’s death now that she had been stripped of her right to be queen. Seeing that they would take no action, the king scoffed at them and swore that the decision would be made before nightfall, “and I myself,” he said, “will make it!” [125] Then he called upon the barons of Carmelide, ordering them, as his liegemen, to render judgment. Bertelay the Old, who was ever in league with his lady, said, “My lord, we want you to be part of this; in fact it is necessary, now that the great barons of Britain have abstained and you have given us the task. We want you to be with us in person; you are such a wise man that you can guide us all toward the right decision.” “Since you have asked me,” said the king, “I will not say no.” Then he rose and went to confer with them. Sir Gawain and the barons of Britain were gathered on the other side, and with them were Galehaut, who dearly loved the queen, and his companion Lancelot, who was determined that, if his lady died, he would die, too. Galehaut said to the Sir Gawain and the others, “My lords, if the judgment is that she should be put to death tomorrow, what will we do?” Sir Gawain said that he would not stay to see that happen, but would turn his back on his uncle’s house and exile himself to foreign lands, and the same was said by Sir Yvain the son of King Urien and by Kay the Seneschal and all the kings and counts. Everyone agreed on this course. “I swear!” said Galehaut. “How can worthy men love the queen so well and yet tolerate her death? For my part, I would rather lose my standing and my land than [126] let her die! But it is necessary to go about things carefully, so that my lady’s honor is safeguarded, and that is why I want you to ask the king, for the sake of all of us together, to allow her to live. Make that plea as soon as he is ready to pass sentence, and if he refuses to grant it, wait for the sentence to be fully stated. Then, once you have heard that Lancelot, Part Il] she is sentenced to death, take leave of him, all of you, saying that nothing could make you stay here.” With that, their meeting was over, and Galehaut drew Lancelot aside, who was racked with sorrow. “My dear, good friend,” he said, “don’t be dismayed by what you will hear said about my lady; but be sure of this, that you will see me today make one of the boldest moves that you have ever seen, for you will see the man held to be the most valorous in the world become the most astounded.” “My lord,” said Lancelot, “what do you mean?” “Yes, indeed,” he answered, “if the king condemns my lady to death, IJ will find a way to make people talk about it forever! What I have in mind is to contest his sentence; I will settle the matter with him in one-to-one combat, facing either him ora knight of his choosing.” “No, my lord,” said Lancelot, “you won’t do that! The king would hate you forever, and it would be a great pity if there were hatred between two such noble men. No, I will be the only one to fight! For if the king hates me, it won’t be a matter of much importance; he would be more uneasy about you than about me. So I beg you, if you cherish my love, to let no one else take arms against this judgment.” Galehaut agreed, but “you will have to move,” he said, “very carefully, because you belong to the king’s house and are a knight of the Round Table. You would be more quickly [127] blamed if you did anything harmful to the king.” “Tell me what to do, then,” said Lancelot. “When you hear that my lady is condemned to death,” said Galehaut, “look toward me and, as soon as I have given you a sign, go up to the king and give up your place at the Round Table and in his household. Then ask him who was responsible for that sentence and, if he says it came from him, then present your challenge and fight him, if he is willing, or his defender.” While the two of them were speaking, the king and the barons of Carmelide came back from their discussion. At the king’s order, Bertelay the Old began to state the verdict, speaking loudly enough to be heard by everyone. “Lord barons of Britain,” he said, “the judgment that we have reached is condoned by my lord King Arthur. The judgment is that, because the said Guenevere stayed with the king and long shared his life in spite of God and reason, she is to be punished as you now hear: She shall lose all the sacramental marks of a queen. Because she wore the crown unwarrantedly, the place where it sat shall be stripped and disgraced, that is, her hair shall be cut off. Likewise, because a queen receives unction in the hands, the skin of her palms shall be stripped away and, to be better recognized, she shall lose the skin of her fingers as well. Afterwards, she shall leave the territories of my lord the king and never come back.” Hearing that, the barons of Britain were filled with rage, and everyone said that he would never [128] stay ina place where that could be done. Sir Gawain said that, if the king himself had not partaken in that judgment, all those who had would have been disgraced; and Sir Yvain spoke likewise. Then Sir Kay the Seneschal came forward, so aroused that he almost called the king a false judge; he went up to 269 the king as if ready to throw down his gage.* At that, Galehaut looked toward his companion and gave him a sign, and Lancelot darted through the crowd, tearing away from his neck a cloak of rich orphreyed silk with ermine lining just like the one worn by Galehaut. When he stood before the king, everyone crowded around to hear what he wanted to say, and many people gaped to see him come up without his cloak. Lancelot was extremely handsome.® His dark face was radiant with gentleness and breeding; nor did he yet have a beard, as he had been made a knight only three years before, when he was no more than fifteen.4 His mouth was small and well shaped, [129] and his forehead broad, his hair auburn and curly. His neck was sturdy and well proportioned to his head and body; his chest was broad, and his arms and shoulders were fittingly fleshed out and muscled; his hands were long and full-sized and soft to the touch. He had a well-arched back and shapely hips, and his whole body was so well built that he outshone all other knights of his size; nor was he small, for, as the story of his life recounts, when he had flung his cloak aside, he stood a half-foot taller than Sir Gawain, and he looked all the more striking for being clad in tunic alone. He came, as you have heard, down the great hall, hot with anger, pressing his way through the crowd. He reached Kay the Seneschal just as Kay, standing before the king, was offering to do battle. Throwing himself between them, Lancelot spun the seneschal away. Angered by such an insult, Kay pushed his way back in front of Lancelot, but Lancelot thrust him back once more, saying, “Sir Kay, don’t offer to take this battle on! Neither you nor any other knight present here will fight this battle! It’s too great a matter for you!” “Why, my lord,” said Kay, “should I not do it, or any other knight, either?” “Because someone better than you will do it,” said Lancelot. “And who is that?” said Kay, who felt scorned. “You'll see,” said Lancelot, “when the time comes!” These words brought Lancelot no credit, but he did not care, for when he was angry [130] he could not tell thoughtful speech from rash. Besides, in saying that someone better than Kay would undertake the battle, he had been thinking not of himself but of the queen, since in everything he did he felt more spurred to act by her than by himself. Lancelot turned to the king and said, “My lord, I ask you, on behalf of the good men present here and on my own, whether this sentence comes from you.” The king answered that indeed it did, “but I reached the judgment not alone, but together with many other worthy men,” and he pointed them out, as they were standing there. 2“throw down his gage”: that is, issue his challenge by throwing down a cap, glove, or the like, to be picked up by the man accepting the challenge. 3Cf. the earlier portrait of Lancelot, in chapter 9. 4The age of eighteen is specified at the beginning of chapter 21. As for the equivalent of the present description in Sommer 59, it includes no indication of Lancelot’s age. 270 “My lord,” said Lancelot, “I have been for a while a knight of the Round Table, thanks to your admitting me to that fellowship. But I now withdraw from it and withdraw from your household, for I wish to owe you nothing any longer.” “Why, my dear friend?” said the king. “Because,” he answered, “I could not defend any cause against you if I remained a knight of the Round Table or of your household.” “And what cause,” said the king, “do you mean to defend against me?” “I hold,” said Lancelot, “that the judgment you have passed on my lady is wrong and disloyal, and I am ready to prove it in combat with you or anyone else. If one knight is not enough, I’ll face two or even three!” When Kay the Seneschal heard this, he could not hold himself back, but said that the arrogance had now reached its peak and that Lancelot should be quite content with a single knight and that it was outrageous of him to claim to be more valiant than everyone else. “What does it matter to you, [131] Sir Kay?” said Lancelot. “I swear, by my allegiance to my lord Galehaut standing over there, whom I love far more than all the other knights in the world, that when the battle takes place, you would not want, for all the land of this king here, to be even the fourth! And just because you have spoken the way you have, I will fight against three, whether it’s right or wrong; for I know that the rules of sentencing do not let a knight do battle against three men, unless he appeals of his own free will. Well, I want to do it, and of my own free will, so that my lady’s innocence will be as plain as possible!” “Lancelot,” said the king, “it is true that you are a very brave knight, and your exploits are known in many lands, but you have taken on more than you should in contesting my judgment. This is the first time I have ever found a knight who dared do sucha thing. Moreover, it is reckless of you to want to do battle with three knights; such madness would be a terrible misfortune. Give up the idea and be my companion!” But he answered that he would not give it up, if only on account of Kay the Seneschal, and he asked that he be one of the three. The king said that, insofar as he, could stop it, he would not allow him to face three opponents at his court. The barons of Carmelide, though, felt themselves shamed and scorned to hear Lancelot challenge the sentence and presume to take on three of the best knights. They offered to fight [132] him and asked the king to accept both sides’ pledges. But the king, eager to restore calm, said that he wanted the matter to go no further. “T want you to know,” he said to them, “that this man is the finest knight alive, and I would not want, for all my land, to let him die in shame.” Still, Lancelot insisted that he would not leave without having his battle and that he would prove the judgment false and those who had made it disloyal. The king made a great effort to convince him to give up the battle, but no argument carried and Lancelot, on his knees before him, held out his gage. Meanwhile, the barons of Carmelide came forward to oppose him, and so the king with great Lancelot, Part III regret accepted the pledges, worried about Lancelot and fearing he would be defeated. Thus the two sides presented their pledges; but at the last moment, Galehaut® said that it was unreasonable for one knight to face three, and the king himself agreed, as he very much wanted Lancelot not to fight. But Bertelay the Old, wicked to the core, jumped up and came forward, saying to the king, “My lord, the pledges have been given by him and by three opponents, and the battle must take place just as he has asked. If he does not want it after all, we are ready to hear the judgment of your court and see the sentence carried out by [133] those who favor it.” At those words, Lancelot swore in no uncertain terms that he would fight no fewer than three knights, and he begged Galehaut® to let him have his battle. He was so eager that Galehaut dared not deny him but said to the king, “My lord, Lancelot will, after all, do battle as he has undertaken to do, that is, to you or to me he will hand over three defeated opponents within the day set aside for the battle, in accordance with our customs; that means fighting one knight after another.” The barons of Carmelide, however, said that they would not have it that way, wanting instead to have the three face him together. Just as Lancelot was stepping forward to agree, Galehaut pulled him back and swore that he would never love him anymore if he did battle on any terms but his. “Let them speak,” he said, “and you be guided by what I tell you.” “I won’t say another word, my lord,” said Lancelot; “just let me not lose my honor.” “Your honor,” he answered, “will not be lost.” Then Galehaut went up to the barons of Carmelide, who, discussing the terms of the battle, said it could not be the way he had proposed. “I swear,” said Galehaut, “not for all your insistence can your terms be accepted in the house of my lord the king! [134] And your urging has brought you more shame than honor, for now it seems your country does not have all the fine knights it claims.” Galehaut went on until the other side agreed to his terms. The king then set the battle for the week after Pentecost and insisted on a guaranty from the men of Carmelide, as he dared do nothing that he thought might vex Galehaut. The day after Pentecost the king made ready to travel back to his own country, and on Tuesday he took his leave; he set sail with his party and arrived at Bredigan on Saturday. Meanwhile, the barons of Carmelide had chosen the three knights who were to fight; they were tall and strong and renowned at home, and the eldest of them was not more than fifty years old. On Monday morning they were ready in the fields below Bredigan, armed in the way 5“Galehaut” as in Micha variants, Micha’s corrections ([X:351), Sommer 61, and Lecoy 265; Micha has “Sir Gawain.” 6“Galehaut”: literally, “Sir Galehaut.” The presence of the title, most unusual for Galehaut but normal for Gawain, is a second evidence of confusion of the two characters in this scene; cf. preceding paragraph and note. Note that a few mss. show “Sir Gawain” in this paragraph as well, both in the present sentence and in the next. Lancelot, Part IIT of their country and as well as they could be; on the other side was Lancelot, accompanied by a number of worthy knights to help him arm. First, there were Galehaut and his barons; then, from the house of King Arthur came Sir Gawain, who with his own hands tied straps and laces and whatever else; he and Galehaut allowed no one else to come so near. Once Lancelot was armored, Galehaut buckled [135] his own sword on him and asked him to wear it out of love for him; and Lancelot said he would, as he loved his lord Galehaut with all his heart. Then the king made an effort to annul the battle if at all possible, but Lancelot would not be moved, no matter who might plead with him. Sir Gawain said to the king and Galehaut that they should be confident and let him fight, since that was his will; he himself was not fearful, “because no one knows his strength as well as I do.” Then the king ordered the guards onto the field; Galehaut was one of them, along with King Yder, the king of the Franks, the king of the Land Beyond the Borders, King Aguisant, Sir Gawain and a number of worthy knights; there were twenty in all, kings as well as counts. The battle took place below the king’s palace, for most of his palaces stood by a river. One of the queens was at a window, and the one for whom Lancelot was fighting had gone up to the tower together with Kay the Seneschal, to whom she had been entrusted until the end of the battle; with them were Sagremor the Unruly, Girflet the son of Doon, and a large group of other knights. Down below, Galehaut called for a horn and handed it to one of his knights, to be blown at his command; then he ordered the knights who were to fight and the others, too, not to move before hearing the sound of the horn. When they had decided which of the three would go first, Lancelot turned so as to face the tower [136] where the queen was standing. Meanwhile, Galehaut drew back and rode over to where the king was sitting on his horse; in tears, he asked him for a favor. “I grant you whatever you wish,” said the king, “as long as it brings me no dishonor.” “My lord,” said Galehaut, “one knight against three is unheard of. Nor for almost anything in the world should you want Lancelot to be dishonored, for I dare remind you that in a single day he once saved your honor and your land. Now, if you annulled the judgment against the queen, I believe we would be doing him a good turn, as there would be no battle.” “And do you think it was to my honor or to my shame,” said the king, “that he contested my judgment and presumed to go into combat against me? Still, whatever wrong he may have done me, I can’t dislike him: he has only too well deserved my love, and today again, at the consecration of the Host, I prayed that God give him victory. I love him more than any other knight not of my own blood, and I have let him see it.” Then they both rode up to Lancelot, who, armored and armed, was impatient to hear the horn blast. The king said to him, “My dear, good friend, I ask you to give up this battle, and I will do more for you [137] than many people would believe. I’ll get your opponents to give it up as well and will declare the queen innocent of everything that she 271 has been charged with; and I'll do all that for you, if you wish.” “No, my lord,” said Lancelot, “you must do none of that for me. So help me God, I will only leave this battle dead or once I have defeated all three of them! And would to God three knights of your house, convinced they were the finest in the world, were in the place of these three; even then I wouldn’t back down. So help me God,” he said, “there is one man who would never again wear a crown on his head!” The king was ashamed to hear that, for he well understood that Lancelot had him in mind. He and Galehaut turned back in tears, but Gawain said to them they should not be afraid. “God strike me down,” he said, “if those three can stand up to him or if I were willing, for the whole kingdom of Logres, to be a fourth on their side!” Then Lancelot cried out to Sir Gawain, “Will I ever hear that horn?” “Right now, my good friend!” said Sir Gawain. “I know you’re more eager for the fight than worried about wasting time.” With that, Galehaut ordered the horn blown, and as soon as Lancelot heard it, he couched his lance under his arm and spurred his horse into a gallop; leaning into his shield, he thundered forward. The first of the other knights did likewise, and they clashed so mightily that their arms felt the impact together with their shields, which [138] were pierced by the lances. The knight’s lance splintered and flew apart, and Lancelot, thoroughly determined, struck the fellow with such force that the panels of his shield split open and his coat of mail was rent. The attacker was strong and furious, and his weapon strong and sharp; he thrust it right through the man’s body so that it stuck out in back, and knocked him down dead onto the ground. When the guards saw that he was dead, they ordered the horn blown again. Lancelot pulled the lance out of the dead man’s body and galloped toward the new opponent as fast as his horse could carry him. They struck each other’s shield high on the boss, and the new man splintered his lance; then Lancelot pierced the man’s shield and, though his hauberk remained untouched, he arched back from the shock of the blow. Lancelot, who was very powerful, threw him over the croup of the horse and onto the ground, and he was badly wounded in the fall. Lancelot leaned his lance against a tree, quite sure that he would need it again, and came up to the knight, who meanwhile had risen from the ground, drawn his sword, and raised his shield over his head. Lancelot, holding his own sword ready, spurred his horse forward, and the other, seeing him approach on horseback, was frightened. “Knight,” said Lancelot, “don’t be afraid! I won't let myself be blamed for attacking you on horseback!” Thereupon he dismounted, tied his horse to a tree, then, sword in hand and removing the shield strap from around his neck, came back to the knight. He hit him until the blood was streaming down his body and, unable to take any more blows, the man turned aside and [139] yielded more and more ground. When he saw that he could never escape, he did not know what to do, since he dared not utter the shameful word “surrender.” The field where they 272 were fighting was closed on one side by deep water, on another was hedged in by knights and other people, and on a third ran up to the tower where Queen Guenevere and Kay the Seneschal and other knights were standing. When Lancelot’s foe saw that nothing would save him, he headed as fast as he could, for a man who had lost much blood, toward the river; all he wanted was to jump in and drown. But then he thought that, if he drowned, he would be dying in shame, as a coward and recreant. So he started back and, when he saw Lancelot coming up, all ready to strike him, he said, afraid to die, “Sir knight, noble man! Have mercy on me! I don’t see how any knight could show me mercy if you don’t, who are the best of them all!” “Indeed!” said Lancelot. “In your own words you need to acknowledge that the men who condemned my lady are faithless traitors.” “Indeed!” said the knight. “That’s exactly what I believe! And it seems to me their great sin has brought shame on me.” “As God is my witness,” said Lancelot, “it’s going to be absolutely clear that they are faithless traitors, for they'll be disgraced in front of the worthiest men in the world! And it will mean your death and the death of that knight over there as well!” With that, he raised his sword to strike, but the knight, not daring to wait for the blow, took off across the field. But when [140] he could run no farther, he turned around toward Lancelot and loudly cried for mercy, but Lancelot said, “Coward! Wait for this nice, sharp sword, or else let me hear that vile word! But you’re better off dying than living in shame.” “As God is my witness,” said the knight, “you’re right, and I want to die by your hand, because I couldn’t die by a better one.” With that, he waited for him, then raised his shield over his head and defended himself as best he could. But it was of little help, for Lancelot shattered the sorry scrap of shield he had left and dealt with him in such a way that all the onlookers were moved to pity; but to Lancelot it mattered not one bit, for he was so pained by his lady’s shame that he had no thought for mercy. Then he came at the knight and dealt him such a blow that it was plain he was moved by a deep rage, for he split helmet and hood and head in half, not stopping until his sword reached the spine and the body fell to the ground. Then he hailed his sword as powerful and handsome and said that the man who bore it must have a valorous heart. He then returned it to its sheath and, going back to his horse and leaping back up, seized his lance once more. But as he was making ready to attack the third knight, the barons of Carmelide came to the king and said that [141] the terms of the battle were, after all, not right, in that a battle of such moment, contesting a verdict, should not be undertaken without an oath. “So we request, my lord, that the oaths be sworn, for we know for a truth that the verdict was just.” The king answered that he had no objection to pausing for the oaths, But Galehaut overheard this and, drawing up to the man who was holding the horn, told him to sound it; and he did that because he had some lingering Lancelot, Part IT fear that the queen might be guilty and the condemnation just. As soon as the horn was blown, the two knights started for each other. Their horses were not slow, but strong and swift; the field was broad and level; and deep hatred was bringing the two foes together. The other knight was much afraid of Lancelot, so he planned to kill his horse at the first clash, because if he were on foot, the knight would be at a great advantage. This knight, named Cardoas of Lanvale, was very brave and bold. What he planned, he did; but he did not remain mounted himself, as he had expected, for Lancelot dealt him a blow that raised him from his saddle and bore him down over the back of his horse. Then, with Lancelot’s horse lying on the ground, both men were on their feet and had drawn their swords. They came together in a mighty clash, each slicing at the other’s helmet, they swift and nimble and their swords powerful. They struck each other so fiercely that each blade penetrated into flesh and red blood came spurting out and the hauberks were soon so torn apart that the grass was covered with chain links that had sprung free. But Lancelot struck heavier blows than [142] his foe, and Sir Gawain realized that the man could not stand up to Lancelot in the end; still, everyone was full of praise for both of them. They fought like that so long that, although one was clearly losing, the other was taking many hits as well; but the knight was badly wounded, as Lancelot had extraordinary strength in his arms. The struggle lasted until mid-afternoon. The knight had lost so much blood that he was getting very weak and breathing harder and harder. He kept trying to move away from Lancelot’s hits, and he was nimble enough to have done so, had he not been so badly wounded. Nevertheless, he did his utmost to fight back and, though he kept giving ground, he gave no sign of surrendering; indeed, he hit back with whatever strength he had. But Lancelot was in command and pressing him, driving him back and forth across the field, and his strength was ebbing so that three times he toppled face down onto the ground. In the end, Lancelot had pushed him so far that they were below the tower windows where the queen was watching, and at that point the knight was so weary that he could move no farther. Lancelot seized him and tore the helmet from his head, and the knight, fearing for his head, covered himself with what little of his shield was left him. Then Lancelot looked up and saw Kay standing next to the queen, and he shouted to him, “Kay! This one is finished! I don’t suppose you’d want to be the fourth?! It certainly wouldn’t do if this fellow were yours to fight, would it?” This taunt was so loud that many fine knights heard it, [143] and they understood it was because Kay had rebuked him when he had undertaken to do battle with three opponents. Then Lancelot sprang back to his foe, who, fearful without his helmet, wanted no further delay and so threw down his shield to fight with his arms alone; Lancelot seized him in his arms and the two twirled around each other. But Lancelot was more powerful, and he was further strengthened to know that the woman he loved most was close to him. So it happened that the knight fell down and Lancelot, Part IIT Lancelot kept hitting him with fist and sword until the blood gushed out through the links of his ventail. Galehaut and the other knights posted around the field were deeply moved to see what the man had come to, since they had seen how bravely he could fight. They cried out for mercy to the king, so that so fine a knight might not die in that state. “The truth is,” said the king, “I would have given a whole city to be able to spare him such treatment, but I feel that Lancelot is so angry with me that my plea would only bring him more harm.” “My lord,” said Galehaut, “I’l] show you how you could save him, and all it would take is a word from you.” “Well, by God,” said the king, “if that will keep him from dying, just tell me how!” “My lord,” he answered, “Lancelot is defending my lady; if you ask her to have him let the man go, he will do it. And there is no command of yours that my lady would not obey.” “In that way,” said the king, “he won’t die.” [144] The king then made his way to the queen. Seeing him come along, she went down to meet him, and at her approach he said, “My lady, you are free, but that knight who is fighting with Lancelot over there is dead unless you save him. And it would be a terrible loss, as he is a truly brave knight. I am asking you to have Lancelot let him go.” “My lord,” said the queen, “since that’s what you want, I'll do whatever I can.” Then the queen went up to Lancelot, right where he was fighting, and said, “My dear, good friend, I beg your mercy! Let this knight go, as my lord the king, in his mercy, has given me my freedom!” When Lancelot saw her weeping and on her knees, he jumped up and said, “No, my lady, by God, don’t cry! If you like, I am willing to say he defeated me. You, after all, are the lady who has done me the most good in the world, which would be true even if you hadn’t done more than keep me in your room when I went out of my mind at the Saxon Rock, where our king was in prison.”” Then he set the knight free insofar as it was up to him, and a number of people helped the man away, as he was very badly wounded. While this queen was overjoyed, the other one was deeply upset and the barons of Carmelide greatly dishonored, because they were thus rendered guilty of a false judgment; and since then the barons of Britain have never allowed any of them to present a case in the king’s court. [145] In that way, Lancelot saved the queen from disgrace, and all the people who loved her® were overjoyed. That night, Lancelot and Galehaut went to Sir Gawain’s lodgings, and Galehaut said to the queen in front of Sir Gawain, “My lady, you are still separated from my lord the king until God is pleased to bring you both together again. The barons should all have nothing but love for you, since you have shown them honor and affection, and no one is more aware of that than I. And so, in front of Sir Gawain, who has so much love for you, I am offering you the finest 7See chapter 71. 8«her”: the French pronoun is 1’, which could as easily mean “him.” 272 and most beautiful land there is among all the holdings of the king or mine. “You have been a queen, and you will not fall from that rank through any lack of land. You will have a beautiful kingdom, rich and so full of strength that the hand of this new queen will be unable to reach you there; Iam sure, you see, that she will seek to harm you in every way if you stay within her reach.” The queen and Sir Gawain thanked him very much for his offer. “But,” she said, “I would not accept this honor without my lord’s consent. Even if he has not done as I have wished, I will still yield to him in this matter as in others. But I thank you; you have offered me a greater honor than have all the barons of my lord the king.” They all went on speaking about one thing and another until morning, when the queen went to see the king as he was leaving his chapel. In front of a large crowd of knights, she knelt before him and said, “My lord, by your order I am going away, though I do not yet know where. I beg you, by God, to tell me what it is that you want me to do, and if you like, put me into some place where I can save my soul and where my body can be safe from my enemies. Indeed, it would not be to your honor if anyone harmed me as long as I remain in your custody. In any case, if I were willing to accept a gift of land, I would easily find a donor, not [146] acting for my sake but for the sake of your honor; but I would not accept this gift or any other without your leave.” The king asked where the land was, and Galehaut, who had been standing near by, stepped forward and said, “My lord, as God is my guide, I will give her the most beautiful land there is among all your holdings or mine; I mean the land of Sorelois. You may be sure that it is the land of mine I love the most, for I would like her to be shown the greatest honor.” The king answered that he would consider it and called his barons together. Once the barons had all spoken, Sir Gawain drew the king aside and said to him in private, “My lord, you know that you alone are driving the queen away and that she has been dispossessed not for any crime but because you have willed it so. We are all disloyal in this matter for having allowed it to happen, but men are dutybound to their lord to suffer a great wrong of his in silence rather than misbehave toward him. And so I advise you to treat my lady in such a way as to safeguard your honor, for if it were true that she had been your mistress, she would be dishonored and so would you. Now, if you fear someone else more than you love her, I know that you will not keep her in your land. If you wish, you can send her home with my cousin Yvain, and she will have all due respect there; if not, you can order her to stay with my father, in Loonois. And if you wish neither, then allow her to go to the land that Galehaut wants to give her.” While they were speaking, a knight walked in who, more than anyone else, was on good terms with the new queen [147] and aware of her intentions. Seeing the king, he said to him, “My lord, I would speak to you.” And the king turned away from Sir Gawain, not daring to let him hear. “Thank you, my lord,” said the knight. The king saw that he was crying and asked, “What is the matter, my friend?” Es “My lord,” he said, “my lady the queen is furious that you want to give land to your mistress, and I am sure that if any of your knights gives her land, the queen will die of heartbreak.” This news upset the king so much that he turned color; he said to the knight, “Tell her that she can be sure I'll do nothing to upset her.” Then he turned back to Sir Gawain and said, “As things stand, my dear nephew, Guenevere must not stay in my land or in the land of any of my vassals, since I might be putting her someplace where I would not be able to watch out for her safety as much as I would like. And I don’t want her to die; I have loved her far too much for that. So I want her to go away to the land that Galehaut is ready to give her, and I will provide her with as many of my knights and men-at-arms as she wishes.” With that, he and Gawain put an end to their conversation, and the king went over to his barons, who had been waiting for him. He explained to them what he had decided, just as he had to his nephew, and they gave him their approval, more because that was his will than on any other grounds. Then he went to the balcony where Galehaut was standing, and said to him, “My good friend Galehaut, I have found great affection and good fellowship in you, and I am convinced, from everything I have seen and been through, that, though you are not my vassal, you would do more for me than any other man in the world. You have offered to give a very rich and [148] prosperous land to Guenevere here, and I am well aware that you would not make bold to say one thing and do another. Nor would I make bold to ask for such a favor, but, as things stand now, she cannot remain in my country. You are not my liegeman but my friend and my companion, and it is as my friend that I hand her over to you, for you to keep her safe as if she were your very sister. Please grant me that, in the name of all the love that you have for me.” Then the king took Guenevere by the hand and gave her over to Galehaut, and he was moved to tears as he did so. Galehaut accepted her on the condition the king had set, that he would keep her safe as if she were his very sister. Everyone standing there was deeply moved, and there was no knight who was left dry-eyed. The king then decided which of his men would go with the lady. After that, she went off to her quarters, and the king and his barons remained. Sir Gawain said to him, “My lord, I want you to know that this marriage is a real burden to you, for it is being said that you have made it not to escape from sin but to enter therein. And whatever may happen to you from now on, you have lost greatly, for in front of all your men you have shown yourself to be disloyal. And you have lost Lancelot, the finest knight in your court. There has come to the Round Table a shame that it had never known before: no knight had ever withdrawn from it of his own free will; on the contrary, any knight admitted to it would look upon himself as fulfilled. Now Lancelot has turned his back on it. You can be sure that, unless you take pains to bring him back, [149] a great deal of trouble will come your way, since he has all the power of Galehaut behind him. But he has done so much for you and your people that any step you now take toward him can only bring you honor.” Lancelot, Part III “My dear nephew,” said the king, “I understand your argument. I would make every effort I could to be back on good terms with him, and I would agree to anything he asked for, except giving up this woman, for even if it meant being on bad terms with all my barons, I would not break my promise to her. Please, my dear nephew, speak to him, convince him, for me and for Galehaut.” Then the two of them, together with the chief barons, mounted their horses and went to Galehaut’s lodgings, where they found Galehaut and Lancelot sitting by themselves on a couch and talking. Seeing the king, they stood up, and the king very gently asked Lancelot to forgive him; Sir Gawain and the other barons made the same plea. “Lancelot,” said the king, “it is true that you have done far more for me than I have ever done for you, and it was out of love for me and for knighthood that you became a knight of the Round Table. Now, though, you have given it up, out of anger with me and out of hatred; and I can’t ever be happy again if you go off like that. Come back and forgive me, and I will cede you half my kingdom. I will do whatever you like that I can honorably do.” “Thank you very much, my lord,” said Lancelot, “but I am not interested in your land. I bear you no ill will, but there is no way I would remain here now, no matter who urged me to; I swear that, by the Mass I heard this morning.” When the king saw that there was nothing more he could do, he and his party went on their way, and Lancelot and Galehaut were happy to [150] see the king go off spurned. Indeed, the king looked downcast all evening and then could not sleep; and in the end he recalled something Lancelot had said to him before the queen’s battle: that he would deny her nothing she might ask of him, because she had taken such good care of him during his sickness.? In the morning, Galehaut came to take his leave, as he was planning to go back to his country, and the king mounted his horse to escort him part of the way. After they had ridden awhile, the king turned to the queen and Sir Gawain and said, “My lady, I know that Lancelot is so in love with you that he would deny you nothing, and you know that I have greatly cherished his presence here. I ask you, then, seeing that you are not uninterested in coming back to me someday, to urge him to stay with me just as he used to, since I have had no success, nor has anyone else who has tried.” The queen was not flustered in her answer, but quickwitted and alert, for she feared that the king had become aware of the love she shared with Lancelot. “My lord,” she said, “I must really love Lancelot if he is willing to do for me what he would not do for anyone else; then I can be sure that he loves no one more than me. And as long as I know that he loves me most, I need to take care, for that very reason, not to provoke him. No, I will not do as you say. I am going to be seeing much more of him than of you; and I am bound to love him more, because his noble-heartedness [151] rescued me when you, in your wickedness, meant to destroy me. Understand that he owes you nothing, and See p. [144]. There is some confusion here, Lancelot’s words having been addressed not to Arthur but to Guenevere, and not before the battle but at its conclusion. Lancelot, Part IIT never will; even if I had unquestionably deserved to die, you should have set me free rather than let him risk his life against three knights, had you recalled the day when he gave you back your land and honor!” With that, their conversation came to an end, for the king saw that it was pointless to go on speaking, and so he stopped. Once he had escorted Galehaut far enough, he took leave of him and his knights, though Lancelot, riding off as fast as his horse could carry him, was nowhere to be seen. His nephew Gawain, whom he loved dearly, he sent on with the queen. Then the king rode away, pained and disappointed that he had lost Lancelot. 80. The Imposture Is Revealed; the False Guenevere Dies; Arthur Repents and Is Reconciled First with Guenevere, Then with Lancelot.’ Thus Galehaut rode off toward his country, taking the queen with him, and after a number of days they arrived. There Galehaut saw to it that Sorelois received the queen with all due homage; and once the land was hers and all oaths of fealty sworn, Sir Gawain left, happy to know that she was properly settled. Then Lancelot went to speak with the queen, not in public but with Galehaut present, in whom she had great trust. She said, “My dear friend, this is where things stand, as you see: I am separated from my husband the king [152] as a result of my misdeed—yes, I acknowledge it—not that I am not his lawful wife and just as crowned and anointed as he, and daughter of King Leodagan of Carmelide as well, but I have been hurt by the sin of going to bed with a man other than my husband. “Still, there is no upstanding lady in the world who would not feel impelled to sacrifice something to make an upstanding knight like you happy. Too bad Our Lord pays no heed to our courtly ways, and a person whom the world sees as good is wicked to God. But now I have to beg a favor of you, because I have reached a point where I have to watch myself more closely than ever before. I ask you, then, in the name of your great love for me, to seek no more of me from now on than a kiss or an embrace, if you like, unless at my invitation. This much of me, though, you will have as long as I stay here; and when I find the time and place are right and you are willing, I will gladly let you have the rest. “But my will right now is that you be patient for a while. You must not doubt that Iam yours forever; you have deserved it, and my heart, besides, would never let me give you up. Remember, when my lord the king asked that I urge you to remain in his household, I said more to him than I have said just now, for I told him I preferred being with you to being with him.” “My lady,” said Lancelot, “nothing you wish can be a burden to me. I am wholly subject to your will, even if it means pain no less than happiness; and I'll endure Corresponds to Micha I:IX; Sommer IV:72-86. 2/9 whatever you like, because my fulfilment can only come through you.” [153] In this way the queen remained in Sorelois, where she usually had the company of Galehaut and his friend and where the lady of Malehaut stayed with her, too; and if not for the company of these three, she could not have gone on, after all the people and pleasures that she had known. So the queen lived in Sorelois for two years, while King Arthur stayed in his country; and if beforehand he had loved his wife dearly, he now loved the new woman even twice as much. Things reached the point where the pope who was then on the throne in Rome learned about it. He held it a grave offense that so important a man as the king of Britain should have cast aside his wife in disregard of the Holy Church. He ordered then that the vengeance of Our Lord make itself felt throughout the land where he had taken his first wife, until such time as they should be brought back together by the Church. In this way King Arthur’s land was placed under interdiction for twenty-one months. During that time, it happened that the king was at one of his castles in Britain together with a great number of knights as well as the queen and Bertelay the Old, who held considerable sway over the royal pair. The queen had so worked on the king with drugs that he could not oppose any wish of hers, and things had already gone so far that all the barons hated her. At the beginning of Advent, the king had held court at Caerleon, and the queen was there, since he took her along wherever he went, whether military marches, sieges, or tournaments, but he never slept with her except when he was staying in his own room. One time, after a quarrel with the barons, [154] the queen withdrew to her quarters, and that night she lost all the strength in her limbs, so that she became paralyzed, except for her eyes, and her flesh began to rot from the feet up. The sickness lasted a long time, and eventually she was so badly stricken and, with the onset of the rot, gave off such a stench that no one could come near her. The very night she was at her worst, Bertelay the Old was struck down in the same way. The king was overcome with sorrow and, once this had happened, remained a long while at Bredigan; in the end, though, Sir Gawain took him off to spend some time at Camelot; [155] not wanting to be rebuked by his barons, the king said that he would have no lack of news of the queen if he were there. It was very hard to take his mind off the plight of his wife,2 but shame made him keep up an appearance. One day, Sir Gawain began to chide him, saying, “My lord, people are finding you very prickly. You used to be the most spirited of kings, and now you show your barons so little joy! You need to go hunting fowl and game and spending time with people. That’s how a man forgets a lot of fruitless brooding, if need be.” “My dear nephew, I take what you are telling me as good advice and will listen to you. Let’s go hunting in the woods tomorrow, since I have not had any sport to lighten my spirits in a while. And the next day we'll go after waterfowl. We have plenty of good, expert fowl hunters here, and plenty of dogs and birds as well.” 2his wife”: no doubt, the false Guenevere. 26. So they made their plan and then parted until the next day, when the king called his men together and said that he wanted to go hunting. They made ready forthwith and, once they had heard Mass, they set out on their way. They rode into a forest teeming with animals and, once they had gone some distance within it, they spotted a large, fully-grown boar, which they chased until mid-afternoon. At that point the boar had been driven to the top of a high mound and, weary from all the blows it had been dealt, turned to face the dogs. Then the king himself dismounted and killed it with a pike that he was carrying. As they were disemboweling the animal, the king heard a cock crow not far away, [156] it seemed, somewhere off to the right. He felt like eating, so he jumped onto his horse and rode off toward the sound of the cock, and Sir Gawain and a number of his men rode off after him. When he had gone some distance, he came upon a clearing fenced around with paling. The king reached the gate first and began to knock and call out loudly enough to be heard inside; indeed, it was only a moment before a white-robed man came to the gate and opened it. Seeing him dressed that way, the king thought the place was a hermitage. He went in and asked the man if the house could accommodate him and his companions for a meal. “Yes, my lord,” he answered, “it is a large, fine house made to shelter knights and other persons passing by.” With that, he went to open a large wooden house, and there was no lack of people to lay the fire that they needed. Next they set up the tables, and the king and his companions started to eat what he had called for. At the third bite of food, he was gripped by such a pain that he thought his heart would burst through his chest, and he was forced to stretch out. His eyes turned up, his face grew pale, and he fainted. The knights stopped eating and leapt up, and Sir Gawain took him in his arms, afraid that he was dead. When he could speak, he said, “Oh, God! Confession! The time has come!” And he recognized neither Sir Gawain nor anyone else, so thoroughly did the pain blind his eyes. Then the knights who were there dashed out to fetch the hermit. They found the man who had opened the gate for them and asked whether he was a priest and could hear the king’s confession. He said no, [157] but he would go fetch the hermit in the chapel. He ran ahead and the others quickly followed him, and they found in the chapel a hermit who was well along in years. As soon as he heard the news, he went to where the Host was kept and, in front of all the barons, said, “May God be praised for this sickness!”—for now he knew that God had heard his prayer. When the king saw the good man, he sat up as well as he could, and the hermit asked him who he was. “An unlucky wretch, sir,” he answered, “Arthur by name and king of Britain for a while! And rightly sorry, too, for I am dying the terrible death of a man who has badly hurt his land and the people close to him!” “Why have you sent for me?” said the hermit. “To make my confession, my lord,” said the king, “and to receive my Savior from you.” Lancelot, Part IIT “I am all prepared to hear your confession,” said the hermit, “but from my hands you will not receive the Host; in fact, I forbid you to receive it. And if you did receive it, it would help you not toward salvation but toward the damnation of your soul.” “Why, my lord,” said the king, “do you forbid me to receive the Host?” “Because,” said the hermit, “you are the basest oathbreaker in the world, the basest sinner, a liar, excommunicate, and traitor! You were disloyal in deserting your lawful wife for another woman, whom you keep against God and reason, and you broke your oath when, condemning her to death, you forswore the faithfulness you had promised her within the Holy Church. And because you divorced her disloyally, without the Church’s leave, you are excommunicated, and no good can come to you as long as you remain in this state.” [158] At that, the king began to sigh. When he could speak, he said, “Good sir, you stand in the place of Our Lord, since you are a priest. Help me, I beg you, for I have greater need of help than any man has ever had. I realize that I was wrong to divorce my wife and am now living in sin with the new woman, for never since this started has any good come to me of it, and she herself has fallen so gravely ill that I don’t think she can ever be well again. Yet I didn’t take her with any thought of committing a sin, seeing that all the barons of the land said she was my true wife and I was wrong to be living with the other one. But I believe that what doomed me is that I left her without the consent of the Church, for it is right that what the Holy Church has put together should not be undone without her consent. But I have strayed terribly, and now I need counsel for the good of my soul and the respect due my body, and I will do whatever you say to gain salvation.” “I will give you no counsel,” said the hermit, “except to return to the Holy Church. If the Church rules in favor of divorce, then the sin is no longer yours; and if the Church orders you to remain with your first wife, you will remain with her.” “My lord,” said the king, “you are telling me how to save myself; I understand and I will do as you say. But now, I beg you, please hear me confess my other sins; I ask you as a man more likely to die than to go on living.” Then he recounted all the sins he could remember, and the good hermit then called the knights over and, in front of them, said to the king, “Arthur, I recognize you better than you do me; [159] however, you will recognize me better once I have told you who I am. I am Brother Amustan, your chaplain, once, for seven and a half years. I came from the kingdom of Carmelide with Queen Guenevere, the daughter of King Leodagan, and I believe I am the man who best knows the truth about which of the two Gueneveres married you. I know her mind better than anyone else; I knew her from the time she could first think until the day I gave up the world for religion. I will easily recognize the woman whom the Holy Church gave you as your wife.” When the king heard the good man identify himself, he easily recognized him and he thanked God and praised Him. Then confessed and repentant, he received the Host, and it was not long before his pain ebbed and he fell Lancelot, Part II asleep; and his men were happy to see him at rest. The king stayed there for three days, until he was feeling better and eating well. He came to the holy hermit and said, “My lord, Iam very much myself again, thank God, and ready to leave for Camelot, which is not far away. Come with me, and I’ll feel much more secure and at ease.” The hermit answered that he would be glad to go. In the morning, the king and his following, and the hermit as well, rode to Camelot, where everyone welcomed him joyously, as they had heard that he had almost died. The next day, a messenger reached him from his wife, [160] who, still bedridden in Bredigan, was sending word that he should come home or he would never see her again. The king came to the hermit and said, “My lord, this is the word from my wife. What would you have me do?” “I would have you go to her, but not without me, for I want you to honor the Holy Church no less than you have shamed her. Call for your liegemen to ride with you to Bredigan.” The king did as the hermit ordered and sent word to his barons that they should accompany him to Bredigan. Once there, he found quarters not where his wife lay sick, but in the town, in one of its many fine houses. This he did at the behest of the hermit; nor did he speak with the woman or see her that night. The next day, he awoke early and heard the Mass of the Holy Spirit sung by the hermit. From the chapel they both went to see Guenevere, who was bedridden, but the stench of her sickness was so great that no one could come near her without the help of incense and aromatics. The king, with the hermit beside him, stepped up to her bedside and asked her how she was. She could speak well, and answered, “Badly; I am getting worse all the time, and the doctors don’t know how to treat my sickness; so I would like to ask you as my husband to take me back to my own country. I understand that I could travel there so easily by boat that I would never have to leave my bed [161] at any point.” “My lady,” he answered, “it is not a thing you could do easily; even if you could bear sailing on the river, you still couldn’t bear crossing the sea. But consider awhile where God wants to lead you, and take care to make your confession, since no one can be sure of himself. This is a good moment for it, as I have brought you here a good man, of saintly life, whom you can speak to in private; and he will know better than anyone else how to advise you.” With that, the king stopped speaking, and the hermit drew near to hear the lady’s confession. Just then, one of the queen’s knights came in and said to the king, “My lord, Bertelay the Old is dying downstairs. He asks you please to come see him one time before he dies.” The king went and, seeing him come in, Bertelay said, “My lord, I have had you come because I have the greatest need to see you, but I would like all your knights to come hear what I want to tell you, since it is one of the greatest wonders ever uttered or imagined. Please have them come in.” The king had all his knights come in. Meanwhile, the hermit was speaking to Guenevere. “My lady,” he said, “you are likely to die, for no mortal man can heal you; and whoever loses his body and then his soul as well, loses too 277 much. You are losing your body; think about saving your soul! Take care that you not hide something that might harm your’soul; remember, there is no true confession unless you admit all the things by which you feel stained, and no one can be safe without true confession.” “My lord,” said the lady, “you are urging me to save my soul if possible, but I fail to see how it [162] can be saved, because I am the most disloyal, the most sinful, the most traitorous of women. I have tricked and betrayed the worthiest man in the world, King Arthur; I made him abandon his loyal wife, who is the flower of all women in the world. And God is taking vengeance as He sees fit, for all my limbs are paralyzed; and His vengeance isn’t even as great as it should be!” Then she told him from beginning to end just how she had betrayed the king, hiding nothing, telling the whole truth about this sin and others that she could recall as well; then she said, “Good sir, give me your advice! I am in great need of it, and my lord the king told me that you would advise me better than anyone else.” “My lady, I cannot easily advise you on this matter; you might well not abide by what I have to say.” But she promised that she would. “In that case,” he said, “I recommend that, just as you committed your sin against the king and his people, you now acknowledge your guilt to the king in front of his people. Your soul will be much relieved, and you can thereby reach salvation sooner. If you don’t do this, you will lose both body and soul.” The lady promised that she would do as he said. Meanwhile, the knights came along whom the king had sent for to hear what Bertelay had to say. Once they were gathered, Bertelay acknowledged his part in the betrayal and admitted how he had ensnared the king; he admitted everything else the story has recounted, then said to the king, “My lord, I am faithless and traitorous, as you have heard, and I want you to know that the wretched woman who is dying upstairs would never have done anything wrong if not for me. I beg you, therefore, to [163] take such vengeance on this wretched body of mine, traitorous and disloyal as it has been, that no one hearing of it will ever dare risk a similar betrayal. I believe my soul will thus be relieved, because the more torment the body suffers in this world, the less hardship the soul will meet in the world beyond.” Hearing this extraordinary statement, the king crossed himself vigorously, and all the knights gathered there were very pleased. But Sir Gawain was happier than anyone else, and he said to the king, “My lord, didn’t I tell you. . .? Not that it was thanks to us my lady was not destroyed, but thanks to God, of course, and to Lancelot! It’s true, no betrayal can be hidden forever.” As the king was listening to Bertelay’s revelations and the words of Sir Gawain, someone suddenly came to call him back to the hermit who was at the queen’s bedside. He left, and his knights all followed. When the queen saw him come in, she burst into tears and begged his mercy in God’s name. “My lord,” she said, “T beg your mercy as the most sinful creature alive.” Then she recounted the betrayal from beginning to end, just as she had done it, under the guidance of 278 Bertelay. Then the knights were happier than they had ever been, since now they were sure that it was all true. But the king was as overwhelmed as any man could be, never having imagined that a woman’s heart would dare undertake such treason. He turned to the hermit and his barons to help him decide what to do. “My lord,” said the hermit, “wait for the barons whom you have summoned to this city, and then you will do as they advise. It will be much better if they hear the true story from the very two people who have confessed it to you.” The king took this advice and waited for his barons, while Sir Gawain picked a messenger and sent him to the queen with the news of what had happened and word that she could be sure [164] she would enjoy more honor than ever in the past. And indeed she was as glad of the news as she should have been. When the barons came to Bredigan and heard the tale directly from Guenevere and Bertelay, who was still living, not one of them proved too foresighted to be astonished, for never had they heard such a revelation. They told the king that he would be dishonored if he did not take such vengeance as would resound throughout the kingdom, and some recommended that the guilty pair be dragged to death. However, Brother Amustan did not approve, but advised the king instead to let God alone take vengeance, saying that they could not suffer any greater torment. Heeding his advice, the king had them moved out of Bredigan into an old shelter. Meanwhile, the barons of Carmelide were sent for to hear the truth about the woman whom they held to be their lawful lady; and they came in time, before she and Bertelay were dead, for it took them both a long while to waste away. When they heard the truth about Bertelay and Guenevere, they were afraid that the true queen would put an end to them. They all agreed, then, that they should go to Sorelois to beg her mercy, because they were quite sure that she would once again be queen of King Arthur’s realm, as much as she had ever been or more; and even if she had never been his wife, they realized that she could not lose her land, now that it was recognized as hers. And so they went off to Sorelois. ‘ When they came close to Sorhaut, where the queen was staying, they all dismounted from their horses and tore their stockings at the toes, ripped their sleeves from wrist to elbow, and cut off their beautiful long hair. Thus they went to beg mercy of the queen as their liege lady, beseeching her that she punish them as she liked and [165] grant them forgiveness or that she drive them from her land forevermore. “We know,” they said, “that we deserve greater punishment than you will mete out, for we dispossessed you though you were our liege lady, and we brought you to the brink of disgrace. Yet we believed we were doing right, simply following the counsel of Bertelay, the traitor who is now dying the basest death anyone could ever endure.” Thus the barons begged the queen’s mercy, on their knees before her in public. She was deeply moved by them, since she was very gentle and gracious, and she began to weep; then she went to raise them up, one by one, and she granted them her forgiveness. Lancelot, Part IT When Christmas came, the king held his court at Carduel, where all the barons had been summoned from far and near. He went to great lengths to welcome and honor them more than he had done for some time, in order to avoid blame for having wronged the queen, which everyone now knew about. Besides, the other woman was still alive; in fact, she lived in great pain until three weeks after Christmas, and her dying brought the king the greatest woe that he had ever known, because he had never loved any other woman as much as her. But he took the greatest pains he could to comfort her and to put on a good face for his people, especially now that the interdiction had been lifted from their land. Afterwards, the queen was sent for in Sorelois, sought by Brother Amustan, the archbishop of Canterbury, the bishops of Winchester and Logres and as many as five other bishops; and there were ten other men with them, both kings and dukes. The queen received them very warmly, but above all she was [166] delighted to greet Brother Amustan, her tutor, once she had recognized him. She was so moved and happy that she went on crying as he started to tell her of the great miracle that God had worked and the sickness that had come over the king while he was at his hermitage and the death of the false queen. Then she offered her deepest thanks to God. When she heard that the king was sending for her to return as his wife, she gave no sign of being pleased, and yet she really was delighted, as right was on her side. She sent out a call to all her vassals in Sorelois and sent for Galehaut and his companion Lancelot. They were very glad of the news when it reached them, glad not for themselves but for the queen. When they came to her, she spoke to them in private, asking what she should do, “for the king has sent word that I should come back to him, and,” here she pointed, “you see the messengers over there. Now he knows perfectly well that he has never had any wife but me, and you have heard how that woman of his died. But I love and respect the two of you so much that I would not return to him without discussing it with you. Tell me what you want me to do, and I will do it, whether to my shame or to my honor.” “My lady,” said Lancelot, “however much we discuss the matter, you will do as you wish; but in any case there is no need of long discussion, for anyone who urged you to reject this honor, [167] that is, the throne of Britain and the king who is your lawful husband and the most valorous man in the world, would be no friend of yours; and you would be widely blamed for it. No, such people would be showing no love for you. We, that is, my lord right here and I, love you best in all this land; yet we would rather be deprived of you. I know his heart as well as my own: one mustn’t recommend to a person one loves something that may turn out badly. So I advise you to go back.” “And you, my lord,” she said to Galehaut, “you who have shown me greater honor than any other man has ever done, what do you advise me to do?” “My lady,” he said, “my advice is the same as everyone’s; I go along with what you have just heard. If you have loved us until now, don’t now forget us, for in no land you ever enter will you be shown such heartfelt honor and service as you have been shown in this one. I'll tell you the Lancelot, Part IIT truth—I won’t hide it: if, by chance, you did not leave us, I for one would not be sorry; but the important thing is not to give the wrong advice.” When the lady heard that the two men she trusted most were recommending the same course she had in mind, she felt greatly relieved, and she was deeply moved to have been asked not to forget them. She embraced and kissed them each in turn, and all three, joined by the lady of Malehaut, were moved to tears. They remained talking together a long while, then went back to the great hall, where the king’s barons were gathered. Galehaut greeted them with great warmth and asked them for news of the king, and they recounted in detail everything that had happened, since they were unaware that he knew as much as he did. That is how they spent that day. The next day, [168] the Sorelois barons whom the queen had sent for appeared, and she bade them goodbye, thanking them for the great honors that they had bestowed on her. Then she left, and all the men and ladies and damsels were heartsick to see her go. Thus the queen had stayed in Sorelois two full years plus the time from Pentecost to the last week of February. When she left, she was escorted by Galehaut, his companion, and a great number of his men. Two days away from Carduel, King Arthur rode out to meet them. Galehaut had asked the queen to forbid Lancelot to rejoin the king’s household, so she turned to him and she said, “Lancelot, be sure not to remain with the king, whatever urging you may hear, unless I plead with you myself. And you may be sure that I will not make that plea as long as I can honorably avoid it.” When the king met them, his greeting to Galehaut and to the queen herself was full of joy, even though he had not forgot his longing for the other woman; but, because of his people, he made an effort to put on a good face. For her part, the queen was very humble toward him, and all those who saw her loved her and admired her all the more. But well beyond the joy shown by the king and all the others was the happiness that Sir Gawain showed. As soon as he could see the queen and Galehaut, he ran up to them with his arms out, and he was so obviously overjoyed that no man of feeling could have been more so. He kissed them each in turn. [169] That night, they stayed in the kingdom of Escalone. As soon as they had dismounted, Galehaut, in his usual way, led the queen to the king’s lodging, and Galehaut said to the king, ‘My lord, here is my lady, whom you charged me to look after and whom I am returning to you. I assure you that I looked after her just as I had promised, so that, so help me God and”—here he pointed toward the chapel— “the saints in that church, she could not have been better guarded, and with all honor to you, had she been my very own sister.” The king thanked him and, with a laugh, said, “My dear friend, I can never pay you back for what you have done for me, because though the will is there, the means are not. There is even something else you have to do, which will cost you very little but will be very important to me; but you won’t know what it is until the time is ripe.” He was speaking about Lancelot, whom he wanted to ask back. Indeed, Lancelot was not present at the 279 reconciliation of the king and queen, but was at his quarters, locked up in a room, sad and downcast, seeing nothing that might comfort him, since he was sure that he had lost his lady; but he kept it all to himself, even from Galehaut. That evening, the king and queen were reunited by bishops and archbishops, and there was great rejoicing. Afterwards, Galehaut stayed on with them for a good week, but Lancelot, with his leave and the queen’s, went back to Sorelois before that. Galehaut stayed with the queen for three days after Lancelot’s departure, [170] then came to the king to take his leave. The king drew him and the queen aside and said that, in the name of their fealty and their love for him, they should do what they could to make Lancelot forgive him and grant him, as in the past, his love and companionship. Galehaut answered that he would gladly speak to him about the matter, “since I will soon see him,” he said, “but my lady will not be seeing him for some time, as he left for my country three days ago.” At these words, the king was sorely irked and said that that was a nasty disappointment. “I was planning,” he said, “to make peace with him before he left; in fact, that’s the favor I asked of you when you returned the queen to me.” “My lord,” said the queen, “at that point it did not seem that Lancelot would do for me what you asked when I went off to Sorelois.2 Now he has left without saying goodbye to me, and yet I would rather have him go without my leave than see him deny my request.” “Ah, my lady,” said Galehaut, “we need to bear with him; he is well worth it. A man who is all upset is not in control of himself, and Lancelot has a heart that forgets nothing. Whatever favor or wrong anyone does him, no matter how small, he never puts behind him; and I have chided him for it many a time, both in front of you and in private. But he sees it as such a great rebuff that my lord the king didn’t free you as soon as he spoke up that he cannot change his feelings back into love for him. He has often said to me, ‘My lord, how could I ever serve him again, now that he has shown me he has no regard for me [171] or all the service I have ever done him? And I have done him such great service that I’ll never be able to match it! No, he is not like you, who in one day gave up your honor for shame!’ My lord, that’s what Lancelot has often said to me when I would chide him.” When the king heard that Lancelot was so deeply upset, he burst into tears with pain and felt great distress in his heart, for he still loved Lancelot with greater love than anyone else but Galehaut. And later on he showed it clearly a number of times, when the slanderers in his house would say vile things to him and he would answer that it was pointless for anyone to try to turn him against Lancelot, “for there is no wrong that he could do me in this world,” he would say, “that would make me hate him. If he did anything base, I could only be grieved.”* The king was greatly saddened by Lancelot’s enmity. He begged this favor of Galehaut, that he, as he cared for him deeply, please do his very utmost to bring Lancelot 3See chapter 8, p. [150]. 4For the realization of this forecast, see The Death of King Arthur. 280 back to him. “And to you, my lady,” he said to the queen, “I make the same plea, by the allegiance you owe me and in the name of the creature you love most in this world, if you want me ever again to be at peace. Swear to me, you and Galehaut, that you will both do as I ask; then it will be up to Lancelot to respond to me as he likes, and in his own time.” Having said this, he fell at their feet and offered his support in return as urgently as if they were now about to snatch him from death. At last they granted his plea, and Galehaut promised that, barring some bodily impediment, they” would both be with him at Easter. Then Galehaut took his leave of the king and queen, and the queen urged him, as he cared for her deeply, to be sure to bring Lancelot back with him at Easter. [172] “And never fear, my good friend,” she said, “what may happen in all this coming and going. I swear to you, by the great faith I have in him, that nothing will ever happen to make you lose his companionship. On the contrary, I will make sure he is with you as often as he has been all along.” With that, Galehaut went back to his country and gave his companion the queen’s message. They stayed together in Sorelois until the middle of Lent and then, traveling in short stages, they reached King Arthur on Palm Sunday at Disnadaron, for he would not ride on any day of Holy Week, a custom which at that time was observed by many people. When the king learned that Lancelot had come, he was overjoyed and the queen was no less happy, both for her own sake and for the sake of the king, who had been yearning for that return and had often urged her cooperation whenever he thought her most favorably disposed. All that week they were at prayer, and when it was time for High Mass on Easter Sunday, the king reminded the queen and Galehaut of what he had asked them, urging them to make their effort clear to Lancelot. “And count on me for anything I can do or give,” he said to the two of them; “don’t hesitate to promise him whatever he may ask that is in my power or yours.” Thereupon Galehaut and the queen sent for Lancelot to join them in the [173] queen’s rooms. When he came in, he took the queen in his arms in front of the others who were there (for the lady of Malehaut had been called to this meeting). Then all four sat down on a couch, and the queen said to Lancelot, “My dear friend, we have reached the point where you and my lord the king must be reconciled; I want it, and so does Galehaut, who loves you very much, as you know. And you ought to be grateful to the king for being so eager for your presence, for he has charged me to promise you whatever you wish of his or of mine; and I know that what you already have of it you like better than all the rest. Nevertheless, I don’t insist you do his bidding as soon as he asks you: leave time for me to entreat you, and Galehaut and then all the barons. I want you to be unbending at first! Don’t yield until Galehaut and I have fallen at your feet, and then all the knights and ladies and damsels. At that point, go up to my lord, kneel before him, and agree to do as he wishes.” 2 “they”: Galehaut and Lancelot. Lancelot, Part IIT “No, my lady,” said Lancelot, “I couldn’t possibly allow you to fall to your knees in front of me!” “Yes, you will,” she said; “that’s what I want you to do! In the name of all the great love you have for me, I beg you to agree.” So Lancelot agreed, not daring to oppose his lady’s will. Then the queen and Galehaut went into the hall where the king and his barons were waiting, while Lancelot and the lady of Malehaut stayed behind. The queen and Galehaut both reported to the king that they were unable to find any readiness for peace in Lancelot. “But we will send for him,” said Galehaut, “and if we [174] cannot reach an understanding ourselves, then have your barons do as we do.” With that, they sent for Lancelot, and all the ladies and maidens who were in their rooms came out. Once everyone was there, the queen and Galehaut made the same request to Lancelot that they had made earlier. He was unbending in his refusal, saying that he had no wish at this point to belong to any household or have any companions other than the one he had. Then the queen promised, just as the king had told her to, to give him whatever he would want, and he went on refusing. He said, loudly enough for everyone to hear, “My lady, please don’t ask anymore, as it would be in vain. You must not think, though, you or anyone else, that I harbor any hatred for the king. The truth is that I could not be anywhere so far away that I would not come back to stand by him if I found out he needed help.” Lancelot thus rejected her plea, at which point Galehaut and the queen dropped to their knees before him, and all the barons, ladies, and damsels did likewise. Seeing the queen at his feet, Lancelot pretended to be incensed; he bounded forward and raised her by the hand, then did the same with Galehaut. He went up to the king, fell to his knees, simply and humbly begged his pardon, and agreed to abide by his will. Then the king raised him by the hand and, happily kissing him on the mouth, said, “Many thanks, my dear friend! One thing I promise you in front of all your friends and mine, and swear to you in the name of today’s holy feast: that I will never again give you any grounds for anger if I can possibly help it.” That is how good terms were restored between King Arthur and Lancelot, and Lancelot remained attached to the Round Table and the household [175] of the king as he had been earlier. There was great joy throughout King Arthur’s court both because the king was happy and because so valorous a knight was not lost. Thereupon they all went to hear Mass, which had been delayed by the matter at hand. That day there was great joy in King Arthur’s court. During the king’s stay at Disnadaron, he decided that the next court he would hold, at Pentecost, would be the most splendid ever held. At the court’s close, as all the barons were about to leave, he commanded them all, if they cherished his love, to join him at Pentecost in London and to come in greater numbers than ever before and with as much pomp as they could afford. Lancelot, Part IIT 81. Gawain Is Abducted by Caradoc; Lancelot, Yvain, and the Duke of Clarence Set Out in Quest of Him.' Thereupon the court disbanded. But the barons came to London on the day the king had appointed, and they came with all the strength of numbers he had wanted; Galehaut’s barons gathered there, too. The court that the king held that Pentecost was splendid, as there were more barons and knights and people of all kinds than had ever come to court before. The king held it to mark, first, the joy of the queen’s recent return and, then, the reconciliation with Lancelot, as the story has recounted. And so there came to the court knights and barons from all the lands in the king’s domains and from many others as well, and such a lively gathering had never before been seen—except that something happened that I will tell you now. [176] What happened is that, after dinner on the eve of Pentecost, Sir Gawain left the king’s tent—and it is true that the king had had tents and pavilions set up all along the Thames, because he wanted to show what he could afford. When Sir Gawain, then, left the king’s tent, he was followed out by Sir Yvain the son of King Urien and by Lancelot of the Lake, together with Galescalain, who was duke of Clarence and first cousin to Sir Gawain by his father King Lot. This Galescalain was a short knight, thickset and robust in body and limb; he was quite daring and wonderfully skilled in battle; and he was the brother of Dodinel the Wildman. Well, the four of them moved away from the tents to go take a refreshing walk through the fields, while Galehaut remained talking with the king about important matters of theirs. The four, unaccompanied by anyone else, walked off toward the wood that was not far from the tents. The wood was called Verwaine, and it was foreboding and full of risks and well known everywhere for the wondrous adventures that befell people there. As they walked through the forest, the four knights came to a tall, broad-trunked oak tree that was thickly leaved as at the end of May. Finding the spot lovely and refreshing, they sat down and began to speak of the adventures and remarkable things that occurred in these woods. Sir Gawain said that he would gladly go roaming through the forest for two or three days [177] to find out if it was really as adventure-filled as people claimed, saying that he would set out as soon as Pentecost was over. Lancelot promised that he would be ready to set out on Monday at the first light of day, and Sir Yvain said that they couldn’t go? without him, as he was sure he was more eager for wonders than anyone else; then the duke of Clarence said the same thing. Thus the four of them promised one another to set out together on Monday, without letting anyone else know where they were going. While they were speaking, a squire came along on an old horse dripping with sweat and stopped in front of them. Not dismounting, he just stared at them, and Sir Gawain asked him who he was. Instead of answering, he gave the 1 Corresponds to Micha I:X; Sommer IV:87-89. Literally, “he would not go,” “he” no doubt being Lancelot. 261 horse a kick with his spurs and galloped away. The knights wondered who he was, and thought him a simpleton. It was,not long afterwards that they heard such loud hoofbeats that they were sure there were many horses on the way. As they all jumped up, they saw a knight armed with every weapon come along on one of the largest horses in the world. The knight himself was the tallest and most robust that they had ever seen, and he was flanked by the squire who had denied Sir Gawain an answer. The knight came forward and spoke. “Which of you,” he said, “is Gawain?” “I am,” said Sir Gawain. “What do you want of me, sir knight?” [178] “You'll know soon enough!” he said, and, couching his lance under his arm, he spurred his horse forward in order to run Gawain through, but Gawain dodged him. As the knight went past, Sir Gawain caught hold of the bridle and turned him around, then threw his hand over the horse toward the sword that the rider was wearing; he thought to pull it from its sheath, and from that point on he would have had nothing to fear. But the knight was quicker; he caught him by both arms and, being taller and stronger than anyone else, lifted Sir Gawain in front of him onto the neck of the horse just as easily as another knight would have lifted a child. The other three dashed forward to stop him, but he was strong and his horse lively and swift. He rushed past them so feverishly® that he knocked Sir Yvain down to the ground and the other two were unable to hold him back. As fast as a horse could carry him, he galloped away, clutching Sir Gawain, who had no power to defend himself. The others ran after him, until they saw the rider rejoin other knights—some twenty of them, all armed. Lancelot was about to rush ahead and strike, but Sir Yvain pulled him back and, holding his wrists, said, “By the Holy Cross, my lord! You can’t go ahead like that! You mustn’t rush in so wildly to show your prowess! It would be a lost cause. Let me tell you, my good [179] friend, what we’ll do. We'll go back to our quarters and arm ourselves without letting the king and queen know, and then we'll go after them. And let’s make it our aim to rescue Gawain or die trying, for one mustn’t help one’s friend in ways that can be of no avail. Prowess should be shown only where it can work!” They all agreed to that plan, then ran back as quickly as they could, heartsore over their terrible loss. Once back at their lodgings, they gathered their arms as secretly as they could and had them carried after them. When they were armed, they rode along the tracks of the men who had carried off Sir Gawain, following the path until they came upon a great highway well trodden by horses. This they followed until they reached forking roads that were just as well trodden. Then Lancelot stopped and said to the other two, “My lords, it seems sensible to me that we should separate at these forking roads and that each of us should go his own way. Otherwise, we will never learn which one was taken by the man who has done us such harm.” They both agreed to this plan, so that Lancelot, going first, started down the middle road, and Sir Yvain started 3“feverishly”: literally, “over their four sic feet.” PASTE down the one to the right and the duke of Clarence the one to the left. Thus they parted from one another. At this point the story stops speaking of Sir Yain and Lancelot and goes on with the duke of Clarence. [180] 82. The Duke of Clarence Learns About Caradoc from His Cousin.’ Now the story says that the duke went on riding until night fell and the moon began to shine bright. Then he listened and heard the sound of a horn not far away to his right. Going a bit farther, he found a path that led in that direction, and it took him out of the woods. Then he looked straight ahead in the light of the moon and saw a very large and lovely field. He rode on until he came to a barbican, which he found open. Going in, he saw to his right and left a broad moat filled with fast-flowing water. He kept riding until he came to a tall, wide door at the entry to a square tower; finding it closed, he called out three times. Then there suddenly appeared at the door a young man who asked who was there, and the duke answered that it was a strange knight who needed shelter. “In God’s name,” said the young man, “you are very welcome and will have good lodgings.” He unlocked the door and, once the duke was inside, locked it behind him. Next, he led him into a splendid keep that rose in the middle of the yard; it stood tall and strong and was surrounded by a tall, strong enclosure. Then the duke dismounted, and other young men came along to take his horse and [181] lead it to the stable. The youth who had opened the door led him upstairs and removed his shield and all his weapons; then he had him sit down on a couch. At once there came out of a room a young lady who was wearing a fine cloth cloak over her shoulders. The duke easily enough saw her come in, as the room was so well lit with candles that you could see in it as clearly as you could outdoors in daylight. The duke stood up to greet the young woman and saw she was so beautiful that she must surely be the lady of the house. He greeted her with words of welcome, and she answered, “God bless you.” Then she put her cloak around his shoulders and forthwith returned to the room that she had come from, while the duke looked around and marveled at all the tower’s splendor, thinking he would ask the young man about it. When he looked back toward the room that the young lady had come from, he saw walking toward him a lady of very great beauty, together with some forty knights and men-at-arms. Seeing her, the duke sprang forward at her approach, and the lady, taking him by the hand, said that he was very welcome; and he greeted her graciously in turn. Then they both sat down on a couch, and the lady asked him in very seemly terms about himself, the land of his birth, the family he was from; and he answered that he belonged to the house of King Arthur. “My lord,” she said, “what is your name?” Corresponds to Micha I:XI; Sommer IV:89-92,93-95. Lancelot, Part IT “My lady,” he said, “Iam called Galescalain.” “And, good sir, where in the kingdom of Logres were you born?” And he answered that he was born in [182] Escavalon, was the son of King Arguel, and “I am the duke of Clarence.” At these words, the lady felt a tremor of joy. She threw her arms around his neck and gave him so many kisses that he was quite overwhelmed. She cried, “God, may You be adored and Your holy name blessed! You have sent me the one man I was most longing to see!” Then she said to him, “My dear friend, what a warm welcome I owe you! You are my first cousin, my uncle’s son, and we were brought up together in Escavalon. I am the daughter of your aunt, the lady of Corbalain, whom your father loved so much.” The duke was astonished to hear this. He well remembered that they had been brought up together and knew she was speaking the truth; but he had not had news of her once she had married, and had even thought she was dead. “My dear cousin,” he said, “if you’re happy to have found me, I am even more overjoyed! I truly thought I had lost you forever. Otherwise, I would have seen you a while ago, provided I had been in some land where I could find you.” Then the lady asked him where he was going and why he was riding fully armed on so holy a day as the eve of Pentecost. And he recounted to her how an unusually tall knight had carried off Sir Gawain and how he and two other knights had set out to rescue him unbeknownst to the king and the whole court. After that, he described the knight’s arms and his height and size, so that she understood who he was. She told the duke that she knew the knight and “I do believe,” she said, “that he passed by here today,” and she agreed that he was the cruelest and most disloyal of all men who had ever borne arms. “And do you know his name and where he is from? He is Caradoc the Huge, the Cruel, the man of the Dolorous [183] Tower, who has never shown mercy to any knight he has overcome. And because he is stronger than any other man, I advise you not to go ahead, since you would gain nothing thereby. The knight has not yet been born who can defeat him, for he is of great prowess and strength beyond measure.” “I am well aware,” said the duke, “that he is of great strength, but strength is not the same as prowess and effectiveness. Would to God, then, whatever the outcome might be, that he and I, fully armed, were facing each other in the field; and let God decide who should have the joy of winning!” “No,” said the lady, “I wouldn’t want to see the two of you in battle for anything in the world! I am sure that if he gained the upper hand, nothing would keep you from losing your head, for many a knight has lost his life to him. No, you won’t go ahead with my consent. If you have made a reckless plan, give it up, for it would be a doomed hope to think that you could accomplish what no one else could do.” “My good cousin,” he said, “don’t warn me away, for your warning would be in vain. Bear in mind that I would be stung forever if Gawain were rescued by Sir Yvain or Lancelot, Part IIT Lancelot and I had no part in it. But please help me with some information, since you know that I really need it.” Seeing that it was useless to insist, the lady began to weep bitter tears, and the conversation ended. Beds were then made ready and the wine was brought in. Once the duke had drunk, he went to bed, but through much of the night he could not sleep for brooding about Sir Gawain. [184] The day’s exertions at arms and riding, though, had worn him out, and at last he fell asleep. Still, he did not sleep long but was up very early. His cousin came to him before he was dressed, and began again, with much crying and weeping, to urge him to stay, “because I can have no peace of mind,” she said, “if you leave.” She went on urging him to remain, but she could not put an end to his plan, and she began to weep again. “My dear friend, I couldn’t possibly allow you to ride off ignorant of information that I could give you. It so happens that of all the women in the world I am one who can best help you; and I will do so to the utmost of my ability. Let me tell you, then, what you can do. When you leave this place, I'll have my man show you the way to a main road; and when you reach it, he will lead you, if you like, all the way to the castle, since the route is so roundabout that it can hardly be followed by anyone who has not taken it many times. I advise you not to refuse the escort, because you would never follow all the ins and outs without getting lost. “Do you know what to do when you reach Caradoc’s castle? You will see a higher, stronger fortress than you have ever seen on flat ground, but it will be no easy matter to pass through the first gate, since it is very well guarded and defended against all those who would like to come in. Ten knights guard it [185] all the time, who are armed with every weapon, and if a strange knight comes along who wants to pass through, he will pay with nothing less than his head, and that’s all the mercy they’ll ever show. Such is the custom of the first gate to Caradoc’s castle, as I have learned from many a messenger I have sent there. You may be sure that no knight has ever entered and lived to come out; as soon as the man is inside, his head comes off. “However, if you listen to me, you will not go to the door where the ten knights are, but will get in from the other side, between the moat and paling, where you will find a low, narrow postern. At that point the moat is spanned by a long, narrow plank which is dangerous for a knight in armor. Once you have crossed on the plank, you will get through the first wall by means of that back door; and after that wall, you will find two others. “Now, even if you were the finest knight in the world, you would have more than enough trouble; but if you can get past the three walls,” you will have to look out afterwards for only one knight, and then you will find yourself in one of the most beautiful gardens your eyes have ever seen. In the middle of the garden you will see a tower and, at its foot, a spring; you can go into the tower unhindered, and, once you’re inside, you will find a young lady who will not strike you as ugly or homely. In fact, she is one of the most beautiful and refined women of low birth that you have ever seen. [186] 2“three walls”: literally, “three sets of walls” (trots petre de murs). 283 “Greet her for me, in the name of her lady of the White Tower, and tell her, in the name of the great affection and trust that she has shown me ever since I first saw her, that she should help you carry out your task. To make sure she believes what you say, give her this ring; she will recognize it at once as the ring that she gave me from her own finger on the last day I saw her. She was for a long time my lady-in-waiting, you see; she was with me as long as my husband was alive and even quite a while after his death. But don’t forget to tell her that you are my first cousin and the man I love most in the world; and you will be telling her the truth. And remember: if you can find your way to her, you run no risk of being killed once she knows who you are.” Then the lady handed him the ring. He took it and asked to leave at once, and she herself mounted her horse and escorted him as far as the forest. Then the duke reluctantly bade her farewell, and she gave him her squire to guide him to the castle where Sir Gawain was being held prisoner. But before she turned back, she begged him, if he valued her love, not to fail to come back her way if God allowed him to leave the castle safe and sound. With that, the lady turned away, weeping out of fear for the duke; and the duke went on his way with the squire. At this point the story stops speaking of him and his cousin and turns back to Sir Yvain just as he took leave of the duke and Lancelot. [187] 83. Yvain Rescues a Young Man and His Family from a Band of Thieves.’ Now the story says that Sir Yvain rode until it was late evening and the night was fast coming on. Then he came into a great valley that was covered with a thick forest. When he had gone some way through the valley, he came upon a litter carried by two horses. Sitting at the back end of the litter was a young lady whose head and face were uncovered and who looked very beautiful. She would have been happy had she not been so grieved by the knight lying in front of her in an open coffin, with huge wounds in his head and body. Four squires flanked the litter, two on each side. The young lady was in deep distress and moaning loudly, for the knight was the creature she loved most in the world. Sir Yvain greeted her as soon as they were close enough, and she said God-bless in return, but her sobbing went on. “My lady,” said Sir Yvain, “I would gladly see what you have there, if you cared to do me the favor of showing me.” “Oh, my lord,” said the damsel, “please don’t ask me that! No knight errant will ever see him without facing great honor or great shame as a result, and so far everyone who has seen him has had nothing but shame and trouble.” “My lady,” said Sir Yvain, “tell me about the honor or shame that you mean.” “My lord,” said the young lady, “this is a wounded knight, and [188] if anyone wants to see him and ty to get 1 Corresponds to Micha I:XII; Sommer IV:92-93,96-98. 284 him out of the coffin that he is lying in, he must first swear an oath as a loyal knight that, if he can get him out, he will not rest until he has avenged him on the man who gave him these wounds. Many good knights have tried to pull him out and failed; the only one to succeed will be the man who can in fact avenge him, and that will be the best knight now living. The shame those knights have felt came from the fact that they could not remove him from the coffin that he is lying in. If you want to make this commitment and remove him, I will show him to you.” “My lady,” said Sir Yvain, “since so many good knights have tried, I must try, too.” Then the young woman ordered the men riding alongside the bier to dismount and to set the bier down on the ground, and they did so. Then Yvain uncovered the knight and saw that he was badly wounded, for he was run through by two spear-shafts, had a half-foot-deep gash in his right shoulder, and had a sword-cut running from the middle of his forehead down between the eyebrows to his right cheek. The knight was moaning painfully, and Sir Yvain wanted to lift him up, but first he had to swear to the young lady, as a loyal knight, that he would take vengeance on the doer of the deed if he could get the wounded man out of the coffin; [189] he so swore. Then he put his arms around the knight and pulled, but he could not move him in the slightest. Once he saw that he could not move him, he gave up, greatly distressed and disappointed. The young lady looked at him and said, “Sir knight, I knew it. It’s no use.” “As God is my witness,” said Sir Yvain, “you have every right to say so. I knew that I wasn’t the finest knight in the world! And now I would be willing to suffer the wounds that this man has, if only that meant a certain knight I know were here now. We parted only a short while ago! But I'll tell you what to do: keep riding along this road; if you can come upon the knight, he will do what needs to be done, if any mortal man can do it. But if you don’t meet him, go straight on to the city of London, where King Arthur holds his court; there, please God, you will find help, since some of the best knights in the world are there.” With that, Sir Yvain left, and the four squires lifted the knight back into place and started down the road that Sir Yvain had come along. Meanwhile, Sir Yvain rode on past nightfall, but luckily the moon was shining bright. For a long while he rode along the highway in the moonlight, until he heard a horn blown somewhere to his left and understood by the sound of it that the horn was not far away. Then he thought that he would ride in that direction to find shelter and a place to feed and rest his horse, for if he rode all night, he would perhaps find the next day no such spot as he [190] would want or even need. With that, he left the road that he had been on quite a while and rode off in the direction of the horn. He had not gone the distance of a bowshot when he heard an urgent blowing of the horn, and it seemed to him that the horn meant something was wrong. In a short while he heard the horn sound five or six times, and, sure that something was wrong, he quickened his pace, moving into a gallop and then running as swiftly as he could make his horse go. At last he reached a wooden battlemented tower that stood at the head of a drawbridge over a great moat filled with Lancelot, Part III water; the moat encircled a large wooden dwelling and the broad, open grounds that surrounded it, and over the moat was a bristling array of long iron-tipped pikes. When he reached the tower, he heard inside a great din of people who were shouting and crying out loud; and the man who had sounded the horn was in the tower and kept shouting, “Holy Mary!” When he saw Sir Yvain fully armed, he realized that he was a knight and called out to him, “Noble knight! Help us, by God!” Sir Yvain looked up and asked him what was wrong. “Oh, my lord, there’s a gang of thieves here. They have pushed into my house and are slaughtering my guards, and I think they've killed my mother, a poor noble lady, and old! And I am heartsick over my sister, a maiden, very virtuous and beautiful: I think they have raped her.” Seeing that the bridge was down and the gate open, Sir Wain spurred his horse forward and raced into the yard. He saw four of the thieves climbing up a [191] ladder to the windows of the main house, and there were two inside, holding the sister of the man in the tower and about to push her out through the window to those on the ladder; there were other thieves, too, almost a score, scattered through the courtyard and the buildings. They were wearing light armor—Welsh leather breastplates and molded-leather caps—and carrying axes, swords, and Welsh bows. When Sir Yvain saw the men who were holding the girl, he dashed forward and threw his spear so hard into the body of the first that the man tumbled down. Then he took sword in hand and dealt one of the others such a blow to the head that head and cap were both split. The other two dropped down from the ladder and fled across the yard, but he dashed after them as well as others and began to slash at their arms and heads and give them the worst time he could. But they began shooting arrows from afar and killed his horse and even wounded him in many places, but they gave him no deadly wound. When he found himself on foot, he covered himself with his shield like the skilled fighter he was and ran toward the thieves with his bare sword outstretched. He swung and cut at them, but they were in such dread of him that not one of them dared hit back, and they all ran away instead, some here, some there. Meanwhile, the young man in the tower took a powerful, sturdy bow of his and shot at them again and again, for there were a good fourteen of them. In this way the two defenders killed or stopped all but a couple [192] who jumped over the line of pikes into the moat. Sir Yain, though, took no pains to go after them, for in no time they had run off into the deep woods. Then the young man came down from the tower and greeted Sir Yvain very warmly, saying, “My lord, don’t be upset that your horse has been killed; you will have another one, please God.” Then they both went into the house, where they found the lady lying in bed in a faint, for she had been badly frightened. And when the sister saw them come in, she threw herself under a bed, thinking the thieves were back; but when she realized that it was her brother, she was overjoyed, and the young man was no less overjoyed to see that she had escaped safe and sound and with her honor. He said that she and their mother should give a warm Lancelot, Part IIT welcome to “this worthy knight here, whom God sent to save us.” They all welcomed Sir Yvain with great joy, and their terrible trial gave way to great gladness; nor did the young man give much thought to the men he had lost, since his mother and sister had come through. That night, Sir Yvain was well lodged, and when they showed him to the most comfortable bed they had, the young man asked him whether he wanted to rise early. He answered, “Yes, as soon as there is light, because I have much more to do than you would think.” “My lord,” said the young man, “tomorrow is the holy feast of Pentecost, but since you have so much to do, I wouldn’t dare ask you to stay. Still, you should not ride off without hearing Mass, and if you like, I could have you hear it nearby; [193] in that way, you would have the time for it, and I could be with you that much longer.” Sir Yvain thanked him and said that he had spoken like a man of true breeding, “for I would gladly hear Mass, but you owe it to me to be sure it’s as early in the morning as possible, since I am in a great hurry.” The man agreed that it would be very early, and then went to his bed, which was set up at the foot of Sir Yvain’s. But now the story stops speaking of Sir Yvain and turns back to Lancelot. 84. Lancelot Extricates Drian from an Enchanted Coffin and Is Warmly Received at Gay Castle.’ Now the story says that, on leaving the duke of Clarence and Sir Yvain, Lancelot rode for a long while without coming upon any adventure worth reporting, until daylight dimmed and night was near. Then his path began to veer somewhat to the left, and he realized that he had been moving toward the road that Sir Yvain was taking; and it is true that the two routes were moving toward a single path. Then Lancelot came into a great valley and rode along until he reached a high hill. Once he had climbed the hill, he encountered the wounded knight who lay in the litter. Coming up to the young lady, he asked her who was in the litter, and she gave him the same answer she had given Sir Yvain. “Show him to me,” he said; “let’s see him.” “I won't,” she said, “unless you try to get him out of the coffin in the prescribed way,” and she told him how. Lancelot answered that [194] that condition would not stop him from trying. He pledged and swore, as a loyal knight, that, if he could free the wounded man from the coffin, he would do his utmost to avenge him on the man who had harmed him. At that, the squires laid the man down on the ground, and the young lady threw back the cover. When Lancelot saw him, he was astonished that the man could live with all the pain that his wounds were causing him. 1Corresponds to Micha I:XJII; Sommer IV:93-96. 285 Then he took him in his arms as gently as he could and pulled him steadily out of the bier. The knight heaved a sigh and, gazing up at Lancelot, said, “Oh, my lord, bless you! No wretch ever suffered the torment that I did in this box, and no one was ever able to get me out, though many a good knight tried. That’s how I can tell that you are the finest knight of all. “Now that God has granted me such good fortune, what do I need to go on looking for? You see, I wanted to go to the court of King Arthur, but even if I had stayed there forever, I would not have gained more than I have gained right here; for I feel so much better, thank God, that I don’t seem to have the slightest pain any longer. “Good nephew,” he then said to one of his squires, “take one of the others with you and go as fast as you can to our castle, and give this news to my brother; it will do his heart good. Meanwhile, this man here will come along with us, since he has richly deserved our honor and hospitality.” Then he said to Lancelot, “My lord, you will come along with us. It is past time to take lodging for the night, and you will have it in one of the finest castles in the world, a place where you could not be more welcome once it’s known that I have been freed by you. Please, [195] in God’s name, come with us; it will be a great comfort to both me and those dear to me.” Lancelot agreed, seeing that he needed lodging if he was to avoid spending the night in the woods. With that, the two squires took leave and rode off as fast as they could make their mounts go, heading toward the castle with their very welcome news. Lancelot himself, together with the young woman, prepared the litter for the knight, making the bed as soft as they could with green grass and cloth, which was plentiful, and pillows and a quilt. Once they had him settled, they covered him with a splendid blanket and lifted him onto the two horses that were Carrying him. Then they started off, leaving the coffin in the middle of the road just as the knight wanted, for he claimed that, if he ever saw it again, all his pains would start once more. They rode all the way to the castle, where a joyous welcome awaited them. The castle stood on the bank of the Thames; it was a very handsome, splendid one for its size, and it had been one of the liveliest in the world, which is why it was called the Gay Castle. Its lord was a man of great age, named Trahan the Gay, who had been one of the most high-spirited knights in the world during his youth; in fact, as long as he had borne arms, his only sleeves had come from ladies’ shifts,2 and he had always been in love. Trahan was the father of the knight in the litter, who was named Drian the Gay, and Drian had an older brother, named Melian the Gay; they were both men of great prowess. When they reached the castle, [196] they met Melian the Gay, who had been waiting to greet them together with as many horsemen as he could find in the town. At their entry, he ran up to Lancelot before his brother and gave 2Literally, “he never wore a sleeve but from a shirt/shift (chemise).” The allusion is to the knightly fashion of displaying a lady’s favor, often one of her sleeves, on one’s own person or weapon. Clearly, the sleeve of a shift betokens greater intimacy (and lightness of spirit) than the sleeve of an outer garment. 286 him the warmest welcome possible; only then did he kiss his brother in the litter and ask him how he was. “My lord,” said Drian, “I am well, thanks to God and to this lord here. It seems to me I haven’t felt the slightest pain since he freed me from that woeful prison of mine, which was so terrible for me. You owe him greater love than any other knight who is not part of our family, for, with God’s help and his, I am going to get much better. He is the best of the finest knights in the world, and he will avenge me! And if he were not the best of all, he would not have delivered me. Such was my fate.” With that, they passed into the castle and found all the people of the town singing and dancing in the streets by the light of masses of candles and tapers; the whole castle seemed to be ablaze. Seeing the knights come in, the people all ran up to Lancelot, shouting, “Welcome to the good knight who has healed our lord!” Thus they escorted him as far as the castle keep, where they met Trahan, who had come forward as far as he could; indeed, he had become so infirm that he could not move forward one yard unless he were carried. He was very happy to see his son, as he had not believed the young man would ever be healed. A number of people lifted the young man out of [197] the litter, and he was put to bed by a few of the many ladies and maidens at the castle. Lancelot, meanwhile, was aware of a great readiness to welcome him joyously. Melian eagerly helped him out of his armor and, once he had done so, led him back to the great hall where Drian lay in bed; there they all offered to serve Lancelot to the best of their ability. It seemed to Melian, fixing a long look on the knight, that he had seen him once before. “My lord,” he said, “I hope you won’t mind what I am going to ask you; it is with all due respect...” And Lancelot answered that he was quite willing to hear him speak, with or without all due respect. “My lord,” he said, “I ask you to tell me if you belong to the household of King Arthur.” “Indeed, I do,” said Lancelot. “But why do you ask?” “My lord,” he answered, “because it seems to me I have seen you before. You look, more than anyone else in the world, like a certain new knight at Camelot who freed a wounded man of the weapons stuck in his body when no one else would help him.” “Oh, yes,” said Lancelot, “and it’s brought me a lot of pain and trouble since!” “My lord,” said the knight, “have you ever found out who he was?” “I have never learned a thing about him,” said Lancelot, “but on his account I spent a year and a half ina prison that I was able to leave only twice.” When Melian realized that this was really the man, he flung his arms around him and hugged him close, then said, “Oh, my lord, bless you—more than all the other knights in the world! So you’re the one who saved that knight, even before you had ever shown any skill at arms, since you had just become a knight that very day! Well, let me tell you, Iam the knight you saved!” 3See chapter 22. 4See chapters 48, 49, 52. Lancelot, Part HI At that, he showed him the head wound and the other two wounds that broken sections of two spears had made in his body. [198] Then he said, “My lord, my brother lying over there and I both owe you a great reward for our persons and our lives, for you took it upon yourself to restore us when everyone else failed. And you have healed not only him and me but my father, too, who is a better man than we are: he has been no less disabled than my brother and I were. Let me tell you about it. “The fact is that there is a knight at the edge of these woods who is the most ruthless scoundrel in the world, and he is also the tallest knight anyone knows of, taller than Galehaut, the son of the Giantess, who is half a foot taller than any of King Arthur’s knights. His name is Caradoc the Huge, lord of the Dolorous Tower; and he had a brother who was no less cruel and treacherous than himself. That’s the man who wounded me with those shafts that you pulled out, and he also gave me the wound in my head. After he had done all that to me, I killed him with his own sword. That is what led to the deadly hatred between Caradoc and us, which had lasted for a long time when, not long ago, he attacked my brother Drian, who is lying here. Drian fought back hard, since when he’s well he is very brave and has great prowess; but Caradoc wounded him as you have seen, because he is so strong that no hauberk can withstand his lance as long as he is mounted on a good horse. Once he had wounded my brother, he wouldn’t kill him but said that he would make him live in sorrow, just to spite all those who loved him. Then he had him taken to his castle and locked up. [199] “Quite some time later, my brother was brought out of his cell by the knight’s mother, the most faithless creature who ever lived, a woman unmoved by any horror she might see. Well, she didn’t do it for his good, but to make sure that he would never be healed and that those who loved him would have nothing but sorrow of him. She put him into the coffin from which you freed him. It was bewitched with spells and meant to hold a wounded knight who would lie there unable to get out until the finest knight in the world set him free with his own hands, neither hurting him in the process nor harming or breaking the box. But there was another magical thing about that coffin: as long as the knight lay in it, he could neither die nor be healed of his wounds. “Once she had laid him out in the box, she had him brought at night right up to the gate of our castle, and in the morning we and our people were so grief-stricken that no one could tell the half of it. But no grief could match my father’s, which plunged him into an extraordinary illness; he lost his speech and hearing and even the power to move his limbs, so that he has never since been able to leave his bed without being lifted out. We were thrown into such grief that we would rather have died than gone on living. “Not long afterwards, I was riding through the woods, together with two uncles of mine who are knights and three other knights of my family. While riding, we began to speak about my father and my brother, who [200] had brought us so much sorrow, and we all began to weep. Through my tears, I said, ‘Dear Lord God, I don’t know if they'll ever be well again!’ Just as I was uttering these words, a young lady glided past us on a swift horse, and, hearing my words, she Lancelot, Part II answered, ‘Yes, indeed, Melian, they will get well again together!’ “We were all stunned to hear her say that. Once I was over my surprise, I spurred forward but I couldn’t catch up with her, and to this day I have never learned who she was. But this much I understood: she meant that all it took to cure my father was to free my brother from the coffin.” And in fact, as soon as you had set him free, my father was healed, as you have seen; and his feet hadn’t touched the ground in over seven months! I know, too, that, with a doctor’s care, my brother would get well again, just as I did when I had such care after you had freed me.” Shown such a joyful welcome by Melian and his family, Lancelot pressed them for a full account of the tall knight whom they had mentioned to him, and he realized, listening to them, that it was the same tall knight who had carried off Sir Gawain. He revealed to them at once the reason for his trip: how Sir Gawain had been captured, and he and Sir Yvain and the duke of Clarence were looking for him. “My lord,” said Melian the Gay, “now that you have told me that much, please acquaint me with one more fact: tell me your name.” Lancelot answered that he was named Lancelot of the [201] Lake, “and I would like you to know,” he said, “that you are the first knight I have ever told.” That made Melian very happy, as he had in many places heard of Lancelot’s exploits. When Drian, who was in bed, heard mention of Sir Yvain, he remembered the knight who had tried to pull him out of the coffin and how he had said he would either be freed by a certain knight who had just parted from him or would never be freed by any knight at all. He told this to Lancelot and asked if that was Sir Yvain, and Lancelot said yes and asked if he had any news of him; but he had no knowledge of him, nor did his young lady or any of the squires. After that, Melian said to Lancelot, “My lord, how do you plan to stop the knight who captured Sir Gawain? It won't be as easy as you think, and you will not be able to beat him without some help from King Arthur. The king would have to bring in all his forces, and he would still have much to do, because the castle is so strong that it would take a great effort to capture it; besides, the knight has great holdings and a powerful clan and was very troublesome to King Arthur during his struggles with Galehaut. “For that reason I advise you not to take on this task. I don’t believe that one knight alone can succeed, not even the hundred best in the world, because the castle is really as strong as I’ve said, and its lord ruthless and cruel. Still, stouthearted as you are, you could hardly believe the extent of it without seeing it yourself, but when you do, you'll say I told you the truth. And [202] let me add that the knight is so arrogant that he still thinks he can get all of King Arthur’s land and then Galehaut’s as well. And for that. 51 iterally, “that my brother’s recovery depended solely on his being freed from the coffin.” The sense of the passage, esp. of the lines that follow, indicates a scribal error and makes us substitute the father’s recovery for the brother’s. Sommer’s text does not include this statement. 287 reason he has introduced all those evil customs into his castle. He thinks that the good knights of King Arthur’s house will all come to rescue Sir Gawain and that he’ll capture them one after another, and that’s how he expects to bring down the king. “Now I have given you good grounds to abandon the search you have undertaken; but you are wise enough to see what is best to do, and you will do whatever your heart urges you to. But whatever you think is the best way to proceed, you will have all our support behind you, and I myself will go with you, along with as many knights—men of mine and friends of ours—as I can rally; for you of all men we are bound, with our persons and our wealth, to help.” “So help me God,” said Lancelot, “I wouldn’t give up my purpose at this point! Two men worthier and older than I are part of the search, and they wouldn’t give it up. Nor must any more knights join us on my account! It would be a greater honor to die in this quest than to turn back.” “So help me God,” said Melian, “if any man could succeed in this, it would be you. I don’t think that knight will die by any hand but yours, because you could not have pulled my brother out of the coffin unless you were meant to avenge him.” They spoke at length that evening about the knight, and the father and his two sons repeatedly promised Lancelot to be forever at his call, for which he thanked them [203] very much. They spoke until it was time to retire; then the beds were readied, and Lancelot was shown to bed with great rejoicing. 85. Gawain, in Caradoc’s Prison, Is Helped by a Resourceful Damsel.’ At this point the story begins to speak of Sir Gawain and how he was carried off by the tall knight. The story says that when they had gone a league from the site of his capture, the knight stripped Sir Gawain of everything he was wearing and lifted him onto a fast-trotting nag. Then he handed him over to two cruel and ruthless men-at-arms, each with a cat-o’-nine-tails in his hand; they flogged him in front and in back and flogged his flanks and his shoulders so badly that blood flowed down his whole body and covered the horse and even dripped onto the path they were following. He, meanwhile, bore it all without uttering a single word, except that he again and again bemoaned his uncle the king and his companions and the great sorrow they would feel for him once they learned what had happened. So the tears streamed softly from his eyes, not because of the lashes that he was being dealt but out of fellow-feeling for those from whom he had been wrenched away. Painfully whipping and wounding him all the way, they led him to the Dolorous Tower, which is what the main castle of Caradoc the Cruel was called; and when they reached it, they turned him over to that treacherous woman who was the lord’s mother. Corresponds to Micha I:XIV; Sommer IV:112-116. 288 As soon as she recognized the captive, she said to him, [204] “Gawain, Gawain, now at last I’ve got you! Now I'll make you pay for my brother, Gadras the Black. He was one of the worthiest knights ever to bear a shield, and you killed him like the faithless traitor you are!” “No, my lady,” said Sir Gawain, who was badly wounded, “I have never in my life been a traitor and never will be.” “You are!” she said. “You were a traitor when you treacherously killed the fine knight my brother was.” When he heard himself called traitor a second time, Gawain was so struck to the quick that he almost went out of his mind, forgetting all fear and all punishments. He angrily answered that she was lying like an old faithless traitor herself, and “if the wretched coward who owns this castle and took me prisoner dared show himself, I would defend my name in his very house, doing battle either with him or with anyone else.” At those words, the old woman cried out to the knights who were standing nearby, and they jumped to attention, since they were very much afraid of her. She said that she would never rest until Gawain the traitor was dead, and “if you don’t kill him,” she said, “I’ll do it myself!” With that, she ran over to a pike that was in a holder, pulled it out, and like a madwoman rushed back to strike Sir Gawain, but her son, who was coming out of a [205] sideroom, ran up to her and, flinging his arms around her, took away the pike. Then he said, “No, my lady, that was the wrong thing to do. You would have robbed me of what I have to do, and I would never have had a second chance.” “God!” she said, “I’ll never have any peace! He insulted me and called me an old faithless traitor!” “My lady,” said Caradoc, “he would like to be killed now, since he knows quite well that grief and shame are in store for him, and he won’t ever be freed from my prison. You mustn’t take seriously anything said by a man who doesn’t want to go on living.” With these words he turned his mother away from her mad attempt. She then ordered four men-at-arms to stretch Sir Gawain out on a big table, and she smeared a poisonous ointment over all his wounds; after that, she covered him with a light unguent to stop the poison from seeping through to his inward parts. Once she was finished, she had him put to bed very comfortably for the night in a splendid room, and there he was closely watched, lest he escape. When morning came and he thought he would stay in bed awhile and rest, he was pulled out instead and carried into a deep, dark prison cell that was full of vermin. In the cell there was a stout pillar of marble whose top surface was large enough for a tall man to lie down and stretch out in any direction, but the pillar was no more than four feet high. At its base were all the vermin, and on top lay Sir Gawain on a pallet of rough and scratchy straw. He lay there in great discomfort, with little to eat and drink and less covering than he needed, for the cell was somewhat below ground level? and cut out of thick, vaulted stone, which made it cold and foul-smelling. [206] The stench of the vermin was so great that no one could have lasted there long, and they made so much noise that they could be 2“below ground level”: literally, “deep.” Lancelot, Part IIT heard from quite far away; nor would any man have been safe there, for if he had happened to fall into their midst, he would never have come out alive. The first night that Sir Gawain spent in the cell, the dreadful din was so great that any man, however brave, would have been frightened, especially when the long snakes headed up the stout pillar, which was low. So Sir Gawain had no end of torment before daybreak, to such a point that he often came close to flinging himself into the mass of vermin beneath him. But the shamefulness of such a vile death held him back, as did his fear of damning his soul, for he would have been knowingly killing himself. And so he looked into his steadfast heart for comfort, and he endured in good hope the pains and hardships that it forecast to him; for a wholesome, noble heart must rather die struggling and in the hope of winning than by simply giving up when chance brings him woes. Such was the suffering that the noble knight bore in the treacherous tyrant’s prison. His wounds became swollen and festered; his arms and legs swelled up with the poison that had been spread on them; his head grew light because of how little he slept and ate; his trunk and all his limbs weakened to such a point that he could hardly stand up any longer. Yet the snakes and serpents never stopped flinging themselves up at him, and he had nothing [207] to fight them off with but his heavy, swollen hands. Day and night he sat up fighting them off, and did so with his feet too, which hurt him very badly. There was a young lady of great beauty in the castle whom Caradoc loved above all other women but who had no love for him. Indeed, she hated him more than any other man, because he had seized her from her lover, a valiant knight whom she deeply loved, and had killed him; she hated him so much on that account that she could never see him without being pained and angered. This young lady had long been in the household of the lady of the White Tower, who was the cousin of Galescalain, the duke of Clarence. She was very sensible and well-bred, but could never be comforted for the woeful loss of her lover; and if she had not been closely watched, she would have fled at the earliest moment, but she was so well guarded by men-at-arms and knights that she could never leave. One day it happened that she was out strolling through the garden that surrounded the tower where she stayed, and she was picking flowers in that lovely place. The spot adjoined the prison where Sir Gawain was being held, and there was a window on that side, not large at all, through which his sighs and laments could be heard. When the young lady reached the window, she remembered Sir Gawain and she was deeply moved to think of all the praise she had often heard for him. Now, hearing these sighs and laments, she felt her heart grow tight, and she began to weep bitterly. She drew close to the window and began to listen. He, bemoaning his great woes, kept saying, “God! I never deserved [208] to die such a vile and shameful death! King Arthur, dear uncle, how heartsick you would be if you knew what horrors I face here! My dear, gracious lady, Queen Guenevere, how pale your pink cheeks would turn if you heard about my troubles! Oh, God, what a loss to the splendid Round Table, not through my death but through Lancelot, Part IT my imprisonment! Fine knights will come looking for me, but in vain. Lancelot, my dear friend, how much lighter my pains would be if I knew you were healthy and well, and were where you belong! I hope God will shield you with the help and protection of my uncle the king; and I pray He not let you come here, because it would be a lost cause. Still, if any power could free me from this place, it would be yours, though I don’t see how: the castle fears no man, and its lord is a man of great power and full of treachery and wickedness, with pity for no one.” That is how Sir Gawain lamented and grieved in his cell. The young lady, after listening awhile, stuck her head through the window up to her shoulders, then softly called to him by name. When Sir Gawain heard his name called, he answered very weakly, “Who is that, God?” “I am a good friend of yours,” she said, “and though as far as I know I have never seen you, I am pained that I can’t help you. The great help that you have always given to ladies and damsels has won you my love.” “Ah, my lady,” he said, “who are you?” And she told him what the story has recounted, and cried bitter tears as she spoke about her lover. “Please, young lady,” he said, “since you would give me whatever help you [209] could, think now about me! I am dying here the most painful death that any man could face.” Then he told her about his wounds and how they were inflamed with poison, and all his limbs and his face and the rest of his body were swollen; he thought it was the work of the snakes and serpents. “But if I had a little stick that I could use to fight them off, I would feel satisfied; no one, I think, has ever done me a favor more welcome than that one would be!” “By God,” she said, “you’ll soon have a stick to use against them! And I’ll also give you an ointment that will counteract the poison on your wounds.” Thereupon the damsel turned away and went up into the tower that she had come from. She opened a case she had and pulled out a certain box; thrusting it into her sleeve, she went into her room, which was the one closest to ground level. There she took a long pole that her clothes hung on, since this was her bedroom, and tossed it outside through a window as discreetly as she could. Then she went out through a door at the back of the tower, closed the door carefully behind her, and went out into the garden, looking up and down to make sure that no one was there. She placed the pole on her shoulder, as it was light and not too thick, and carried it to the window, where she hung the box at the end of the pole and held it out for Sir Gawain to take. It was hard for him to take it, though, since there was no light in the cell save whatever light came through the window, which was tiny. “Sir Gawain,” she said, “take this box now and spread the ointment over your whole body; this one won’t give you [210] the sort of swelling that won’t go down! Then break the pole into pieces, and, until God sends you help, you can use them to fight off the vermin in there with you. But, if you value my love and honor and your salvation, take care never to let anyone know anything I have said or done, because it would be the death of you and a betrayal of me.” 202) He answered that she could trust him, that he would rather let his tongue be pulled out. Then he took the box and placed it inside his shirt so that he would not lose it, and he tried to break the pole into pieces with his two hands and his knees. With great effort he produced three sticks; then he fought hard to beat back the snakes crawling up on him and he maimed and killed many of them, hitting with a length of the pole in each hand until he had gained some relief. Meanwhile, the young lady went back, because she was afraid of being noticed; and when she was back in the tower, she remembered a recipe that she had learned from the faithless old woman who was Caradoc’s mother. It was for a kind of bread that would instantly kill any vermin that ate it. She drew aside a young girl in her service and whispered to her to go fetch enough flour to make bread for ten men at a morning meal. She herself fetched a certain herb and then kneaded the flour with its juice, adding something else that the recipe called for as well. Having prepared the dough just as she had learned to do, [211] she baked the bread and then broke it into tiny pieces on a white cloth. She went to the garden gate and then, once she had made sure that no one was watching, went up to the window and threw a third of the crumbled bread onto the floor of the prison cell. When the snakes caught the smell of the warm bread, they wanted it and flung themselves upon it so noisily that they could have been heard in the garden. In no time the bread was gone. Then she threw in the rest, and again they went after it; the bread was warm, and they therefore ate much of it, because poisonous snakes are of a very cold nature and are thoroughly cold. Having eaten the bread, they were full. Then the warmth of the bread and the strength of the herbs acted against the snakes’ cold venom, and they all died so suddenly that not one could crawl away from the spot where they had fed. Then the stench was so great that Sir Gawain would have died, if not for the sweet scent of the ointment spread over his body; and yet he did not know that the snakes were dead, for he would have been too overjoyed. The young lady heard everything that happened; then, with great delight, she went away, not saying a thing. At nightfall, she brought Sir Gawain a large meal. She tied a rope to the end of a long spear and hung the food from it, and from that point on he had no lack of food or [212] drink, as she, deeply moved by his misfortune, gave him as much as he needed. That night Sir Gawain did not face his usual torment, and he wondered why. The next day, the damsel came to see him and asked how he had been through the night. He had been very well, he said, “since I didn’t feel last night any of the snakes that had been plaguing me; nor did I hear any of the usual loud noises.” “You will see how it is again tonight,” she said, “but no more of this now. I am sure I can cure you of all the ills you have suffered.” With that, she left. She waited until nighttime and then came back, bringing a little crystal lantern with a brightly burning candle in it. “Sir Gawain,” she said, “now shine this all around and see how things are.” 290 He held the burning candle out and saw all the vermin dead in one corner of the cell. He was delighted and said so to the young woman, and she told him what she had done for him and how she had thrown the bread into the cell without his knowledge. In this way, Sir Gawain stayed in the cell, and every day the young lady would speak with him, offering him whatever help and comfort she could. With the good ointments that she gave him she drew all the pus and poison out of his wounds, and he had as much to eat and drink as he needed. It was very cold, but she gave him so many of her best clothes that the cold did not bother him. So he lay there much more comfortably than before, resting and getting better day by day, gradually regaining his good looks and his strength. He was troubled, though, by the stench of the vermin and complained of it when [213] his comforter came to the window. She asked him how he was, and he told her, “My dear young lady, my prison would be just right, thanks to God and to you, if not for the great stench of the vermin, which is killing me. I do believe I'll die of it!” Hearing that, she sighed and answered very gently, ‘Don’t be dismayed now, my dear friend. I will think of something!” Then she left and went back to the tower. She prepared a sulphur fire, removing the bad smell with a great amount of incense, and then came back to the prison cell with her cousin,® where they both threw burning pieces through the window onto the vermin. Then Sir Gawain was relieved by the good scent that he smelled, and the vermin were all burned up through the young lady’s great cleverness. From then on, there was nothing that burdened Sir Gawain aside from the weight of prison itself; nor did anyone take notice that he was so comfortable, since he was sent his food every day at the hour of nones through a trapdoor in the ceiling of the cell. But the story has nothing more to say about him at this time and turns back instead to King Arthur and his men, to speak of what they were doing in London in the fields by the River Thames, at the splendid court that had come together from many lands. [214] Ny 86. Galehaut Stops Lionel from Setting Out After Lancelot.’ On the eve of Pentecost, the story says, at the hour of vespers, the king came out of his tent; and when he and Galehaut had heard the office, they happened to ask about Sir Gawain, but there was no one who could tell them any news of either him or the other three.? Galehaut, though, to whom it meant more, would not let the matter drop but mounted his horse and rode to Sir Gawain’s lodgings. He did not find him there, nor anyone who would give him any word; and it was like that at Sir Yvain’s lodgings as well; nor 3“her cousin”: presumably, the same as the “young girl” on p. [210]. Corresponds to Micha I:XV; Sommer IV:101-102. 2“the other three”: Lancelot, Yvain, and the duke of Clarence, last seen at court at the beginning of chapter 81. Lancelot, Part IT would the duke of Clarence’s men speak a word of the truth; for all three knights had forbidden their households to give news of their whereabouts to anyone. Just as Galehaut was going back to his own quarters to ask for news of Lancelot, he looked down a narrow street and caught sight of Lancelot’s cousin Lionel rushing by on a huge horse. Lionel was supposed to become a knight the next day and was already clad in the robe. Galehaut, seeing him go by so fast, dashed forward and caught up with him at a little bridge and seized his reins. Lionel looked at him shamefacedly and, since the youth was about to be knighted, Galehaut was surprised to see that he was wearing his traveling cloak. He asked him where he was going and, as he asked, he lifted the corner of the cloak and saw that he had put on his hauberk and was carrying his sword. “What is this, Lionel?” he said. “Where are you going?” “No, my lord,” he answered, “please don’t ask me that, but just let me go.” “T can’t,” said Galehaut. [215] “I want to know, and you won’t take another step unless I know!” “My lord,” said Lionel, “by the faith you owe the creature you love the most in this world, don’t ask me again, since the only answer you'll get is no answer!” “You’ve convinced me not to ask you again,” said Galehaut; “but, by God, you’re not going very far! is With that, he turned him around; and Lionel felt so pent up with rage that he almost burst. Just then, they both looked up and saw a squire coming along; he had a shield hanging from his neck and was not slowing down as he came near. Lionel, recognizing it as his own shield, drew back somewhat to make way, lest Galehaut stop him, and shouted to him to keep going. The squire rushed across the little bridge, not letting himself be stopped by anything that Galehaut might say. While Galehaut was busy shouting threats to make the squire turn around, Lionel drew out his sword as warily as he could, then, slashing the reins in Galehaut’s hands, spurred forward after the squire. When Galehaut saw himself holding the useless reins, he sighed and shouted to Lionel as he disappeared, “Ah! Unbridled Heart! It’s clear the two of you are really cousins!”5 With that, he spurred his horse to dash after him; Lionel, though, rather than linger, was racing off as fast as he could go. But Galehaut was on a very fine horse, as he had a choice of the best in the world; so he caught up with Lionel and, seizing him under the arms, lifted him out of his saddle and sat him down in front of him, for he was extremely strong. Lionel, however, was hardly weak; he twisted back and forth, doing his best to free himself, until he pried himself loose from Galehaut’s grasp [216] and dropped flat onto the ground. But Galehaut flung himself down from the horse onto the youth and said, “Now you’ll come back with me, for you’ve no way out!” Lionel was so angry that tears came to his eyes. “All right, sir!” he said. “I see where things stand: I have to tell you what I had thought to hide. I was going after my cousin, who just now rushed off into the forest, not that I know what trouble made him go off in full armor! And with him 3¥For the import of Galehaut’s exclamation, see chapter 11, p. {108}. Lancelot, Part III went Sir Gawain and Sir Yvain and another knight, too, a very important man. And because they went off tonight, without saying a word to us, I am afraid the trouble is serious. So I beg you, please, to let me go!” “What!” said Galehaut. “Are you sure this is true?” Lionel answered that he was sure it was true. Galehaut did not want to show that he was worried, so instead he comforted Lionel as well as he could, saying to him, “My dear friend, don’t be worried. They are men of such valor that no one need fear for them! As for you, it is not right for you to do what you’re doing, because you are not supposed to dress like a knight or gird on a sword.” “Why, my lord?” he answered. “Am I not a knight?” “No, by God!” said Galehaut. “You cannot call yourself a knight until tomorrow, and it’s the king who will make you a knight and gird you with the sword! Besides, it may be that the men you are following will yet come back tonight, since they wouldn’t desert the king on such [217] a solemn day.” Galehaut said all this to keep Lionel from leaving, all the while feeling great fear and anguish himself, but in the end he succeeded and the two men mounted their horses and rode back to their lodgings; nor ever again that day were they apart from each other, for Galehaut was afraid that Lionel might yet slip away. The matter was kept quiet enough for the king not to hear of it, except that he did the next day, as you will hear. But at this point the story says nothing more about it but picks up what happened to the duke of Clarence when he took leave of his cousin. 87. The Duke of Clarence Rescues a Damsel, Defeats Four Fighters at Pintadol, and Fails at Escalon the Dark.’ Now the duke rode off together with the young man whom the lady of the White Tower had given him. They came to the great highway and found the tracks of horses just as the duke remembered them, and they rode along until mid-morning, finding no adventure worth telling about. Then they came out of the woods into a broad stretch of open country and rode some three bowshots across it. Then they came upon a great slaughter of horses and knights, and the ground was covered with broken lances and fragments of shields. It was plain that a great battle had taken place there, for a stream that flowed through the heath was all red. The duke then stopped and wondered who the men might have been that had been killed on that field and who had killed them. [218] As he was thinking, he looked up and saw, coming through the hedge around a small thicket that was close by, a squire whose head was bandaged with a strip of shirting, because of a sword wound. The duke moved forward toward the squire, who, when he saw him coming, dashed back through the hedge. The duke rushed after him, putting hand to sword and shouting he was as good as dead if he did not stop for him. The young man, afraid of death, 1Corresponds to Micha I:XVI; Sommer IV:102-103, 104-109. 29) dropped to his knees and cried, “Mercy, for God’s sake!” and the duke ordered him to say who had been slaughtered here. The squire said that he would tell him provided he had nothing to fear, and the duke gave him his word. “My lord,” said the youth, “what happened is that the lady of Cabrion was going to court in London to see the king, who is her cousin and whom she had not seen in a while. Here in this open space we came upon some twenty armed knights, but we passed each other without speaking. On a big horse in their midst, though, there was a knight, stripped to his underclothes and barefoot, whom they were flogging with cats-o’-nine-tails so badly that he was all covered with blood. Once we had passed them, one of our knights said to my lady that the man was Sir Gawain, and she was so grieved that she fainted right on the neck of her horse. When she’d come to, she said she would rather lose everything and die than let him go unrescued. So our knights came to blows with the others; but we lost everything, since there were only fifteen of us and, besides, they had one very tall knight who was so powerful that none of us could stand up to him. In that way, all our men were either killed or wounded, and I don’t know what’s become of my lady herself; she disappeared into the woods when she saw the great loss of her men.” At those words, they saw a young woman come running out of the thicket, dashing as fast as she could toward the duke and holding in her hand her thick, blond tresses, which had been cut off. Running after [219] her was a fully armed knight. She kept racing forward and looking around, for she was greatly afraid of the man; and she was shouting to the duke, as loudly as she could, that he should save her. The duke ran toward her, and when the other knight saw him coming, he ran back and fled into the thicket to hide. “Ah, my lord,” the young woman said to the duke, “thank God! That scoundrel chasing after me will dishonor me if you don’t take my side—as if it weren’t shame enough to cut off my hair!” Hearing that, the duke spurred forward, while the man ran off toward his horse, which he had hitched to a tree so that he could attack the damsel. The duke followed after him, hurling reproaches at him for his disloyalty. But the man reached his horse, put his helmet back on his head (for he had taken it off), then, unable to get into the saddle in time, flung himself behind an oaktree and asked the duke whether he had anything to fear. The duke answered that he was challenging him, “because I cannot ever let a man go unpunished,” he said, “who dishonors a lady or maiden.” “Good sir,” said the other, “it’s not a reasonable fight if you are on horseback and I am on foot; but if I were mounted, I would be defending myself properly and then it would be to your honor if you could defeat me.” “As God is my witness,” said the duke, “a poor excuse is not going to do you any good, but you’re not going to say at the end that you fought under a handicap! I’d rather dismount. Well, you choose: either I get down or you mount.” The man answered that he would mount. [220] Once he was on his horse, he asked the duke what he wanted. 292 9 “On such a solemn day as this,” answered the duke, “you have dishonored a young lady, attacking her body and cutting off her hair.” The man answered that he had never lain with her. “If you are willing to put yourself in her power, ” said the duke, “I'll let you go without a fight.” But the other said that he’d have none of that but would rather take on two such men as the duke. At that, the duke charged at him and he did likewise. He was tall, strong, vigorous, and much larger than the duke. They dealt each other such great blows with their lances that the hide covering their shields was torn and the panels split and pulled apart, but the sharp tips stopped at their hauberks. The duke, though, had extremely strong arms and was as bold as a lion; moreover, he was incensed and angered at the shame suffered by the young lady that he had undertaken to defend. So he struck the knight with such force that both he and his mount landed on the marshy bank of a stream, and his helmet filled up with the soft and shiny mud. The duke thought he could now gallop past him unhindered, but his horse tripped over the two who had fallen, and he was flung out of his saddle right onto his feet. He took sword in hand and started running at the knight, but he noticed that the man was struggling, gagging on all the mud that he had taken in; without help, he would surely choke to death, for he lay pinned beneath his horse. The duke raised the horse and dragged the powerless man out of the mud; he held him on the ground and gave him such a beating that he could not even move a hand or foot. He pulled his helmet off and made as if to cut off his head [221], but for a long while the man did not budge. When he could breathe again, he moaned and cried and begged the duke to grant him mercy; and the duke said that all he would ever be granted would be such mercy as the young lady would be pleased to have. “Ah, my lord!” he answered. “I admit that I did her great wrong, and that’s why I’ve just had such bad luck. Pll make it all up to her, just as you wish!” At that point the young woman came up and the duke asked her, “My lady, what would you like me to do with this knight?” She answered that he should do as he saw fit, and she showed him the beautiful tresses that the man had cut off. “And what else, my lady, did he do to you?” “Nothing, my lord,” she said, “thank God and thanks to you who saved me, for he would gladly have done more!” Then the duke asked the knight who he was and who had slain the knights of the lady of Cabrion. However, he was unwilling to answer, so the duke ran at him with sword drawn, saying that he was as good as dead unless he answered his questions and also said where Sir Gawain had been taken as a prisoner. Afraid of dying when he saw how angry the duke was, the man admitted the truth and said that Caradoc the Huge had killed them and taken Sir Gawain off to the Dolorous Tower. “Do you think that he’ll kill him?” said the duke. “No, my lord,” he answered, “don’t worry about that; but he will make things very hard for him, because Sir Gawain killed his uncle, who was a very worthy knight. Now Lancelot, Part III please, for God’s sake, have pity on me! I came to his aid, I am sorry.” “May God never forgive me,” said the duke, “if I grant you any more mercy than this young lady would wish!” With that, he held out his sword to the lady and said [222] that she should cut off the man’s head if she wished; then he pulled down the flap that covered his neck. But the squire who had been wounded in the head took the sword and said that he would rather do the deed lest otherwise the man not die, “since this is my sister, and he gave me this wound for defending her.” She, looking at her tresses, was very upset and began to weep. She covered her head and, starting to walk away, said that she would rather he die than live. The squire raised the sword, struck a great blow, and the head bounced onto the field. Then, looking up, he saw one of his party on a mean little horse at the edge of the woods and waved to him with his hand. The man came galloping up, greeted the duke when he saw the dead knight, then told the squire that their lady was nearby. Out of love for Sir Gawain, whose cousin she was, the duke went to see her and comforted her as well as he could. Then they did what they could to gather their horses, but the wounded squire was left without one, so they put him on the horse of the knight who had been beheaded. Once they were all mounted, they bade goodbye to the duke, and the lady said that she was still on her way to King Arthur’s court. The duke asked her not to speak to the king about Sir Gawain, and she assured him that she would not. Then she asked him his name, and, once he had given it, they took leave of each other and the lady took the road toward the court, escorted by a single knight and no more than three squires. The duke too started out again, together with the squire that his cousin had given him. They rode a long way, until they came to a crossroads. And there a young lady on a palfrey ambled up to them and [223] stopped in front of the duke. She said, “Sir knight, are you the one who has set out to look for Sir Gawain?” “My lady, I would like to be capable of finding him, and to that end I will do my utmost, whatever the outcome may be.” “So help me God,” she said, “your utmost won’t get you very far, for you have neither the bravery nor the prowess to accomplish such a great deed!” “How do you know that, my lady?” “If you were daring enough,” she said, “to follow me today and tomorrow to the place where I would like to take you, then I would say that you had enough courage and prowess to carry out such a great task.” “My lady,” said the squire who was leading the duke, “he won’t go with youl He’ll have more than enough help to guide him where he wants to go, and it will be a better route than the one you would show him.” “In God’s name,” said the woman, “I knew very well that he would not be brave enough to follow me; and yet I'd be taking him to a place where he would not have to fight even a tenth as much as he will have to in the place where Sir Gawain is held prisoner.” Lancelot, Part IT “No, my lady,” said the duke; “a man who wants to carry out such a great task needs to prove himself; and if I cannot fight half as well elsewhere as I will have to fight in the place I am seeking, then I'll be wrong to have set out. I will follow you, whatever may be in store for me!” Hearing this, the squire was distressed and tried his best to change the duke’s mind; but it could not be, as the duke said that he would indeed follow the young lady. Then she started off and he went after, and they rode like that until late evening. At that point they came out of the woods into a stretch of open country and continued across it until it began to grow dark. Then they reached a large, tall stockade, [224] and they went in one after the other. When the people of the household saw the lady come along, they ran up to her, since they knew her well; and they greeted her and her company with joy. That night, they were lodged quite comfortably and honorably; and in the morning they rose very early, and the duke put on his armor and made ready to leave. But before mounting, the duke heard the young lady say to him, “Follow me, sir knight.” Then she walked ahead and he behind her, until they came to a very big, broad room, and from that room they took a staircase down into an underground vault that had heavy, strong doors. The damsel opened one and went in, and the duke went after. Inside the cellar he saw four extraordinarily tail and well-built men, three of whom were brothers while the fourth was their father. For sport, the four were fencing, and they were as skilled at it as anyone could be. Their shields were wonderfully strong and tough, made of wood edged with projecting horns and covered with molded leather, and they had Welsh leather breastplates and wore Welsh headgear; their weapons were horn-tipped, with steel blade ground sharp and not too heavy, but quite light and easy to wield. When they saw the armed man come in, they drew apart, two to one side and two to the other, and, holding their shields close, ready to strike, they uttered not a single word. [225] The young woman walked past them, telling the duke to follow her, and he was well aware that the four men were all set to harm him if they could. He wanted, though, to keep his agreement with the young lady, for he feared cowardice more than death, and he saw that she was heading straight toward an exit and that he could not avoid passing between the two pairs of men. He put his hand on his gleaming, sharp sword and raised his shield above his head; he was well acquainted with their kind of skirmishing, so he covered himself, knowing how to get through safely. He quickened his pace, and when he came close to the four men who were awaiting him, they lowered their heads behind their shields and all rushed at him to strike as forcefully as they could. When they were in a position to deal their blows and thought he was ready to receive them, they all four flung themselves at his flanks. He, though, did not wait to be hit, afraid as he was of their horn-tipped maces, which were very sharp; he jumped back, and they followed him, angry and ashamed to have all missed him. He saw his chance and rushed ahead along the wall that two of them had just moved away from. Then he held his shield up in front of his face, since there was no threat from behind and, his helmet being very 293 strong, he was not afraid for his head. He deftly held them off, and their many blows all missed him. His sword was sharp and sliced neatly into their shields whenever he could reach them with his eager thrusts, so that time and again the sword cut through the panels of the shields and through the leather breastplates right to the bones of his foes. [226] He was burdened with them like this for a long time, while the young lady had gone up to the door leading outside and stood there watching them; others of the castle had come by and were watching as well. She said to the duke, “Come now, sir knight! Are you going to stay here all day? You don’t seem in much of a hurry to accomplish what you’ve set out to do!” Hearing this, the duke flushed with embarrassment. Meanwhile, the four men were more and more unrestrained in their attacks, but the duke feared none of the three sons so much as the father, since he was stronger and more bitterly determined than the others, so that he was at a greater disadvantage facing him. Then, as the father was readying a hit, the duke took aim at him and sliced him with his shining sword between flank and shoulder in such a way that both arm and weapon flew to the ground. When he saw his arm cut off, he cried out and the other three turned mad with hurt. Had they dared, they would have gladly seized the duke by the arms; but that was not the custom, for they could not rightfully seize a foe by the arms unless he had tried to do so first. From that point on, the duke found the three brothers more bitterly determined than before and fighting with no restraint. He took aim at the one who was troubling him the most and started to thrust toward his head; but the man took cover and the blow landed on his hip, cutting down through the lower back so that his left thigh was severed and he fell to the ground. After that blow the duke dealt another, hitting one of the two brothers in the back of the neck, where he was poorly protected; and he sent his head flying before he could even realize what was happening. The fourth man dared not delay any longer but turned and fled toward the door leading outside where the damsel was standing. The duke dashed after him with drawn sword, chasing him out into the yard. And when the man reached the yard wall and could not [227] run any farther, then, fearful of that sword that cut so well, he cried mercy and surrendered, throwing down both shield and mace. Then up went the cries and shouts of the people who had been following them, for there was a great crowd of knights and ladies and damsels and others as well, and they clustered around the duke and made the most joyful fuss over him. Then the young lady who had led him here opened a door, and they went out into an open field. The duke looked around and saw at the end of the field, less than four bowshots away, one of the most beautiful castles in the world; and he listened and heard coming over the walls the sounds of so many horns and trumpets that the whole castle and field echoed with them. Then he looked and saw streaming out of the castle such a great throng of people that he was astonished; and they came up to him 2o4 with the greatest possible joy and led him off to the castle just as joyously. When they reached it, they began to sing and dance, and there was no one in the castle, however lowly, who did not do whatever he could to show his joy at the duke’s arrival. Four youths came before him bearing the shields and maces of his four defeated foes, and the old men and old ladies who were there cried out, “Welcome to the good knight who has freed us from our great woes and delivered our children from their shameful servitude!” And as he passed in front of them, they all fell to their knees as if before an altar. [228] With such joy they welcomed him throughout the castle; and the lord of the castle, who was so old that he could barely see, urged him to stay, but the duke said that he had too much to do. “Ah, my lord,” said the other, “the people of the castle would be only too happy if you could stay! But let me tell you the custom of this place. A long time ago, we swore—I first, and then my vassals—that after my death this castle would pass into the hands of whoever freed it from the woeful customs that have obtained here all too long. Now! want to honor the oath and, in the presence of all my liegemen, offer you the lordship of the castle.” The young lady joined her voice to the old man’s, and so did all the knights who were present. They so pressed the duke that he accepted the lordship, and the barons swore fealty to him and did him homage, as did the knights who were there. He asked them the name of the castle and was told that it was called Pintadol. With that, the duke took his leave and departed, but not before the old lord asked him his name and he said that he was named Galescalain and was duke of Clarence; and they were all even happier than before. And so the duke rode away, together with the young lady and his squire. After a while, he asked her why those four brutes had been where he had found them and what purpose they had served. ‘T’ll tell you,” she said, “but not before you leave me; and [229] it will make you either happier than you are or sadder.” Thus they rode all day long until it was almost the hour of nones, and then they came to a castle that was very beautiful on the outside. As soon as they reached the gate, they saw that the whole castle was so plunged into darkness that no creature could have seen a thing along the path of a bowshot. But in the middle of the town? there was a square alongside a ruined church and its graveyard where you could see as clearly as you could outside the walls. The young lady dismounted in front of the gate and helped the duke and the squire to dismount, and they then led their horses forward. They went through the gate and followed along a chain that led from the gate as far as the graveyard. While they were thus walking, they heard people on all sides of them weeping and wailing and cursing the day the castle was founded. © De ay 6 8 . . : : “ 7 2This “town” is unusual in being situated within a “castle’ (chastel) rather than outside. Lancelot, Part II When they reached the graveyard, they saw that the grass there was thick and high all over, and it seemed plain that no one made a habit of visiting the place. Once they had passed the graveyard, they came to the door of the church and found it open. The young lady said to the duke, “Sir knight, you have come to your test. If you can carry out the adventure of this church, you can be sure of bringing an end to the customs of the Dolorous Tower; not that there is much to do!” Then she led him up to the threshold. He looked in and saw that the church was so dark and rank that you could no more have seen anything in it than at the bottom of the deepest pit; moreover, a wind blew through it so cold and numbing that it seemed no wind could be more so, and it carried a stench so great that the duke was sickened. The young woman [230] covered her nose with her sleeve and her veil, and, pointing toward an opening between a door and the wall at the other end of the church, she said to him, “Sir knight, if you can go from here up to that opening over there and then open the door and go up to the altar that faces it, you will have performed the finest deed of prowess that a knight has ever performed, and you will have fulfilled your agreement with me. Now, the door next to the opening is not closed with a latch or a bar or any other kind of lock but just moves on two hinges. Nevertheless, the man who can open it will bring greater joy to this castle than any castle has ever known, for all the people who are within these walls, all those many men and women that you have heard, will be freed from their woeful captivity, and there will be as much light throughout the castle as there is in the graveyard. “Do you know where this awful stench comes from? For seventeen years now, every man or woman who has died within the walls of this town has been laid out on the floor of this church. The bodies have been brought in not by people from the castle but, immediately upon dying, by— who knows?—devils or spirits; and no one from the castle can come into the graveyard, but for seventeen years they have been so penned in that they cannot go outside the walls or even enter the graveyard.” [231] The duke found this all very perplexing; he asked the damsel to explain what the castle-dwellers lived on and how they got by. ‘I'll tell you,” she said, “since I know quite well. All those who till the fields live outside the walls. They settled there after darkness had come to the town, but they work for the people inside and cultivate the grains and fruits they live on; yet the people inside lead a very poor and sorry life, since they don’t have all the food they were used to, and all the goods they used to own were sold during the great famine that once touched them.” “My lady,” said the duke, “whatever this adventure may hold, I will try and see if I can accomplish it. But since Iam not sure of coming through it alive any more than I am of dying, I would very much like to know what sin brought such misfortune to the castle. I have never before heard of such a remarkable thing, and I would be greatly beholden to you if you told me the whole story.” “I will,” said the young lady, “since you are so eager to know. This place that you see bathed in light is the burial ground of many worthy men who in their lifetime were holy Lancelot, Part II and religious. And this land where the castle stands is the best and most fruitful in all of Britain, which is why it was built here. “Now seventeen years ago, during Holy Week, on the first night of Tenebrae,? the people, [232] according to Christian custom, had come to church. The lord of the castle was in love with a certain maiden, but he was unable to have his way with her as she was very closely watched. That night, he took hold of her in this church and lay with her through Tenebrae. But the Holy Spirit revealed the deed to a holy hermit at matins and, Our Lord answering his prayer, the lord of the castle and the young lady were then found dead in each other’s arms; and ever since the people left the church, there has been no more light than there is right now, here or anywhere within the castle walls, aside from the light in the graveyard. It is thought that there is light in the graveyard because of the holy men who lie buried there. “That is the misfortune that has darkened this castle for seventeen years; and we have often heard it said that the finest knight in the world, but never any other, will restore the light we used to have. Now I have told you the true story of the castle and how this great darkness came about. I want you to know this, too: it is said that the knight who carries out this adventure will also put an end to the evil customs at the Dolorous Tower, where you hope to rescue Sir Gawain. “Now tell me if you will undertake the risk of this adventure and, as I have said, open the door.” The duke said, of course he would. [233] With that, he stepped into the church and, holding his bare sword ready, followed the chain that stretched from one door to the other. He went a fourth of the way through the nave and felt so overwhelmed by the stench that he almost threw up; his eyes turned up and his head began to spin, and in his dizziness he clutched the chain to steady himself. As he thus paused, he felt his helmet pummeled with more blows than he could count, and he was so pounded that he could not remain standing but fell to his knees. When he started to rise, he was so struck again that he went sprawling backwards and lay there dazed, unable to move. After he had lain quite a while on the ground, he struggled up, took hold of the chain once more, and retraced his steps all the way to the door. Seeing him, the young lady said, “What, sir knight! Are you back?”* But he was too dazed to answer, and she sneered and called him a coward. Overcome with shame and pained as he was, he rushed back into the church and, once he had moved quite forward, he was treated even worse than before and fell down in a faint. When he was up again, he took hold of the chain once more and found his way back to the door. Seeing him, she cried out, and he was so sickened that he [234] could barely stand, and he did not think he could take his helmet off fast enough for the queasiness he felt; in 3“the first night of Tenebrae”: the night of Wednesday before Easter Sunday. 4Micha prints, Ha, sire chevalers, comment revenés vos? which would give, “Ah, sir knight, how are you coming back?” Better to express the damsel’s derision, our translation reflects the repunctuated utterance, Ha, sire chevaliers! Comment! Revenés vos? Ze fact, as soon as he had it off, he spewed up everything inside him. The young lady left him at that point, turning away without a word. Then the duke and his squire mounted and, leaving the graveyard, rode all the way down the street to the gate of the castle. The duke was still so dazed that he had trouble staying in his saddle; the young man was carrying his helmet, lance, and shield. And so the duke rode off, deeply upset and ashamed. He and his young man went back to the highway and traveled on until well into the evening. Somewhat recovered from his dizziness, the duke asked the fellow about the young lady and whether he knew who she was, and he answered, “My lord, she was for a long time a ward of my lady your cousin, a close relative of her husband’s. But in the castle where you did battle today there was a very evil custom, and that’s why she led you about these two days. You see, it happened quite a while ago that the lord of the castle where you overcame the four fencers was in the prison of a deadly enemy of his, and he stayed there for a long time, until he was freed by the first man you beat, the father of the other three. “The lord of the castle then swore to him on holy relics, and so did his vassals, that in return for that help he would grant the man whatever boon he asked for, [235] never thinking that he would make the outrageous demand that he did. What he asked for was a third of all the land the lord of the castle owned in return for having freed him from prison; and for having restored their lord to his people, he demanded that each father hand over a child of his choice, boy or girl, to serve him, and he promised that he would maintain this fee for his readiness to take up arms, along with his three sons, against all knights errant who might come to the castle. In this way the castle was long held in thrall, and many beautiful maidens were dishonored, many fine boys were turned into slaves, and many men of valor met their death.” Then the duke asked whether the damsel who had guided him had anything to do with all this. “Yes, my lord,” said the squire; “she has a niece, her sister’s daughter, bound to be one of the most beautiful women in the world, though she is not yet more than twelve years old. She was well aware that her niece would be handed over to the four scoundrels that you killed, and it was because of that terrible worry that she approached you, in the hope that God would grant you the great honor, which you had, of defeating them.” “What about the castle that’s in darkness,” said the duke; “what is its name?” “My lord,” he answered, “it’s called Escalon the Dark; and the young lady was telling the truth when she told you that the only man to put an end to the evil customs of the Dolorous Tower is the one who will open the door in the church you were in today. “But [236] since, as you see, it turned out that you didn’t succeed in that adventure, you may be sure that you will not carry through your attempt to rescue Sir Gawain. For that reason I would advise you to turn back, for the farther you advance, the less honor you will gain, because there is no way you can succeed.” “So help me God,” said the duke, “since I have undertaken this quest and have come this far, it would not 220 be to my honor to turn back; indeed, people could hold it against me if I gave up my plan because of something I have never seen. But you, if you like, can turn back; it seems to me this road will take me fairly close to where I want to go.” “No, my lord,” said the youth, “you are still much farther from it than you think. Without something extraordinary happening, you will never get there along this road. And if you don’t turn back, I won’t either, because my lady would never forgive me! I'll go with you until I see how things turn out.” And so the two of them rode on until at length they saw an old overgrown path that led far away from the road; the squire headed down the path and the duke followed. But the story speaks no more of them and turns back instead to Sir Yvain, in bed in the house of the young man whom he had saved from thieves on the eve of Pentecost. 88. Yvain Attempts to Rescue Sagremor and a Damsel.' Now the story says that as soon as he could see daylight, Sir Yain arose; and the young man, who made every effort to serve him, brought him a horse to replace the one that [237] had been killed. “My lord,” he said, “your horse was killed in my service, so take this one now, which belonged to my father. You may be sure I have no better one, for, as God is my witness, I would gladly give it to you even if it were the best horse in the world—not that my father didn’t think this one good, and, though poor, he was a worthy knight!” Sir Yvain looked at the horse and thought the matter settled very satisfactorily. Then he mounted and went to hear Mass. The lady of the house and her daughter mounted as well, one in front of the young man and the other on a palfrey, and they, too, went to hear Mass. Right afterward, Sir Yvain took leave of them, and the youth escorted him a long way. They spoke of many things as they rode, and the young man was very happy to know that he was with Sir Yvain. The young man escorted him two good leagues from the church. Then Sir Yvain sent him home and rode on until the hour of tierce. Then he came upon a great valley below him, but the path down was so steep that he would have to dismount. So he dismounted and led his horse by the bridle all the way down to the bottom of the valley. Soon the woods came to an end, and he discovered a beautiful meadow and a broad, deep river that flowed through it. Less than a heavy stone’s throw from the river a pavilion had been set up that looked very comfortable, neither too large nor too small. All around, there were as many as ten shields [238] leaning against the sides of the tent; in front of each there was a horse tied down by the reins, and a lance rested alongside it. Sir Wain rode across the meadow to a great oak that stood about a bowshot away from the pavilion. He looked around and saw a damsel hanging by her two braids from one of the branches of the tree; her two hands were bound ' Corresponds to Micha I:XVII; Sommer IV:98-100. Lancelot, Part [IT to the same branch, and with lengths of cord pulled so tight that blood was trickling from her fingertips. As he looked at her, Sir Yvain was overcome with pity; but as he hurried toward her, he glanced to the right and saw a knight, stripped to his underclothes and bound to a post, who had been so badly beaten that his underclothes were all red with blood. Sir Yvain was so stirred that under his helmet tears rolled down his cheeks. Then he came up to the young lady and found her very badly wounded and hardly able to speak, for she had cried out so much that her voice had faded; and with all the weeping she had done, her eyes were red and swollen; her soft, white hands, moreover, had been cut through to the bones by the tight cords. She was in a very bad way, in both body and speech; still, insofar as she could speak, she fell into bitter laments that all ended in the wish that Sir Gawain were present. When Sir Yvain heard her lament the absence of his lord and [239] cousin, he was more deeply affected than he had yet been. He bent toward her and with great kindness asked her why she kept invoking Sir Gawain. “Ah, my lord,” she said very sorrowfully, “who are you, asking me about my lord Gawain?” “After the king his uncle, my lady, I am surely the man who loves him most in this world.” “And what is your name, my lord?” she said as best she could. “Iam Yvain,” he said, “son of King Urien and first cousin of the man you wish were here.” “My lord,” she said, “I have good reason to bewail his absence. If he were here now, as you are, he would forthwith have staked body and honor to rescue me as soon as he had recognized me; and wherever he may be, he would be greatly pained by what has happened to me if he knew of it. It’s because of a favor I did him once that I have been left to die, together with one of the finest knights in the world; he was captured with me, and I think they have killed him.” Sir Yvain realized that she was speaking of the knight who was tied to the post, and he asked her what his name was. “Oh, Sir Yvain,” she said, “if you had only seen the knight, you would have recognized him right away! It’s Sagremor the Unruly.” And saying this, she almost fainted with grief. When Sir Yain heard that the knight was Sagremor, he was very sorry to know that he was in such trouble; but he was distressed by the young woman’s plight as well and did not know which of them to set free first. But he decided to free the damsel first for the sake of Sir [240] Gawain, who meant so much to her. He took sword in hand and hacked at the branch until it broke loose and fell to the ground together with the person hanging from it. Suddenly, just as he was trying to untie her, a knight armed with every weapon came spurring toward him, shouting that it was a great mistake to untie her and that he would pay for it dearly. Sir Yvain, who was intelligent and well bred, understood that he was one of the men from the pavilion. He said, “Sir knight, J don’t know who you are, but you have really gone too far. You have captured one of the Lancelot, Part IIT worthiest knights in King Arthur’s court and tied him up like a thief; and you have tried to kill this young lady, who was under the protection of Sir Gawain.” “What!” said the knight. “Are you then from King Arthur’s court?” “Yes, indeed I am,” he answered; “I won’t deny it!” “Well, on your guard!” said the knight. “I challenge you!” Thereupon he galloped to the other side of the field, and Sir Yvain moved away as well. Then they headed back toward each other as fast as their horses could go and struck hard at the raised center of each other’s shield. The knight broke his lance, but Sir Yvain’s weapon remained in one piece and he drove it home hard, for he was skilled in its use and had courage and strength. So he bore both rider and horse to the ground in one heap. He knew, though, that that would not be the end of the man’s folly, and he did not want to stop short of doing everything he could, so he rode over the knight five or six times as he lay there on the ground, trampling and crushing him so badly that no bone in his body was spared. He was so thorough that the knight had no possibility of getting up. [241] Then he went back to the young lady and was again untying her when a second knight came out of the pavilion, as fully armed as the first. He shouted out a challenge to Sir Wain and galloped toward him as fast as his horse could go. Seeing him, Sir Yvain left the young lady, whose two hands he had just untied, and jumped onto his horse; lance at the ready, he dashed toward the oncoming knight, and they tore into each other’s shield. The knight splintered his lance, and Sir Yvain knocked him out of his saddle, throwing him over the rear of his horse to the ground. He left him at that and, coming back to the young lady, stood his lance up against the oak where she been hanging and then dismounted; as gently as he could, he began to untie her braids. Her hair was so knotted, however, that it was no easy thing to free her in a hurry; indeed, the hair was long and thick, and the looser it got, the more tangled it became. She cried out that he should just cut it, by God! But he was so struck by the beauty of the hair that he could not bear to cut it; nor could he cut off the branch at its thinner end without harming the girl. She, hardly safe this way, kept begging him to cut the hair, but he said that, please God, she [242] would yet be freed without losing the beautiful treasure of her tresses. At that moment, all the other knights of the pavilion came out and shouted a challenge to Sir Wain. He looked up and saw them all coming toward him one after another, with their helmets on their heads, their shields grasped by the inside straps, and their lances couched under their arms. Seeing them approach, he left the young lady, whom he could not go on helping, but first he stuck the thick end of the branch into the ground, which was wet, so that she would be able to sit up. Next, he jumped onto his horse and, taking up his lance once more, made straight for the men he saw coming toward him. They were riding toward him at intervals of three or four lance-lengths, and they dealt him so many blows that he and his horse were at last thrown to the ground. But he leapt to his feet as quickly as he could, having been through this sort of thing many times before, and Zo / began to wield his sword, which he was very skilled at doing. He defended himself mightily; and his foes did not spare him, but were attacking him with all their strength, when one of them draw them all back and said that they would be dishonored if anyone found them in battle against a single knight on foot. “Let’s let him mount again; and if he has the fighting skill to get past us, then he can well boast of having greater prowess than anyone else in his land.” He convinced them to withdraw and then said to Sir Yvain that he would be showing great prowess if he could fight his way through “and what’s more,” he said, “I will give my horse, which is the best on this field, in exchange for yours; but there’s no doubt [243] it will be of no use to you, because I am going to give you today the same treatment that I’ve given to that man tied to the post!” He said all this in order to make believe that he wanted to harm Sir Yain, whereas what he truly wanted was that Sir Yvain capture all the knights, including himself. In fact, the others would have put Sagremor to death, if not for him. He, you see, was the man whom Sagremor had defeated the night when Sir Gawain went to bed with Helient, the beautiful daughter of the king of North Wales, when the king himself tried to have him killed. Sagremor had captured him just as the portcullis had come down, and he was shut out together with him and Sir Gawain; the knight pledged that he would from then on be at his call forever. As for the young lady hanging from the oak, it was she who had led Sir Gawain to the daughter of the king of North Wales, just as the story recounted a while ago, though it does not explain how or why the knights had so shamefully treated her and Sagremor; the time for that will come in a little while.? The knight came up to Sir Yvain and [244] dismounted; Sir Yvain took his place on the horse, which was a very fine animal, and the knight mounted on Sir Yvain’s horse. Then began the combat between Sir Yvain and all the knights, including this one, who made a show of attacking him but really did what he could to hold back the others. Again and again he came between Sir Yvain and the blows that they were dealing him, and he made it seem that he was unable to control the horse that he was riding. In time, Sir Yvain realized that the man was helping him, but he could not understand why. Sir Yvain thus fought back against the knights, and they did not seize his arm or reins; nor did they all strike him at once, but only one after another. But the story leaves him at this point and turns back to Lancelot. 2¥or the episode to which this paragraph alludes, see chapter 64 above (esp. pp. [388-390]) and chapter 90, pp. [252-253], below. 298 89. Melian Brings News of Lancelot to the Royal Court; Arthur and Galehaut Set Out to Rescue Gawain.’ In the morning, Lancelot made ready as soon as he could see daylight and went to hear Mass wearing all his armor except his coif and helmet. Once he had heard Mass, he went to take leave of the lord of the castle where he had spent the night; this was the father of the knight whom he had freed from the coffin. Then Melian escorted him a long way, as far as the house where Sir Yvain had killed the thieves. There they learned something of Sir Yvain’s whereabouts, for the lady of the house showed them the path by which he had left. At a short distance from the house, they came upon the young man who had escorted him; he pointed out the way that he had been going and told Lancelot how he had happened to be freed of the [245] thieves. That made Lancelot very eager to see Sir Yvain. So he sent Melian and his company back, not wanting to be escorted any farther by anyone, and started down the road that Sir Yvain had taken. Melian went back then, though he would gladly have ridden another day or two with him, had he been willing. Once back at his castle, he gathered as many of his friends and kinsmen as he could and, with the leave of his father and brother, started out for King Arthur’s court. When he reached it, he found the king and the whole court worried because they had had no news of Sir Gawain and the other three.® Evening was already coming on when Melian reached the court. That was the day when Lionel had become a knight, and that very day he had fought with the crowned lion of Libya, which had been brought there so the court could see such a wonder, for no crowned lion had ever before been seen in the land of Britain. It was a great proof of prowess for Lionel to kill it, as the story about him explains;* and that day he set aside” the lion’s skin for Sir Yvain to bear with his shield, because Sir Yvain, on the eve of Pentecost, had given him his shield to carry. He had had it done afresh, and the shield was quartered, showing the four colors of gold, blue, silver, and red. Lionel bore that shield for many a day, and from then on Sir Yvain bore a shield of red with a white band for love of Lancelot, whose shield was white with a red band. That day everyone at court was very upset, and there was no one bold enough to smile. When Melian came before the king, he offered him greetings from Lancelot, and the king, at those words, leapt up for [246] joy and threw his arms around Melian, welcoming him warmly. The news was soon brought to Corresponds to Micha I:XVIII; Sommer IV:100,86-87,103104. 2For Yain’s exploit, see chapter 83. 3“the other three”: Lancelot, Yain, and the duke of Clarence, last seen at court, like Gawain, at the beginning of chapter 81. 41 ionel’s battle with the lion is not recounted in our version of Lancelot; see Sommer’s Appendix, IV:391-393. “set aside”: literally, “granted,” but in the absence of Yvain the word “granted” seems confusing. Lancelot, Part II Galehaut, who was in his quarters and sorrowful beyond the possibility of comfort. At the news, he rushed to the king’s lodgings and heard Melian telling the king about the adventure in which Lancelot had freed his brother from the coffin. Then the king asked for news of Sir Gawain, and he told, just as it had happened, how Caradoc had carried him off and how Lancelot had told him he would undertake a search together with Sir Yvain and the duke of Clarence. The king was then both happy and sad: happy to have this news, since it surely meant that Gawain would be rescued, but sad that all this had ever come about. There was great worry in the king’s household that evening, as the king was very much afraid that he had lost Sir Gawain and the other knights forever® as a result of the Caradoc’s treachery. Yet he was grateful to Melian for the news that he had brought, and showed him much honor. But the honor that the king showed him and the king’s fears for the knights were as nothing alongside what Galehaut did and felt. He could not think of letting Melian leave him for a single hour, and yet he was so overcome with sorrow for Sir Gawain and fear for Lancelot that, if not for his great good sense, he could hardly have smiled. Word was sent to the queen to come hear the news, and when she came in, the king said to her, “My lady,” he said, “we have news [247] of Sir Gawain and Lancelot.” And, in Galehaut’s presence, he told her the news. When she heard it, she was so pained that Lancelot had gone away without her leave that tears flooded to her eyes and she could not remain standing but had to sit down on a couch. To comfort her, the king said, “My lady, don’t be afraid. We will yet have them back, God willing! But you mustn’t be any less worried about Lancelot than about Gawain. If, God forbid, we lost them both, I can’t begin to say which one I would grieve for more.” And she, so distraught that she was close to losing her mind, could not help saying part of what was in her heart. She answered the king that she hoped God would bring him back Sir Gawain but would be pleased to keep this or that other person away forever. With that, she rose and went back to her rooms, so grief-stricken that no one could make her utter a word. Galehaut, who well understood her agitation, ran after her and found her lying in a faint on a couch, attended by the lady of Malehaut, who was very upset. He gently took her in his arms and held her until she regained her senses. Then she fell into bitter wailing, and he strove to comfort her, asking that she say something of what was on her mind. “ll never disclose what’s wrong,” she said, “until it has been remedied.” When he saw that she would not tell him why she was so upset, he turned to the lady of Malehaut, but she did not know what to say. [248] Seeing that he would not learn anything from either of them, he sadly went back to the king. The king asked his advice in the matter, and they 6The text seems inconsistent, in that it is hard to reconcile the king’s fear with his happiness, expressed in the previous sentence, over Gawain’s probable rescue. Other versions, as pointed out by Lecoy, p. 266, do not speak of the probability of rescue. Lancelot, Part IT agreed that they would both set out the next day to rescue Sir Gawain, each making full use of his troops. However, Melian the Gay, who had brought the news and was called into the planning, advised the king against leading his army through the forest, as it was too large and trackless and full of terrible threats. Caradoc, moreover, was in his own country and very powerful, and the land was full of hindrances, being on all sides closed in by dense woods and deeply rooted, thick hedges and broad marshes, and “if your men pushed through to his land by way of the forest, they would come to great harm; they would never escape it, no matter how well prepared at the start. Therefore I would advise you to go by way of the Thames. In that way, you will have your men skirt the forest, and in five days I will lead you all there along a good, safe route.” The king agreed to this plan, as did Galehaut, and they had it cried throughout their lands and in their camps and throughout the city that no one under their authority, from barons to knights to fledgling knights, should move, but that in the morning they should all be ready and equipped as needed for both [249] attack and self-defense. Thus the king and Galehaut ordered their armies out; and that night the king told the queen that she should make ready as well, for she was to come with the army. But she, not meeting his gaze, answered that she would do nothing of the sort; and she did not change her mind, giving him to understand that she was quite sick. In the morning, the king and Galehaut set out with all their men and rode under the leadership of Melian the Gay. But here the story stops speaking of them and turns back to Lancelot at the point where, having left the Gay Castle of Trahan the Gay and his two sons, he was escorted by Melian until he heard news of Sir Yvain from the young man whom he had saved from the thieves attacking him. 90. Lancelot Comes to the Rescue of Yvain and Sagremor.’ Once Lancelot had left Melian, he took the way that had been pointed out to him and found himself following the tracks of Sir Yvain. He rode until he came to the downside of the hill that overlooked the field where Sir Yvain was having a hard time in battle, but he did not see the fight until he had reached the valley floor. Then he noticed the little pavilion, which looked very lovely and smart, and saw the knight who was bound to the stake; under the oak he saw Sir Yvain, who was struggling to defend himself, and recognized him by the shield that he was Carrying. Then he spurred his horse so hard that blood spurted from both flanks, [250] and he headed toward the fight. Under his arm he couched his lance, with its rigid shaft and sharp head, and as he drew near, he saw the knight who was doing his best to help Sir Yvain. He realized that the man would rather see him win than lose. With that, Lancelot plunged into the fray as fast as his horse could take him there, and he struck the first fighter he encountered once 1 Corresponds to Micha I:XIX; Sommer IV:100-101. Boo he had cried out his challenge to them all. He hit him not from behind but from in front and in such a way that, despite shield and hauberk, he thrust his whole weapon through the man’s body and threw him down dead onto the field. He rode right past him, leaving the weapon in the body, then drew his neatly slicing sword. He galloped back into the battle and dealt great and heavy blows to the knights whose path he crossed. He cut into their helmets and their byrnies and sent big pieces of their shields flying onto the field. He kept ripping up the mail of their silvery hauberks, so that their sides and their shoulders were nicked, and he laid about among them and dealt them so many harsh hits that he battered them in no time, and the boldest among them were seized with fear; nor was there anyone left strong enough to make a quick comeback, for they were all overwhelmed by his sword, which all by itself did more work than all of theirs put together. For his part, Sir Yvain was hardly so beset that he was lacking breath and strength, though he was badly wounded. But he took great comfort in Lancelot’s unstinting help, and his boldness grew, for [251] it was clear to him that the men they were facing were not going to defeat them; he was happy, too, that Sagremor would be rescued and the damsel set free. The two companions fought hard enough to slay four men and watch a fifth run away into the woods, and they thrashed the other five so well that their defenses fell; still, both took care not to harm the knight who had shielded Sir Yvain. When the four men saw that they could not outlast the two companions, they turned and fled, not daring to stay any longer; and the fifth one, who had been of such great help, rushed back to the tent. Once he saw that Sir Yvain and Lancelot had chased his fellow-knights into the woods, he came up to Sagremor and slashed the ropes that bound his hands. Then he took him into the tent and helped him put on the clothes that he had in there; they were all alone there, aside from a single squire, who had remained when all the others had fled and who was the knight’s nephew. After that, the knight ran out to untie the young lady, who was faring more and more poorly; he was dismayed to see how tangled her hair had become. Moreover, the flesh on the back of her neck, along with the beautiful hair attached to it, had come loose, and her hands were so badly skinned that she could not even raise them to her head. Once he had unbound her, he carried her in his arms to the pavilion, and Sagremor suffered far more looking at her than feeling the pain of his own wounds; tears of pity rolled down his cheeks. [252] It was not long before Sir Yvain and Lancelot came along, looking very much like knights right out of a major encounter; for their helmets were unbanded, their shields cut up and split and shattered, the chain mail of their hauberks ripped apart in many places, and their arms were covered with blood up to the shoulders, though it was not their blood but that of their foes. When they found Sagremor and the young lady unbound, they were delighted. They dismounted and, noticing a fine meal all ready that had been set out for the knights, they ate, as their need for food was great. They were both happy and 300 sad: happy to have rescued Sagremor and his young lady, and saddened by the ordeals that they had undergone. At the end of the meal, they asked the newly freed pair how they had been captured and who the knights were who had treated them so badly. Sagremor answered that they were the knights of the king of North Wales, who had come upon him just as they were on their way to the court in London, and they had bound him like that because of his defense of the lady. “And you can be sure,” he said, “that they would have killed me if not for this knight here, who did everything he could to defend me.” Then the knight recounted that he was the one, out of the twenty knights guarding the daughter of the king of North Wales, whom Sagremor had captured the night when Sir Gawain went to bed with her. Lancelot and Sir Yvain asked the [253] young lady who she was, and she answered that she was in the service of the king of North Wales’s daughter to whom Sir Gawain came, and that all the trouble she had just had was because she had led him to her lady.* And they said that Sir Gawain was in greater trouble than she was. Then Lancelot told her and the knight and Sagremor what had happened to Sir Gawain and how, along with the duke of Clarence, he and Sir Yvain were going in quest of him; and he said that they had to be moving on, “for we have no time to waste.” With that, they had the young woman’s palfrey saddled while it was still hitched to the tent, and did likewise with Sagremor’s horse; and with great difficulty, since he was badly wounded, they dressed Sagremor in his armor. When they had armed him and made his traveling companion ready, they helped her onto her horse and Sagremor onto his, as he was in great need of aid. The knight who had been of such help to him said that he would come along and indeed would never leave him until he was healed. He had his nephew strike the tent and pack up the splendid bedding—quilt and sheets and blankets—and the boy trussed them back on to the two packhorses that had carried them here, because the bedding and tent would be very useful to the travelers later if they had to spend the night outside a town. That done, they left the place, and Sagremor and his companions started down the path by which Sir Yvain had come. But the other two urged them, [254] if the king should ask for news of Sir Gawain, not to disclose anything save that they had not seen any trace of him. And so Sagremor went on his way to London, but the story speaks no more about him and his companions. Instead, it follows Sir Yvain and Lancelot down the road they took, going where they knew Gawain to have been carried off by the tall knight. *For the episode to which the knight and the damsel refer, see chapters 64, esp. pp. [388-390], and 88, p. [243]. Lancelot, Part IIT 91. Lancelot and Yvain, en Route to Caradoc’s Dolorous Tower, Stop at Escalon the Dark; Yvain Fails, but Lancelot Succeeds.’ Once Sir Yvain and Lancelot had left Sagremor, they rode about two English leagues without encountering any adventure but talked at length about things that had happened to them on this road before. After the two leagues, they came upon a young lady, the sister of the one who had led the duke to the castle where he did battle with the four fencers and which was plunged in darkness.? When Lancelot saw the damsel, he greeted her, and she wished God’s blessing on him and his fellow-knight. Then Sir Yvain asked her to point out the way to the Dolorous Tower if she knew it. “What reward will you give me for it?” she said. “Reward?” said Lancelot. “You will have the two of us at your service for the rest of your life!” “I don’t believe,” she said, “that either of you is brave enough to dare approach the tower you ask about, let alone enter it.” “My lady,” said Lancelot, “why would we not dare enter?” “Because there are so many dangers and awful trials between here and there that you would not have the courage to get that far.” These words were almost enough to make him lose his mind, because he was afraid she had [255] witnessed some kind of cowardice on his part, and he said, “My lady, in the name of whatever you hold dearest, show us the straightest way to the tower, the way with the greatest dangers and the most awful trials, and then you will see if we are bold enough to come through! Shame on the man who has the daring to set out but not to reach his goal!” Hearing him speaking so boldly, the young lady felt sure that he was a man of noble heart. She asked him which of the two intended to rescue Sir Gawain, and he asked her first whether she thought he could be rescued by anyone. She answered that she knew for a fact, through the testimony of wise men, that a knight would come along who would put an end to the evil customs of the Dolorous Tower by great feats of arms. “You may be sure,” said Lancelot, “that there won’t be any lack of such feats, since we have both set out to rescue him. You may be sure, too, that without him we will never go back to his uncle’s court!” “In that case,” she said, “I’ll show you the way and even lead you all the way myself, provided you tell me your name.” But he was slow to answer. “Tell me,” she said, “if you want me to lead you where you want to go, since otherwise I can’t do it.” He was very embarrassed, but he gave his name. Hearing his name, she said that she would take him there. Then she rode in front and they followed, until it grew late in the day and she turned in the direction of a Corresponds to Micha I:XX; Sommer IV:109-112. *See chapter 87. Lancelot, Part IIT hermitage to seek shelter for the night. When Lancelot saw her turning off the main road, [256] he thought that she was doing so in order to avoid some kind of untoward encounter, and said to her, “My lady, don’t shame us by leaving the highway in order to spare us an adventure! We wouldn’t thank you for it!” But she began to laugh and told him not to worry, since “you will have plenty to face before your task is over.” “Let there be no lack of trials,” he said, “for a man with no lack of readiness to face them!” And so the two knights followed the young lady all the way to the hermitage, where they were welcomed with great honor. In the hermitage there were two good men, one who was a priest and another who had been a knight and was the uncle of the two knights’ guide. Whatever the good men could prepare was served to the two knights errant, and the man who had been a knight asked why they were out riding on such an important day.? The young woman then recounted how Sir Gawain had been captured and these two men were going in quest of him. “And this young man,” she said, “this dark fellow, is Lancelot of the Lake, who is these days the finest knight in the world.” “And what is the name of the other man?” he answered. And she said she didn’t know. Then he himself asked Sir Yvain his name, and when Sir Yvain told him who he was, the good man was much warmer in his welcome than he had been before, saying to him, “Welcome, my lord! I have wished to meet you for a long time. I have great affection for you, both for your own sake and for the sake of your father, whom I knew well.” And he told him that he had belonged [257] to the house of Urien before he had become king and then for quite some time afterward. That night they were lodged with all the comfort that can be found in a hermitage, and the next morning, after a very early Mass, the three travelers went on their way. The young lady led them to the castle of Pintadol, where the duke had killed the fencers and then departed that very morning. When she was greatly surprised to see all the rejoicing in the castle, she was told what a wonderful thing had happened. She had not known about it, but she realized that it had been the doing of the knight who had stayed at the White Tower, for her sister had indeed said that she would follow him and then lead him to a place where his prowess would be put to the test. Then the damsel of the castle left, with the two knights following her, and they rode until they came close to the castle that was in darkness. Outside it, they saw fine fields and beautiful farms, and she asked the peasants who were tilling all about whether they had seen any knight errant come to the castle. They answered that not long before one had gone away, but without having accomplished whatever he had come for. She realized right away that that was the knight her sister had followed. Then they came to the gate and could see inside the walls, except for the graveyard, all the darkness that the 3“important day”: Pentecost. 301 story has already recounted and explained, and both knights wondered at it.* The young lady dismounted first and then the two knights; but Lancelot did not want to ask her about that extraordinary darkness, because he was afraid she would look at him as cowardly, so he simply followed her [258] through the gate. Sir Yvain went last, and each one walked his horse along the chain as far as the graveyard. They wondered at all the people they heard on either side of the street while not one was to be seen. Thus they reached the graveyard, where they found a brightness greater than they had found outside the walls. Next they came to the door of the church and saw the great blackness inside and smelled the stench, which was so great that they could hardly stop from shrinking back. Sir Yvain could no longer hold back from asking his guide the reason for the darkness and what this event could mean, for he had never yet seen anything quite so wondrous. She answered, “Sir knight, your companion asked me today not to shield him from unexpected encounters lest they cause some trouble, and he said if there were trials, he had no lack of readiness to face them. But I tell you now, whatever you may be ready to face, you have both reached the stage of trials; and you may be sure that neither of you will be too brave to feel fear before you leave this place, if you are willing to go through the adventure of this church.” “As long as we dare, my lady, fear doesn’t matter,” said Lancelot; “there is nothing so daunting that a [259] man of stout heart won’t dare it! Just explain what this adventure is all about, and prowess and daring won’t fail to carry through!” She answered, to bait him, “Sir knight, whatever prowess you may have, you do like the sound of your own words! But it seems to me a true knight doesn’t boast.” “My lady,” said Lancelot, “true knights inquire into the nature of the wonders that frighten them, while the poor fool fears nothing until he feels the sword hit his neck; and wise knights inquire into the nature of a challenge before meeting it.” The young lady’s words were meant to embolden Lancelot and help him with his task in the time of need, for she knew very well that he was of such noble valor that, if he should ever fail to meet a great challenge through a lack of the virtues that a knight is supposed to have, no one after him would ever dare to undertake it. Then she said to Sir Yvain, “My lord, I will tell you what the adventure of this church is all about.” With that, she acquainted him with the adventure of the door near the choir railing; on that whole side of the church there was no more light than came through the opening, which was very narrow, as the story explained [260] in the episode of the duke of Clarence.? The young lady informed him just as her sister had informed the duke, and she told Sir Yvain that he would go first, well aware that, if anyone were to succeed, Lancelot would. She wanted to put Sir Yvain to the test first because, if he failed 4See chapter 87. 5See chapter 87. 302 and then Lancelot succeeded, Lancelot would have earned even greater honor and joy. When she had told them, from beginning to end, everything the duke had learned from her sister, she showed Sir Yvain the chain that went from the first door to the second and told him never to step away from it, “because if you do,” she said, “you will find it very hard to make your way back over the bodies that are strewn through the church.” Then he went into the church and, holding onto the chain, made the sign of the Cross over his face and head, then took sword in hand, unfastened his shield from around his neck, and held it away from his body. When he took two steps forward, he felt the great cold inside and smelled the terrible stench; it sickened him, but he was determined to withstand it. So he went along the chain, always keeping his left thigh in touch with it, but he had not gone a third [261] of the way when he felt a great pounding of blows on his helmet, which it seemed to him came from maces and clubs, axes and swords; and it seemed that he was also being struck from all sides, as if by lances. He was sure that his shield was shattered and that he was wounded in the back and on the sides;® but more than the other pains, the pounding on the head so overwhelmed him that he could not remain standing but was forced to the ground. He fainted and lay senseless for a long while. When he could stand up again, he was still dazed; and not seeing a thing, he had the ill luck of being unable to find the chain again. Yet he stayed on his feet and turned here and there until at last he noticed, through the door by which he had come in, the light of the graveyard. He started in that direction, but the cold and the stench so sickened him that he almost threw up everything inside him. Moreover, the heap of bodies lying at his feet hindered him and so hampered his movement that he fell down more than seven times before reaching the door. And when he reached the top step to go out, he could not keep himself up any longer but fell and hit his helmet against the edge of the step. Lancelot witnessed it and felt great shame and pity for him; he ran up to him, pulled him away by the shoulders, and laid him on the green grass. [262] The young lady said, to see whether Lancelot could be unnerved, “By God, I knew it! The knight has not yet been born who can open that door!” “T’ll soon see about that,” he answered. Then he hung his sword on his arm with a very strong strap and unfastened his shield from his neck. Watching him, the young woman said, “What are you doing, sir knight? Do you mean to go die like your companion? The truth is he’s as good as dead. It is better to be a coward but alive than bold but lifeless.” “My lady,” he said, “whatever the outcome, life or death, I am going to take on this adventure. I can hardly be risking much shame in withdrawing, after two of the most valorous knights of my lord King Arthur’s court.” “There is nothing more I can say,” said the young lady; “but I am sorry, for you might well die, and it would be a great loss. But since you are not willing to listen to me and 51 iterally, “in back, in the flanks, and on the sides.” Lancelot, Part III give up this idea, go ahead, then; and put your trust in God!” He crossed himself and called upon God and His mother.’ Then, looking as directly toward London as he could and mindful of the woman whom he loved more than himself, he said, “My lady, I entrust myself to you; and whatever peril I face, may I always bear you in mind!” With that, hé went down the steps and, sword in hand, strode forward as steadily as he could along the chain. He, too, felt the cold and smelled the stench that [263] rushed to his nostrils, but the woman who made him forget the greatest woes so warmed his heart and filled it with sweet smells that he could easily abide the stench around him. Through the church he went in long, smooth strides along the chain; but he had not gone very far when he, too, felt blows come pounding his helmet and shield and every part of his body, so that he was forced to his knees. It did not take him long, however, to jump back up and parry and thrust all around him. He struck to the right and hit to the left, and such a din resounded all about him that he thought the church was about to fall apart. But he was not dismayed by anything he heard, nor was he daunted by any blow or wound he received: he moved swiftly ahead. Before he had gone two-thirds of the way, he was forced to his knees a second time, but he jumped back to his feet, raised by Love. He sliced and stabbed with his sword all around him, and it seemed to him that he was breaking lances and smashing shields and helmets, and that made him strengthen his efforts to do well. At no time, though, was he so distracted as to let go of the chain; indeed, he fought his way steadily forward until he [264] reached the door with the opening. But when he tried to move ahead, he was so harshly struck from above and below and from front and back that it seemed to him the blows were cutting through to his brain and his heart. He fell sprawled out, face down, but he had the good luck to fall close enough to the door that he could reach it with outstretched arm. He was not at a loss, but groped forward and grasped the door. As he lay there, he pulled at it so hard that his whole body was bathed in sweat, but he forced it open. At once, the darkness fell away and there came into the church, and into the entire castle as well, a flood of light greater than had ever before been seen there. When the young lady, who had been standing at the door,’ saw this, she almost fainted with astonishment; she was sO overcome with joy that she could not remain standing, but had to sit down. Meanwhile, Sir Yvain had come out of his faint. When the young woman could rise, she and he ran into the church. Seeing Lancelot still lying on the floor, she was frightened that he might be dead, and let out a great cry; he, hearing it, flushed with shame. He jumped up and rushed through the door to the other side of the choir. And at that moment all the bells that had not pealed in seventeen years began to ring out. [265] Then Sir Yvain and the young lady came up to the altar where Lancelot was kneeling and asked him first of all how he was, and he answered, “Very well, thank God.” 7“His mother”: or else, “his mother,” i.e., Ninianne. 8“the door”: this is the other, the outside, door. Lancelot, Part IIT She then unlaced his helmet, since she knew that his head was aching, and they both sat him down in a chair to rest. Once he had rested a little and had regained his breath, she took him by the hand and led him out of the church. Outside, they met all the people of the castle, who were coming up to Lancelot in great excitement and hailing him as joyously as they would have hailed God himself. They were thin and pale, as if they had been in prison (and so, of course, they had), and their eyes were pained by all the light. That night, Lancelot stayed in the castle, and no one could imagine greater joy than he was shown. Yet it was an effort for him to stay, since he would gladly have got on with his main task; but he did, after all, have to give in somewhat to the urgings of the people in order to put them at ease, for they did have a great need of comfort. The young lady that evening explained how what had happened at the castle was due to the sin of the lord himself; [266] and she told him the same tale that her sister had told the duke of Clarence and that the squire guiding him had told him.? And when he had heard the whole adventure, he admitted he had never heard another one so wondrous. The celebration of Lancelot was great that night. Everyone did what he could to treat his wounds, as well as those of Sir Yvain, who was badly hurt. After a while, the two knights, worn out and needing to rise early the next day, went to bed. In the morning, as early as they could, they heard Mass and then left. Those who could ride out with them did so, and the damsel led them all along the way the duke had traveled. But at this point the story stops speaking of the three of them and turns back to the duke, who was riding along, weary and exhausted, with the squire guiding him. 92. The Duke of Clarence, Despite Warnings, Enters the Valley of No Return.’ After the duke had left Escalon the Dark and the squire had told him the reason for the wonders that he had seen, they rode on for a long while without a word, both of them brooding and downcast. When they had gone a long way like that, the squire, who had much love for the duke and cared about his honor and his welfare, started speaking to him again. He began to warn him in much stronger terms than earlier, but the duke refused to heed [267] anything he had to say. The squire went on, “My lord, I tell you, we are now in the wildest, most dangerous part of the woods, and there is no way I know that can take us where we want to go without risking very dangerous adventures; the damsel wanted to put you to the test, and that’s why she brought you this way. Do you know the name of the road we are on right now? It is called the Devil’s Road, and the whole stretch of land between the castle you are coming from and the river over here is called the Forest of Misadventures. And the name is right, because many a woe and many a shameful defeat °See chapter 87, pp. [232-235]. 1 Corresponds to Micha I:XXI; Sommer IV: (108-109) ,116. 303 have come to knights in search of adventure here. Nor has any knight, however fine, ever traveled along this road, trying to go just straight ahead, without either dying here in pain or walking away in shame and misfortune. “For that reason I would advise that you turn back to the White Tower. You are badly hurt, and my lady would make every effort to heal you; if you were bedridden in some strange place, no one would take care of you as willingly as my lady would. She loves you, I know, more than any other man. Besides, now that you have learned, from your failure in this last adventure, that you might not succeed in the great task you have undertaken, you should turn back, for you won’t gain anything by being farther away when you do so.” “No,” said the [268] duke; “God willing, I would never go back like that. I would rather go forward as far as possible, for it would be better for me to lose my life honorably than avoid all perils and be shamed for the rest of my life.” The young man admonished and warned him for a long while, but the duke would not yield. Thus they rode on until the end of the afternoon, when the day was turning dark and night drawing near. Then, peering ahead and somewhat to the left, the youth saw a clearing in the forest, where cows and sheep were grazing. He turned to the duke and said, “My lord, if you don’t mind, it seems time to stop for the night. I’d say you need to find good lodgings; you ought to go to bed soon, to rise early tomorrow.” The duke answered that he would gladly stop if he found the right place. “My lord,” said the squire, “I bring it up because I know that we are not far from lodgings, since I can see animals grazing up ahead. If you like, I’ll go ask the herders where we can take shelter. There are bound to be herders with them.” The duke answered that it was all right, and the squire spurred forward to the spot where he had noticed the animals. He found two herders sitting on underfed mares and ambling along. He greeted them and they, him; then he asked them, if they knew of any shelter thereabout, to point out the way, as there was a knight errant with him who was [269] unwell and now needed to stop for the night; his body was covered with wounds, and he had little strength left. The two herders belonged to a worthy vavasor of great age who had a handsome, well-placed manor in the forest; he was glad to lodge knights passing through and was overjoyed whenever one happened by. At word of the knight errant, the herders were delighted, because they knew for a fact that their master would be overjoyed. One of them said to the squire that he was quite ready to take him to the house, where he would have whatever he needed. Then he said to his companion that he should take good care of the animals, and “once I’ve taken this young man and his master to the manor,” he said, “I’ll come back to you.” With that, he left his companion, and he and the squire went back to where the duke was waiting; they then 2«clearing” (cler) as in Micha variants; Micha has “end” (chief). 304 started off, with the herder leading them to the house. They were welcomed with great warmth, and two knights, sons of the lord of the manor, rushed forward to greet them. Then two youths who were their brothers removed the duke’s armor and to the best of their ability gave him whatever he needed for his comfort. That night, the duke was delighted with his welcome, for he found pleasure in the company of the lord and his lady, who was a very good woman and needed no urging to take care of his wounds. Still, he was far less [270] injured than he had thought, inasmuch as he had no wound anywhere in his body caused by the lances and swords that he had felt; and yet he was quite sure that he had been hit in many places. He slept rather well that night, out of weariness and because of the reassurance that he had no injuries; he realized that everything he had heard in the church had been the work of the Devil. As soon as he saw daylight, he rose; the squire had his arms ready, and he armed and then went to take leave of his host and the whole household. But the vavasor, who was a wise and worthy man, said that he would ride out with him, so he and his four sons mounted their horses and escorted the duke a long way. The good man asked him about his undertaking, and the duke disclosed part of it and kept part a secret, acknowledging, however, that he was coming from London and going to the Dolorous Tower. “God’s mercy!” said the vavasor. “You’ve come to the wrong place. You are about half a day away from the right road, and I must tell you that you have started down the most perilous road in these woods and, if you mean to follow it all the way to the Dolorous Tower, you will come upon such dangers and hurdles that no knight could face even half as many without being maimed or killed. “Because you are a knight and have been a guest in my house, I will offer you whatever advice I can for your wellbeing; for a man should by all means avoid treacherous adventures in which he can only lose, however brave and skilled he may be. I’ll tell you, then, what [271] this adventure is all about. The truth is that ahead of us, under fifteen leagues from here, your road will take you right up to a great valley that, as you will see, is broad and deep, “This valley is so grim that no knight who enters it ever comes back out; and those who seem to know say that this has been true now for three years or more. But I won’t tell you the reason for which it happens, because it would be too long a tale and I have other things to do. I have to go back to attend to an important task of mine; but if I didn’t have too much to do, I would escort you all the way through the valley. Yet the directions I am going to give you will be just as useful, if you follow them, as my presence. “Follow the metaled highway without veering to the right or the left, and when you reach the point above the valley, you will find a chapel called Morgan’s Chapel. At that spot you will find two roads, one on the far side of the chapel, going to the right, and the other on the near side, going left. Stay away from the road to the left and follow the other, which will take you straight to the Dolorous Tower; 3Literally, and redundantly, “say that for three years or more no knight has entered it and then come out.” Lancelot, Part II and you won’t meet any obstacle that a good, skilled knight could not overcome. “Now, I don’t forbid you to enter the valley any more than I would bar you, on even better grounds, from the road to the Dolorous Tower; but, as God is my guide, I do not believe that any knight can have so much good [272] luck as to succeed in either case. The valley is so dreadful that it is called the Valley of No Return, because no knight has ever come out of it; and the Tower is called Dolorous because of the terrible things that have happened there, so that no knight who has entered has ever come out alive. Now you have heard my advice, but you are wise enough, it seems to me, to know the difference between sense and folly; and if what you have undertaken is folly, do give it up! You can still easily change your mind, but if you go on, a change of mind may come too late.”4 “My good host,” said the duke, “I realize that my bodily well-being would be served by turning back, but I have not come to this place for the sake of comfort. I know that turning back means great shame for me and going ahead, great honor. Now, which would you advise on your soul if I asked your counsel?” The man answered that he would advise going ahead if it were something that could indeed be carried out by a single knight, “but since that can’t happen, you would not face the same shame, it seems to me, that you would if you avoided a challenge that could be met by a single knight.” “Whatever the outcome,” said the duke, “success or failure, I want to go ahead! I would rather risk proving weak in body than wanting in boldness.” “Go, then,” said the vavasor, “and may God keep you from harm, since no advice can change your mind.” [273] Thereupon they bade each other goodbye; the vavasor and his four sons went back to their business, and the duke rode on with his squire. They traveled until mid-morning without encountering any incident worth reporting, and they made sure to go straight along the road without veering off or straying. They reached Morgan’s Chapel, which stood between the two roads, and saw the one that turned to the right, toward the heath. The road to the left was at the entry to the valley, as the vavasor had said, and it was a good third broader than the other, being a very old metaled highway. But the other was made for avoiding a dangerous stretch, and in the end they both merged again into a single thoroughfare. When they reached the chapel, the young man pulled on his reins and went in front of the duke. He said, “My lord, this is the valley that the vavasor said is so dangerous, and here is the road that will lead you to safety, if you wish. Now take pity on yourself! If you enter the valley, you are doomed forever; and if you go despite that, I won’t take a step to follow you, because I won’t follow any man, no matter how much I love him, into a [274] place that I don’t think I can return from. But here you see the safe route, by which I would lead you at no risk to the place you want to reach.” “There is no way,” said the duke, “I would take that route! I would be showing even more concern than you for 4“too late” (a tart) as proposed by Lecoy 266; Micha has “may be reached” (ataint). Lancelot, Part IT my well-being, but then I would be considered above all a recreant and a coward.” “No, my lord!” said the youth. “I’ll swear to you right now, on the relics in this chapel, that I will never tell a soul!” “I am well aware,” said the duke, “that you would not readily do anything you thought would bring me shame. But even if you didn’t say anything, I would, because if ever I can find my way back to the court of my lord King Arthur, I will have to tell the truth; if I didn’t, I would be forswearing myself. For a man of valor, it is more dreadful to be faithless than to die; and if I knowingly forswore myself, it would be an act of faithlessness. Wanting to avoid disloyalty, I will tell the truth. And knowing I would be dishonored if I avoided this adventure, I will not avoid it but rather go as far as I can. I ask you, then, to wait here awhile for me, to see what happens; and when you see that I’ve remained or I’ve escaped, then you can go back to my cousin and tell her what has happened to me.” The young man promised that he would wait for him as long as he could, for he would have liked to stay with him if only he could have. The duke then rode away, quickly starting down the valley road to the left. Here we will now stop speaking of him and his adventures for a time, while the story [275] describes the valley and explains why it had two names and how it was that no knight could leave it once he had entered. 93. Description of the Valley of No Return.’ The story says first of all that the valley was called the Valley of No Return and the Valley of False Lovers. It was named the Valley of No Return because no knight came back from it; and it was named the Valley of False Lovers because all knights stayed there if they had been unfaithful to their lovers in any way whatever, even in thought. Now you will hear how this came about. The truth is that Morgan, the sister of King Arthur, knew more about witchcraft and spells than any other woman; and because of her keen interest in such things, she gave up and forsook all dealings with people and lived day and night in far-off forests, so that many people (there was no dearth of fools at that time through the countryside) never spoke of her as a woman but rather called her Morgan the Goddess. At the time when the adventures began,” it happened that Morgan was very much in love with a certain knight. She had given him her whole heart, for she loved him more than any other man and believed that he loved her above all other women. More than her, however, he loved a damsel of rare beauty whom he could find no place or chance to see as often as he would have liked, [276] because the woman for whom he felt more fear than love kept so tight a rein on him that he could hardly ever be gone from her. One day, though, it happened that the knight and the young lady he loved met in that valley, 1 Corresponds to Micha I:X XII; Sommer IV:116-117. 2the adventures”: the adventures of King Arthur and the knights of the Round Table. 305 which was one of the most delightful places in the world. While they were there, they were denounced to Morgan, who had been keeping them under watch, and she herself then went and caught them in the act. She was so distressed by this that she almost went out of her mind. Then she bound the whole valley in a spell such that no knight who entered might ever leave if he had been unfaithful to his lover in any way, even in desire alone; and all those who in any way had been unfaithful would remain there until such time as a knight would enter who in no way had ever slighted his lady even? in thought or desire. As for her own lover, she set down that he would never step outside the valley any more than the knights who entered after him. But in the case of the young woman she was extremely cruel, for she put her into a harsh prison, where she had the feeling day and night that she was standing in ice from the waist down and in a blazing fire above. Such was the power of the spell over the valley that, once having entered it, every knight who loved or had ever loved remained there; it was a prison, which had lasted [277] seventeen years. If it happened, however, that a knight entered who was not in love and had never been, he could leave unharmed; and the whole spell cast over the young woman and the rest was meant to end, as you have heard, at such time as a knight would come into the valley who had never been unfaithful to his lady. Morgan, though, did not believe that there could be a knight who in some manner had not been unfaithful in love; and so she planned it all as she did, meaning to keep her lover in prison forever. This evil custom was well known through many lands, and the valley was so dreaded that no man, however fine a knight he might be, dared to set foot in it; instead, everyone avoided the place. The valley was broad and deep and surrounded on all sides by broad, high hills. It was covered with thick green grass, and right in the middle a lovely, clear spring welled up; the metaled highway ran straight from one end of the valley to the way out at the other. The day when the duke rode down into the valley, there were as many as two hundred fifty-three knights imprisoned there. The valley was enclosed and sealed in an extraordinary way, in that the walls were as sheer as air. As soon as a knight would come along, he [278] would be let in without a challenge; but as soon as he was inside, he was powerless to turn back and could not even find the spot where he had entered. Knights came there from many lands, and they lived in very handsome houses. Outside, just at the entry to the enclosed valley, there was a chapel where they heard Mass every day; that is, while they were inside the valley, the priest was outside, in the chapel. And that is how Morgan herself planned it. There were many knights who were very much at ease there, and there were also those who suffered greatly. Whoever could bring his lover in with him, kept her, or kept his squire if he had one. Still, there had already been many deaths, some the outcome of great sorrow, some from long imprisonment, some from another affliction. The ladies in the valley, to be freed, did not need to wait for one of their kind to come along who had never 3“even” (neis) : Micha has “either” (ne). 306 been unfaithful in love; indeed, they stayed as long as they liked and could go away at will. But this was not true of the squires, who, if they had once cheated in love, had to stay until their masters left or they themselves died; if any squire came along who had never loved, he could* leave at will. Yet there were many of both kinds who came and stayed because of love for their masters. The prison was much more pleasant than generally thought, for there was [279] no lack of food and drink, and there were outdoor sports and backgammon and chess; there were dances and carols all day long and the delights of fiddles and harps and other instruments. Now you have heard what the valley was like and how it happened to imprison all those who entered it. But now it is time to tell how the duke came in and what befell him there. 94. The Duke of Clarence Is Held Prisoner in the Valley of No Return.' Now the story says that once the duke had left his squire behind at the chapel, he started down the hillside, which was so steep that he had to walk rather than dare trust his horse. The horse was already sorely labored, and he feared exhausting and hurting it, as the hill was very high and troublesome. And so the duke dismounted and led his horse behind him. When he reached the bottom, the only thing he saw was a kind of thick smoke all around the middle of the valley. This was the valley wall, which was made of air. Then he mounted his horse and rode straight ahead until he reached the smoke-like wall, and he wondered what it could be. He went through it and rode on until he saw very lovely houses to the right and left. And once he had gone a short way, he could see no trace of the spot where he had entered. Moreover, it seemed all along that a great wall stood so close to him that his shoulders were almost bumping into it; that is, both to the right and to the left he was flanked by two walls so great that he could neither turn around nor leave his path. [280] : He kept going like that until he came to a door so low and narrow that he had no way of getting his horse past it, so he dismounted and left the animal standing. He undid the neckstrap of his shield and, holding the shield up over his head, drew his sword out of its sheath. He had already left his lance behind on the way. Then he bowed his head and, with sword drawn, went through the doorway; he saw that the path in front of him was long and narrow and only dimly lit. The duke kept going ahead and had not gone at all far when he made out two dragons as large as dragons can grow, which were spewing great curls of fire and flame from their mouths. They were tied at the neck by two chains, each anchored to one of the two facing walls. When the duke caught sight of them, he realized that they were wild and fearsome beasts. He looked back and 4Literally, “If any squire had come .. ., he would have been able,” but this contrary-to-fact statement does not fit the context. 'Corresponds to Micha I:X XII; Sommer IV:117-118. Lancelot, Part [HI saw that the door that he had found wide open was now firmly locked behind him. He then clearly understood that he had to make his way past the two dragons, and he said that that would not keep him from moving, so he walked ahead as the path led him until he came up to them. They both attacked him with all the fury they could, one of them tearing with fangs and claws at his shield, which he had thrust in front of him, and the other ripping into his tightly mailed hauberk so that he felt its claws sink through his flesh right to his bones. The two dragons were wounding him badly, but he was not slow to fight back, thrusting and swinging his sword at their heads and their ears. [281] But whatever blows he dealt them, he could not detect any harm done them; yet he kept trying so hard that at length he escaped them, running past as fast as he could. When they saw that he had escaped them, they withdrew to their places and licked up the blood that they smelled; their crests went limp, and they lay down where they belonged. Meanwhile, the duke was up ahead, shocked, shaking himself, beating out the flames that the dragons had spread all over his body. Soon he came to a second door and, once past it, went on until he reached a broad stream, fast-flowing and noisy. He wondered at it, saying to himself, “Good Lord! I never thought, never imagined I’d see such a stream in this valley!” Then, looking about, he saw a long, narrow plank bridging the stream and understood that that was how he would have to cross it, since there was no hint of another way. He feared it, though, since the plank was very unsteady; and yet he said he would cross. When he came up to the plank and was about to step onto it, he saw two knights on the other bank who were fully armed, with shields held out in front of their faces and swords drawn, and making it clear that they were guarding the bridge. The duke wondered at all this and was alarmed; he was afraid of the knights, both because there were two of them and because they had the advantage of remaining on dry land. If they threw him down into the stream, no one but God could stop him from drowning, for the water was very deep and fast-flowing and so extremely dark that for anyone falling in it would be like going straight to hell. Nevertheless, he said that that would not stop him. With that, he stepped onto the plank and went as far as the midpoint. There was no vein in his body that was not throbbing, and his heart was pounding in his chest out of fear of the water below him, which he found terribly frightening. As he drew near to the two knights, he looked up and saw [282] that there were three of them and that the third, who had been holding a spear, was now throwing it at him to pierce his body. One of the other two was taking aim to stab him through the visor, and the third gave him a solid blow on the helmet. He teetered so badly that he could not stay on his feet but went splashing flat into the stream. It seemed to him that he would surely drown in no time, and he felt the anguish of death. He was in that painful state for a long time. He would have liked to be dead, if he could; but then it seemed to him he was being dragged out of the stream with iron hooks, while he was still senseless. The hooks dragged him until it seemed he was out of the water; and when he could Lancelot, Part IT open his eyes, he found himself in a broad meadow, with a tall knight coming up to him fully armed and harshly shouting that he should defend himself or die. He was so weak and dizzy, though, that he could only painfully raise himself to his knees; and as he rose, the knight, tall, strong, and fierce, with a large, heavy axe in his hand, swung the weapon so hard against his helmet that he fell forward, palms to the ground, and was too stunned to know if he was living or dead. Then the knight ran back and aitacked him in one long leap, pulling his helmet off and saying that he would have his head forthwith unless he acknowledged himself a prisoner. But the duke would not yield, whatever harm the knight might do him, and he bore it all until he fell senseless once again and was as good as dead. But in no time at all he was seized by four men-at-arms and stripped of his armor; once they were fitted out with it, they carried him into a beautiful garden where there was a throng of knights. Seeing him carried in like that, the knights [283] asked whether he was dead; and the men-at-arms answered that he was not far from it, “because he has suffered great pain,” they said. The knights were all deeply moved and, weeping, cursed the day the adventure of the valley was established. The duke soon came to, bitterly complaining of pain. The knights around him gave him all the comfort they could and told him that he should let himself be comforted by the presence of so great a throng of fine knights. When the duke’s mind was clear again, the knights inquired who he was; and he answered that he belonged to King Arthur’s court and was a knight of the Round Table. When he gave his name, three knights started forward who were likewise companions of the king; they were Aglin of the Vales, Gaheris of Carahew, and Kehedin the Fair. The three of them recognized the duke and began to weep, and Kehedin said, “Oh, Galescalain! How terrible for you! And not only for you, but for other companions of ours who have yet to suffer here! You can surely say that if Sir Gawain knew about this adventure, he would be sorely troubled.” The three companions grieved for the duke before he recognized them; and when he did, the sorrow and joy he felt were both immense: sorrow because he saw himself and his three fellows in a prison that they had no hope of leaving, and joy because he had found them alive, whereas everyone at King Arthur’s court believed they were dead. Then they asked the [284] reason for his travels, and he told them about Sir Gawain: how a knight had carried him off and how he had set out along with Sir Yvain and Lancelot? to seek him. At that, no man was left dry-eyed, so moved were they by Sir Gawain’s plight. They said it truly seemed to them that the joy of the Round Table and the greatness of King Arthur’s court were coming to an end. The sorrowing and grieving over Sir Gawain went on at length. Meanwhile, his companions told the duke why all the knights remained in the valley: because no man, if he had ever, in any way, been unfaithful in love, could be of such great prowess that he would be free to leave. The duke answered that, if he had known no prowess would be of 2nd Lancelot” as in Micha variants; Micha does not at this point include the third member of the search party. 307 avail, he would never in his life have set foot in that place, for he well knew that no one could love for very long without being unfaithful either in deed or in thought. But at this point the story leaves the valley and those who lived there until time and place are right for speaking of them again, and turns back to Lancelot. 95. Lancelot Liberates the Valley’s Prisoners but Is Abducted by Morgan the Fay.’ Now, according to the story, Lancelot was greeted with much joy and honor at Escalon the Dark when through his great knightliness he mastered the darkness, driving it out, and brought light back to the church and the castle. The next morning, the story says, [285] when he, Sir Yvain, and the damsel had heard Mass, they left and rode, as she led them, straight to the Valley of False Lovers. It happened that they came upon the vavasor who had given lodging to the duke, and he gave them whatever news of the duke he had. When they left him, they quickened their pace, as they were impatient to catch up with their companion. At the hour of nones they reached the chapel where the road forked, and found the squire who was waiting for the duke. He told them how he had ridden off and when. They were surprised to hear this and troubled not to have caught up with him. Then Lancelot asked how long ago the squire had come there with the duke. “Two long days, my lord,” he answered. Then, seeing the young lady, he recognized her easily, as she did him, and the two greeted each other very warmly. “My dear lord,” the squire went on, “what are you going to do about the duke? Will you just ride through the valley without waiting for any news of him? He would never leave you there, even at the risk of dying!” “So help me God,” said Lancelot, “he’s not going to stay there! We’re going in after him, and we’ll see why no knight can ever come out!” With that, Lancelot turned down the road to the left, together with Sir Yvain and the young lady, who was eager to do her utmost to advance Lancelot’s renown. When they reached the entry in the smoke-like wall, she said to Lancelot, “There are adventures in which you risk no shame, because one or another of your companions has failed in them; strive for something greater! [286] Here you face one of the most trying adventures in all of King Arthur’s realm, for no knight, once entered here, has ever come back out. If you like,” she said to Sir Yvain, “you try this adventure first; otherwise, Lancelot will. If you choose the next one, Lancelot will have this one.” Sir Yvain was afraid of her and feared that, if he declined this adventure, she would call him faint-hearted and that she was proposing it just to test him; so he answered that he would gladly undertake this adventure. Lancelot, for his part, dared not speak against her will, because he was afraid she would rebuke him just as she had 1Corresponds to Micha I:XXIV; Sommer IV:118-124. 308 done when he boasted he would succeed in the adventures he’d find and suffer the trials.? Then, as Sir Yvain went through the door, the young lady said to Lancelot, “Wait for me a little while, until I bring you news, either good or bad. I won’t be long.” She then followed Sir Yvain to see how he [287] would fare. Just as the duke had been treated, so Sir Yvain was treated. At the end, she saw him disarmed and carried away to the place where the duke and all the others were. They wept over him until they could weep no more. Thereupon she came back to Lancelot and said as soon as she saw him, “Now then, noble knight! You are going to see what great honor awaits you! For, as God is my true witness, my heart tells me that today you will set free all the men who are prisoners in this valley because of the evil customs that are in force here. Yet it will not just be a feat you owe to your skill as a knight; you could never carry it through were it not for another virtue you have.” “My lady,” he said, “what virtue do you mean? I have far fewer than I’d like of all the many virtues that go into knighthood.” “T’ll tell you,” she answered. “You will never in your life leave this place if you have been false or unfaithful to your lover, in either deed or thought.” At these words, he began to laugh and then said, “My lady, and what if a knight came along who had never been unfaithful?” “You can be sure,” she said, “that he would soon set free all the people in this place; and it would be no small honor, since there are over two hundred knights here who expect never to leave. However, you are such an upstanding knight that it would be a terrible loss if you were to fall into such a dreadful prison, so my advice is that you would do better to go find Sir Gawain. I don’t believe there is any knight alive who has been in love and has not in some [288] way been unfaithful to his lady.” “T’ll soon see,” he said, “but now come follow me.” Then he boldly strode in, followed by the young lady, who was uneasy and afraid for him. Having left his horse outside, he walked ahead until he came to the two dragons. They made straight for him, but he was already taking aim at the first; he struck him between the eyes, and his sword bounced right back. He was so stung with disappointment that he almost flung it as far away as he could. However, he thought that it might still be of some use to him, so he thrust it back into its scabbard and pulled his shield away from his neck, holding it up in front of his face to protect himself from the flames. Then he threw himself upon the dragon that was closer to him, aiming his fist at him, but the dragon jumped up and clawed at his shield and spewed hot flames from its gullet. But Lancelot thrust out his hand and dashed the dragon against the nearby wall; then, seizing it with both hands, he gripped it so tightly, with so much tension in his arms, that he snapped its neck. With that one slain, he hurled himself against the other, undaunted by any dreadful harm that might come to him. When the dragon saw him coming, it jumped toward his eyes, but he covered 2Lancelot’s fear here, like the damsel’s encouragement in the preceding paragraph, alludes to chapter 91, pp. [256-262]. Lancelot, Part II himself with his shield to keep away the hot, thick flames darting at him. Why should I prolong the telling? Just as he had killed the first, he killed the second; and the young lady, seeing this, was very pleased. Then [289] he went back to where he had left his lance, picked it up, and went ahead as the path led him, until he came to the deep stream where the young lady had seen Sir Yvain fall in; at that point, she was greatly frightened, more so than she had ever been. When Lancelot reached the stream and saw the long, narrow plank and the three knights on the other bank, he stopped and asked the three whether the crossing was barred to him, but they gave him no answer. When he saw that they were not saying a word, he said that, if ever any true lover were allowed across, he would never let them stop him from crossing. Then, having unfastened his shield from around his neck, he stepped forward with his right foot and went steadily along the plank, just as if it had been an earthen path trodden by the most agile and self-assured of knights. When he reached the middle and saw the knight who was holding a lance poised to run him through, he stood stock-still; then he held his shield out in front of him as far as his arm could stretch, and couched his lance under his arm. When he saw the other man’s lance touch his shield, he strengthened his stance on the plank as well as he could and pushed his shield upward against the lance so mightily that the shaft was shattered. Then he flung his shield to the side, lest it get in his way, and dropped it into the water. With that, he quickly planned his attack, then ran as fast as his legs could carry him toward the three men who were awaiting him. He struck the lance-holder with his lance just below the throat and tossed him to the ground so dazed that he was powerless to stand back up. Then he hit the other two with such fury that he knocked them both down to the ground and he himself went sprawling down on top of one of them; [290] but it did not take him long to stand up again, as he was very nimble and strong. So he jumped right back up and, grasping the man who had been under him and was all stretched out in a daze, pulled him up to the bridge and threw him into the water. Then, with sword in hand, he turned back to attend to the two whom he had left on the ground, but they were not to be found. Lancelot was extremely puzzled. He looked toward the young lady, who he could see was delighted. “Good Lord, where have they gone? By whatever you hold dearest, my lady, tell me, if you know!” She said that she didn’t know, so help her God. Lancelot was very upset, afraid that their escape meant he had lost everything; he stood there awhile, rapt in thought. She asked him what he was waiting for. “I am waiting,” he said, “for those two weak cowards who ran away. I’m afraid they may come back once I am gone and claim that Jran away from them.” “A foolish fear!” she said. “Aren’t you better off if the adventures back away from you than if you run away from the adventures? Go ahead and face the next ones, since you have failed at them so far! I wish you would fail at the rest in the same way.” Lancelot, Part III “So help me God, my lady,” he said, “that’s not what I want! You would be robbing me of the great honor that you have promised me here.” With that, he pulled off the left gauntlet of his hauberk and looked at his ring. Not seeing any trace left of the broad stream and the plank bridge that he had seen and crossed, he realized right away that it had all been a magic spell. Then he put his gauntlet back on, [291] picked up his shield from the ground, and went on until he came to a fire blazing across his path. The fire was so intense that it seemed nothing could enter it without being burned up; and it stretched all the way from the wall on the right to the one on the left. Rising above the fire was a stone staircase that led up to a splendid palace. The staircase spiraled as it rose; it was very high and was over a foot* wide. At the door to the great hall stood two knights fully armed and each holding a large, extraordinary axe; one stood below the other, a little higher than the first step. When Lancelot saw the fire, he wondered what it could mean; but when he saw that his path was taking him up the stairs, he was very glad, as he scorned the obvious attempt to bar his way. He reached the stairs, went up, and at the top faced the first knight. When the man saw him drawing near, he made ready to deal him an overwhelming blow; but Lancelot thrust his shield over his head to ward off the strike and made as if to run up against him. Now the knight rushed to deal his blow, thinking to cleave Lancelot right through the head; but he failed, because Lancelot stepped backward, and the axe smashed into the stairs with such force that it entered more than half a foot deep into the stone. The knight thought he could just pull it out, but he could not move it; meanwhile Lancelot rushed at him, sword in hand, and gave him such a blow on the right shoulder that the weapon cut slantwise down to his left hand® and maimed it. The man let go of the axe and tumbled senseless onto the stairs. Then Lancelot, having put his sword back into its sheath, grasped the axe [292] embedded in the stone, and, when the knight tried to rise and run to safety and was already on his knees, he raised the axe and swung so mighty a blow against his helmet that the man fell sprawling back onto the stairs, and his hands could not help cushion the shock. When the other knight at the door above saw the first about to fall into the flames, he tried to help him, leaping down to hold him back; but he could hardly pause to do so, as Lancelot ran toward him, axe in hand, and would have hit him on the head, had he hung back a moment; but instead he dashed back to the door and there awaited Lancelot with his axe firmly in hand. Meanwhile, the knight whom Lancelot had struck slid down into the fire and was soon dead. When Lancelot saw the second knight waiting at the door, he went boldly up to him, while the man planted his two feet firmly on the ground in order to give added weight 3This is the ring given to Lancelot by the Lady of the Lake, which allows him to detect and undo magic spells; see chapter 22, p. [270]. 465 foot”: sic. 5“hand”: not specified in the text. 3U0F to his swing. When Lancelot was close enough for him to strike, he glared at him and Lancelot glared back. Then Lancelot removed his shield from around his neck, took it in his right hand and the axe in his left, then, taking aim, he threw the shield at him as straight as he could and hit him right on the noseguard. As soon as he had thrown [293] the shield and had seen him covered with blood, he threw the axe at him; it went through the noseguard into his face and sent him sprawling onto the ground. Lancelot was not at a loss, but rushed up to him as he was lying senseless on the ground and pulled his helmet off his head. Then, looking up, he saw a knight coming through the door of a sideroom, he was fully armed, had his sword buckled on, with his left hand had a firm grip on his shield and a short, thick-shafted lance, and in his right was holding an axe with a gleaming, sharp blade. When Lancelot saw him coming armed that way, he said, “What are you seeking, sir knight?” “I am coming,” he answered, “more to harm you than to help you!” “All right!” said Lancelot. Then he® straightened up to face him, with his axe in his right hand and his shield in the left; and as the man came toward him, he’ threw the shield at him; at the same time the other dealt his blow, striking so hard that his axe became embedded in the raised center of the shield, and when he tried to pull it out, he could not.2 Then Lancelot, holding his axe with both hands, struck the other so powerfully that the man sank to his knees. Then, looking around, Lancelot saw that the first knight had stood up and was coming toward him with his blood-stained axe at the ready. He hit Lancelot hard enough on the top of his helmet to make him stumble and almost fall to the ground. When he felt himself hit so hard, Lancelot was stunned for a moment and ashamed of it. He raised his axe [294] and showed his wrath in the blow he dealt the knight, which split his helmet down to the ventail and was stopped only by his shoulder. The man fell dead to the ground. Then Lancelot rushed furiously toward the other knight, who was waiting for him. They dealt each other powerful, dangerous blows to the helmet. But Lancelot fought with greater might, sending his axe a whole palm’s-width deep into the knight’s helmet, so that the man fell stunned to his knees. When he tried to take the weapon back, he could not, as it was embedded too far; so he tugged at it, while the knight tugged in the opposite direction; but Lancelot pulled it out, though the backlash was so strong that it almost knocked him into the wall behind him. Then he came back, holding the axe with both hands, to strike the knight. But seeing him come up, the knight dared not wait another moment, but turned and ran right off toward a room inside. Lancelot took off after 6«F1e” seems to us to be Lancelot, whereas Micha understands the subject to be Lancelot’s foe. The”: Lancelot. 8The description of this action is not entirely clear. It would seem that axe and shield go flying toward each other simultaneously. But where is the shield and what is the posture of Lancelot’s foe when the man attempts to dislodge his axe from the boss? Such details are normally provided in our text. 310 him so fast that he almost brought down both the knight and himself. Seeing that he could not stand up to Lancelot, the knight ran to a low window that opened onto a meadow and [295] jumped out. When Lancelot saw him on the ground, he shouted that he was not going to escape him that way, and jumped out after him. The knight, though, not daring to linger, fled far across the meadow to a broad, noisy river whose banks were high and steep. He plunged into the water and reached the other side before Lancelot had come to the first bank. When he saw Lancelot there, armed with his axe, he cried, “Sir knight! Now I’d call you brave and daring if you crossed the stream and came to fight me!” “Tell me,” answered Lancelot, “as a loyal knight, where you went to get across so quickly.” “As a loyal knight,” he said, “I tell you I crossed at the spot where you’re standing.” “Well,” said Lancelot, “I have never seen a knight meet any challenge that I didn’t believe I could meet as well, so I'll risk crossing if you promise to wait for me.” “I give you my faithful promise,” said the knight. But as Lancelot was about to jump, the young lady seized the skirt of his hauberk and pulled him back toward her, saying that he should not go, because he would be drowned. “My lady,” he said, “if he crossed, wouldn’t it be shameful for me not to cross after him? Besides, I am more at home in water than he is: that’s where I was brought up!” And, armed as he was, axe in hand, he jumped into the water and easily made his way across. After all, it was only a magic spell. When the knight saw him come across the river and reach the bank safely, he realized that he was very brave, coming where no other knight had ever dared let himself be drawn; nevertheless, he still wanted to see how it would all turn out. He moved toward Lancelot and gave him a great blow with his axe, so that his helmet was nicked and dented. The blow stunned Lancelot. The knight, as soon as he had [296] struck, did not dare wait, but ran back as fast as he could. Lancelot dashed after him as fast as he could run, and they both came to a great hall. , The great hall was long and broad, with a large table set across it in the middle. The knight reached the table and leapt onto it; but as he was about to jump down on the other side, Lancelot caught up with him and struck him in the right shoulder with his axe, tearing the man’s hauberk and slashing his flesh to the bone. He was too afraid of dying, however, to pause over his wounds if he could but escape, so he dashed off into a garden. In the middle of the garden stood a handsome, ornate pavilion. The knight flung himself into it and then Lancelot did so a moment later; inside the tent were a number of young ladies together with knights sitting beside them. In the center there stood a large, splendidly covered wooden bed, where Morgan the Fay lay sleeping. The knight ran up to the bed and, out of fear of Lancelot, scrambled under it. Lancelot, not wanting to be stuck down there with him, seized the bed without realizing a lady might be lying on it, and dragged it forward and upward with all his might, so that it turned upside down. Lancelot, Part II The sleeper cried out as she found herself under the bed, and Lancelot wondered what it was. He looked around, realized that it was a woman’s cry, and was mortified. He then took hold of the bed and, putting it back in its place, saw the knight making fast for the door. He ran after him, with all the people in the pavilion running after to see what would happen. [297] The knight fled back to the great hall where the large table stood, and Lancelot, full of hate for him, followed closely behind. The man had lost so much blood that he was badly weakened, and when he tried to jump over the table, Lancelot was already at his back and striking him with his axe; the harsh blow sliced into his left thigh, and he dropped onto the floor. Lancelot would not let him be, but stepped over to the senseless body and, with a wide swing of his axe, made the head bounce off. He took it together with the helmet and carried it straight to the tent where Morgan was lying. He encountered a crowd of knights and young ladies gazing at him in wonderment as he strode in with the head in his right hand. Now, Morgan had been moaning loudly about being hurt by the bed. When Lancelot heard her moans, he had no doubt that she was the person on whom he had turned over the bed. He was so ashamed that he barely dared to look at her, for of all the knights in the world he was the one most unwilling to wrong any lady or maiden. He fell to his knees in front of her and, showing her the head, said, “My lady, I have come to repair the great wrong that this knight made me commit when [298] he flung himself under your bed.” But seeing him, Morgan was badly frightened and cried out loud. A young lady who was the lover of the slain knight came in, crying aloud like a madwoman and brandishing a spear in her two hands. With all her strength she struck Lancelot between the shoulders, tearing his hauberk and sinking the spear so far into his flesh that red blood spurted out and ran all the way down his back. When Lancelot felt the blow, he leapt way up and grasped his sword; but when he saw that it was a woman, he was shocked and put the sword back into its scabbard. Meanwhile, she was swearing by everything she could swear by that no one could stop her from killing him, or else he would kill her, “because I don’t want to live on after the creature I loved most in life, whom you killed like the faithless scoundrel you are!” “So help me God, my lady,” he said, “no worthy young lady should have loved him, for he was the most cowardly and craven knight that I have ever yet seen, however tall and handsome he was!” At those words, she was so stung that she almost went out of her mind. She sprang toward him, but he jumped aside, then caught her in his arms and pulled the spear from her hands. A moment later, a young man came in and, going up to Morgan, said, “My lady, I have [299] very strange news for you.” “What is it?” she said. “Speak!” “My lady,” he said, “the spell over the valley is broken, and the walls are gone. You can already find more than a hundred knights at the gate who have been prisoners here for a long time.” Lancelot, Part IIT “How did this happen?” said Morgan. “Who did it?” “My lady,” he said, “it was done by this knight here, who has performed greater feats of arms today than any other knight has ever done!” After the young man had spoken, the knight came in who was Morgan’s lover and because of whom the bewitching had taken place. When he saw Lancelot, he greeted him, saying, “My lord, you are welcome here as the flower of all knighthood,” and he fell to his knees before him. “In God’s name, unwelcome,” said Morgan, “as the greatest wrongdoer of all knighthood!” “My lady,” said the young woman who had come with Lancelot, “what have you said? He is the finest knight, the most trustworthy knight ever born of woman, and the.most faithful in love as well. It is clear, and you can see it perfectly well.” “Young lady,” said Morgan, “if he is faithful in love, that is a great honor and a great joy to his lover, but he has brought more harm to us than joy or well-being to her, There are beautiful and loving young ladies in this place who have been fully satisfied by their lovers, because these knights could go nowhere else. Once they are out, things will change and they won’t ever again spend so much time with their ladies. Still, the knight deserves to be honored and admired in every land for the great loyalty he has; and his lover, whoever she is, may well boast that she is the best [300] loved woman of all. And I never thought I would ever see a knight who had not done something wrong in love! May God keep him forever just as he is now!” Then she rose and went up to Lancelot and offered him a very warm and cheerful welcome. In a moment, Sir Yvain came in, together with the other knights of the king’s household and a crowd of knights who had been held prisoner for a long time. When those who knew Lancelot saw him, they ran up to him with arms outstretched to welcome the man who was their companion and who had just delivered them from a woeful prison. Morgan had him disarmed in great honor. When she learned that he was Lancelot, she guessed right away that he was in love with the queen, and resolved to cause her some distress. Indeed, she thought that, if the queen loved him as much as he did her, she would deprive her of happiness forevermore, for she hated the queen more than any other woman. This hatred had arisen between the two as you will now hear. The fact is that Morgan was the daughter of the duke of Tintagel and his wife Ygraine, who later became queen of Britain, the wife of Uther Pendragon and mother of King Arthur, whom she had conceived during the duke’s lifetime through Merlin’s treachery.? When Ygraine came to Uther Pendragon and married him, she had her daughter Morgan with her; she left behind in the dukedom of Tintagel a boy who was the duke’s son by a wife the duke had had before Ygraine. The duke was an ugly man, and Morgan, who took after him, was also ugly; and when she came of age, she was so lustful and wanton that a looser woman could not have been found. Now, when King Arthur was newly married, there was in his household a knight who was a nephew of the queen; °For the story of Arthur’s conception, see Merlin, chapter 4. Bil this was [301] Guyamor of Carmelide, a very brave and handsome knight. At that time, Morgan was lady-in-waiting to the queen and fell so deeply in love with Guyamor of Carmelide that she could never have enough of his company. One day, it happened that the two of them were in bed together. The queen had already been warned and had been keeping close watch on them, as she would gladly have kept Morgan chaste lest the king be shamed, and Guyamor as well lest the king punish him, for he would have hated him for such behavior, had he learned of it. That day, then, the queen caught them together in the act; there was no hiding it. She came to Guyamor and said that he was as good as dead if the king learned of the affair, and with pleas and threats she succeeded in making him give up the young woman. In fact, he did so easily, since he was hardly so in love with her that he could not get by without her. When Morgan saw that he had given her up because of the queen, she was sorely distressed, and all the more as she was pregnant. Seeing that she had failed utterly with him, she decided to run away to Merlin; she would search everywhere until she found him, for she believed she could find no help in her plight from any other man. She sought him and at last found him, bringing great wealth and many horses with her. She came to know Merlin well, and he loved her more than anything else. He taught her all the spells and bewitchments that she knew later on, and she stayed with him for a long time. The child she had by Guyamor became a knight of great prowess. That explains the hatred that she felt for Queen Guenevere throughout the days of her life. She decided, when she saw Lancelot, that [302] through him she could cause her greater distress than by any other means, for she was quite sure that the queen loved him, because he had performed greater feats of arms for her than any other knight had ever done for any other lady. But so that he would not suspect what she was planning, she was as charming to him as she could be. When he heard her order that he be disarmed, he said that he had to be on his way; but she swore that he had to stay the night, as she was eager to show him great honor and hospitality. “And when you do leave this valley,” she said, “it will remain so emptied of knights that not a single person could find lodging here; all these fine houses will fall to the ground and turn to dust, and the valley will be as empty and barren as it used to be. Without you tonight, the knights who are here would be at a loss to find a place to sleep.” Her words at last convinced him to stay. Everyone rejoiced to have him there, and the more Morgan watched him, the more she prized him. At the beginning, though, he did not want to stay, until she promised him that all the knights were free to leave whenever they wished; she promised him, besides, that each of them could leave the valley with the horse and the arms that he had brought in. The night was filled with the rejoicing of the knights as they awaited the new day; and there is no point in describing the splendid feast they had, for they might as well have been in the richest city in the world. B12 When it was time to go to sleep, the beds were made ready, and they gave [303] Lancelot an especially comfortable one, with Sir Yvain and the duke beside him, as well as the three other knights of the king’s household. Then Morgan asked Lancelot and his two companions where they were going; and when she heard the news of Sir Gawain, she was very sorry and said to Lancelot, “If the knight who is holding Sir Gawain in prison were holding you and knew you as well as I do, you would have a bad time of it there, deservedly so.” He answered that the knight might well hold him, if he could live long enough to reach his castle. “But how,” he went on, “have I deserved to be killed, if he held me?” “You killed his nephew today,” she said; “it was the man whose head you brought me.” “God!” he cried, “now I am even more pleased than before, because that means Sir Gawain is avenged somewhat! If only I could face him now, without interference from anyone else!” And she began to laugh. With that, she left and pretended to go to bed; but first she carried out what she had undertaken to do, and only then did she go to bed. Once she was sure that Lancelot was asleep, she came up to him and slipped a ring onto one of the fingers of his right hand. This ring was such that, if it was put onto the finger of a sleeping man, he would remain asleep as long as it stayed in place. When she was done, she went to bed for a while. After sleeping a little, she rose and went back to Lancelot’s bedside. She then had four of her men-at-arms move him onto a quilted mattress and carry him out into the meadow, where they put him onto a stretcher attached to two strong, swift horses and hurried away with him. Morgan went along, [304] as did her lover. They took him far away, to a forest where Morgan had a splendid property and a very beautiful house. In the morning, they lowered him into an underground cell and left him there. But now the story stops speaking here about Lancelot and Morgan, and turns back to Sir Yvain and the other knights who were still in the Valley. 96. The Valley’s Newly Liberated Prisoners Are Received by Kay of Estral; News of Lancelot Arrives.’ When morning came, the knights all found themselves in the middle of an open field. And when Sir Yvain and the duke failed to find Lancelot, they were astonished. As soon as they saw that Morgan had gone off in secret, they realized that she had taken Lancelot away. Their grief and sorrow were immense, and all the great joy of their deliverance was now turned into pain, as all the knights were convinced that Lancelot was lost to them. But the grief of Sir Yvain and the duke of Clarence went deeper than that of the others, and they said that now there was no hope of setting Sir Gawain free, since they had lost the only man who could carry out any such undertaking. Corresponds to Micha I:XXV; Sommer IV:124-126. Lancelot, Part II When they decided to be on their way, they found their equipment and their horses all ready; they armed themselves and mounted. Then Sir Yvain said to the duke, “My lord, you are the best knight and the most worthy and highborm man of all of us. Advise us what to do about the important mission that we have undertaken.” “It’s true,” said the duke, “that we have lost the best man in the world, and there is no recovering him, since we don’t know where he is. If we knew, we wouldn't hesitate to try to get him back; and if anyone could lead us to success with [305] Sir Gawain, he is the man. But although we are missing Lancelot, I would advise, if it seemed right to you, that we go where we had set out to go. And if these knights whom he set free cared to join us, they would be honoring him. If it could be, I would like us to succeed in something before my lord the king comes to join us where we are going; I am sure, you see, that he will come as soon as he knows where, and with as many troops as he can bring.” Everyone accepted the duke’s advice, and they all pledged to do their utmost to rescue Sir Gawain or else to die, thus taking on the task of the knight who had freed them from wicked imprisonment. With that, they rode off, two hundred fifty-three knights in all. Kehedin the Fair said that he would find them quarters that night in one of the most beautiful castles in the world, “and I tell you,” he went on, “that we'll be bringing the best and most important news that ever reached there, and we will be there very soon.” Then he turned to his squire, saying, “Hurry on to my uncle’s castle at Roevent. Give him my greetings and tell him that I am coming, along with Sir Yvain the son of King Urien and the duke of Clarence and all the knights who were in the Valley of False Lovers; he has a good idea of the numbers. Tell him, too, to have a great feast prepared, a fitting welcome for guests who are bringing him the best news he has ever had!” The squire galloped off as fast as he could and rode straight to the castle at Roevent. He found Kehedin’s uncle sitting on a couch, playing [306] chess with a very beautiful lady sitting across from him. When the uncle saw the young man, whom he had thought to be still in the Valley with Kehedin, he was greatly surprised. He jumped up before any words had been uttered and, throwing his arms around the youth, kissed him gently on the mouth. Then he asked him what news he had of his nephew and the Dolorous Valley,? that accursed place. “My lord,” he answered, “I have wonderful news for you! Your nephew is healthy and well and sends you word that he will be staying here with you tonight.” When the lord of the castle heard that, he was so overjoyed that he remained speechless awhile; when he could speak again, he said, “Lord God, how did it happen?” The squire told him how he had seen Lancelot fight his way past all the perils and then how he had disappeared through the treachery of Morgan; and his listener grieved that a man of such valor had been lost. After that, the youth 2“Dolorous Valley”: One cannot be sure whether this third phrase for Morgan’s enchanted valley is intended, like the first two, as a proper noun or meant as a momentary designation. In the latter case, of course, it should appear without capitals. Lancelot, Part II told him that the Valley was wholly freed and that all the knights who had been imprisoned there would be this night under his roof. When the lord of the castle heard that, he jumped and sang with joy and, to judge by his behavior, he had never been so overjoyed. The lady with him, however, felt nothing of his happiness, but was so anguished by what she heard that she fainted forthwith and lay so senseless on the couch that they all thought she was dead. The lord himself hurried to make her sit up again; and when she came to, her first words were, “Ah, Lancelot of the Lake! May God never let you leave the prison where you are! But if you do leave, may you [307} be killed in battle at the first challenge you face! You have robbed me of my happiness and thrown me into a sorrow that will never end, into the fear of losing what, only this morning, I thought death alone could take from me.” For a long while, the lady raved like that, again and again calling herself a sorry wretch, but her husband took pity on her and comforted her as best he could, saying that she should feel as secure as she would if the Valley of False Lovers had not been opened up. But it was to no avail. She grieved and sobbed until she was weary and worn out, and her eyes were red and swollen from weeping and her voice hoarse and broken from shouting; and night was drawing near. At that point the knights came, led by Kehedin, and the people of the castle all ran to greet them, having heard that the Valley of False Lovers had been emptied, and they were all so happy that they sang and danced among the knights. The castle lord came down to the gate of his courtyard, for he dared not step beyond it, and welcomed them as warmly as he could, first the duke of Clarence, Sir Yvain next, and then all the others. Their quarters were large and lovely and strewn with fresh green grass. The knights dismounted, and their horses were stabled, for there was no lack of people to look after them. Once they were all disarmed, everyone settled wherever he wished, as there were plenty of buildings and rooms. But the lady was so unhappy that she could not see them but remained shut away in her room. Not seeing her, Kehedin asked for her, and his uncle himself told him where she was and recounted her daylong grieving. Kehedin, who loved her very much, went to see her, together with the duke and Sir Yvain and quite a few of the others. She looked as if she were dead. The lord of the castle then said, “My lady, here is my nephew Kehedin, who has come to see you [308] and gladden you with the story of how God freed him from the dreadful prison he was in.” But she sat up and said angrily, “Of course, my lord, I am glad that he’s free, and yet I am sorry!” “Sorry, my lady?” said Kehedin. “I never thought you would be sorry about my well-being. I have never deserved that!” “I am not sorry about your well-being,” she said, “but about the harm done to me. I cannot ever again be happy. And never since coming to this castle had I been so happy!” “Oh, my lady,” said Kehedin, “the harm done to one lady can’t outweigh the harm done to two hundred fiftythree knights who were lost.” SHS} “No great harm would have come to the knights,” she answered. “They sought it through their own foolishness; they felt themselves goaded by knavery, and that’s why they were shut away in the Valley! And it’s not the task of a knight who is true to go rescuing one who is not.” The lady went on arguing like that, while Kehedin himself, as well as the others, laughed at her; yet in the end they prevailed upon her to rise and come outside with them, and she composed herself as best she could, because she saw that she had nothing to gain by lamenting. Apart from her, everyone was having a very good time; the meal was wonderful and ready on time, and they all ate with great enjoyment. Afterwards, the castle lord? asked the duke and Sir Yvain what had drawn them into the Valley of False Lovers, how they were caught there, and where they had been heading. About [309] all these things he asked very tactfully and shrewdly; and the duke, to whom Sir Yvain yielded, told him how they had been going after Sir Gawain, and he was unaware of the state of things in the Valley. When the castle lord heard about the terrible loss of Sir Gawain, he sighed so deeply that tears came to his eyes. He was very sorry about Lancelot, too; he had never seen him, but he had heard so much about his great exploits that in the whole world Lancelot was the knight he most wanted to meet. While they were speaking, happenstance brought in the squire whom the duke had left at the chapel above the Valley and the damsel who had led Lancelot and Sir Yvain there. When they saw them, they leapt up and embraced them warmly, having thought them lost, then asked whether they had any news of Lancelot. The squire answered that he knew nothing that would please them. “My lord,” said the young lady to Sir Yvain, “the truth is, Morgan had him carried off by treachery last night, while I was in bed with one of her maidens. As soon as I understood what was happening, I jumped up and, luckily, found my horse saddled; I mounted right away and rushed after them until broad daylight. Then Morgan noticed me and saw that I was extremely unhappy. Pity, I know, took hold of her, and she rode up beside me and whispered into my ear, ‘Honestly, my dear friend, are you something to the [310] knight over there?’ And I answered, ‘No, not at all, but I took him to the Valley because of the feats of arms that I had seen him perform, and it troubles me to see him face harm and shame.’ Then I recounted what you and I had seen him do at Escalon the Dark; and when she had heard it, she crossed herself and said, ‘As God is my witness, young lady, you have every right to say there is no greater knight than he; and I assure you that he will bring the search for Sir Gawain to a happy end. Don’t be afraid for him; I give you my word that he will come to no more harm than I. But go back to his companions, who are worried about him, and tell them to be cheerful and reassured, because by tomorrow evening they will see him in front of the Dolorous Tower.’ I told her I was too frightened to believe what she was saying, but she laughed and gave me her hand and promised me as a true Christian that it would 3“castle lord”: in Micha, “the knight,” which would presumably designate Kehedin, though the context seems to call for his uncle instead. 314 turn out as she had said. Then she gently embraced me and so begged me to go back that I did. I met this squire just a while ago, and we followed your footsteps here.” This news gladdened everyone, and the young lady and the squire were invited to eat. Then the duke turned once more to the lord of the castle and said, “Good sir, please explain something that we are very curious about.” “What is it?” he answered. “The [311] lady’s great sorrow over the deliverance of the Valley.” “Of course,” he said, “gladly; I’ll tell you the whole truth. God in his mercy let me belong to King Arthur’s household for almost ten years; Iam and, God willing, will always be a knight of the Round Table. I know you well, just as I do Sir Yvain over here, to whom I owe a great reward because on my account he once suffered a spear-wound in the left thigh.” At these words, Sir Yvain realized that this was surely Kay of Estral, and said so; and Kay acknowledged that that was indeed the case. “I am very glad,” said Sir Yvain, “that we’ve found you! And it’s true that we were terribly afraid when I was struck with the spear. Do you know where it happened?” “Yes, of course,” said Kay; “it was in the house of the Proud Damsel, who tried to kill every man who wouldn’t go to bed with her—and all those who did as well! Still, you went to bed with her but escaped dying, though you were very frightened! Many times since then I have recalled how gracious you were, to risk death in order to shield your companions. ”4 “Well, let’s let that be,” he answered; “it’s a thing of the past. Tell us, rather, why the lady was so unhappy.” “The fact is,” said Kay, “that it has been a good seven years since I last stepped outside my door. I had loved this lady more than anything else in the world even before coming to the king’s court. I had always sought her love but to no avail, until one day she disclosed to me at last that she would in no way be mine unless I promised her one favor whenever she [312] might ask for it. I could not refuse anything she might want, since I loved her too much, so I gave her my faithful promise, though I didn’t know what she had in mind. After I had been to bed with her, she found a moment when she held greater sway over me than ever before (and yet she had never been without influence over me)° and she begged me at that moment, by the faith I owed her, to swear to honor the agreement I had made with her. I did as she wished. “She made me take an oath that I would never step outside my door until such time as the Valley of False Lovers would be emptied, for she wanted me in her prison, as I had her in mine. I couldn’t avoid it, since I had sworn; and, God knows, I have always feared being disloyal more than dying. It has weighed very heavily on me that I have been idle so long, and it would trouble me even more if I 4¥For the principal version of the story of the Proud Damsel, see Le Haut Livre du Graal: Perlesvaus, ed. Wm. A. Nitze, T.A. Jenkins, et al. (2 vols., Chicago, 1932-37; repr. New York: Phaeton, 1972), 2:241. >In Micha, the clause in parentheses states just the opposite: et neporquant ele n’avoit onques esté sau desos non de moi. Lancelot, Part II didn’t love her; but all burdens are lighter when you have taken them on willingly. “And so IJ have stayed in this house seven whole years plus the time since the beginning of Lent, and it’s because I am about to leave that the lady is as unhappy as you have seen. She fears she will lose my love just because she won’t have my company as often as she has had it. But I am delighted that God has brought you here, for you will not go to rescue Sir Gawain without me! I must go, first for his sake and then for Lancelot’s, since Lancelot has released me from prison, just as he has you. I’ll take along all the men and goods I can, since I have great treasure and foodstuffs that can follow us from here, from [313] my castle at Estral, and from all over my broad estates.” When the others heard him, they were very pleased and thanked him. Forthwith he sent word throughout his estates that food should be sent after him, and he summoned the knights of the area who were his vassals. The next day before the hour of nones, there were more than a hundred, all armed and ready. As soon as they had eaten, they left® Roevent with all their men, and with them went the squire who had come with the duke and the young lady who the night before had brought the news of Lancelot. They rode through the lands of Kay of Estral, followed by a great store of foodstuffs from Estral, which was the main town of his holdings, as well as from many other towns. They rode along easily, at a slow pace, following their leaders, who said they would reach the Dolorous Tower by evening of the next day. But at this point the story gives up speaking of them and their journey, and turns back to Lancelot, carried off by Morgan. 97. Lancelot, Released Provisionally, Resists Seduction by Morgan’s Damsel; He Recovers Two Bodies from a Riverbed, Then Rejoins Wain and the Duke of Clarence.’ When Morgan and her entourage had taken Lancelot into the woods, which the story spoke of a while ago, she had him removed from the litter, asleep as he was, and lowered into a deep, dark hole carved out to be a grim prison. When he was lowered into it, his hands and feet were tied as he slept, and then the ring was removed that Morgan [314] had slipped onto his finger to keep him asleep. He woke up right away, saw the hideous, black cell that he was in, and was shocked. Then he began bitterly to bewail the plight of Sir Gawain and Sir Yvain and the duke, for it seemed to him that everything he had done and seen in the Valley of False Lovers was a dream, and he was sure that Sir Yvain and the duke were as badly betrayed as he was. Again and again he called aloud to them and lamented and looked all around, but he neither saw nor heard anyone who might respond to him; and he wondered how all this had happened to him. After he had gone on like that awhile, Morgan came to him SThe text here adds “the next day,” which is redundant. Corresponds to Micha I:X XVI; Sommer IV:124,126-130. Lancelot, Part IT and, calling him by his name, said, “Lancelot, now I have you in my prison! Now you'll have to attend to what I want!” When Lancelot recognized her, he said, “Ah, my lady, how have I deserved to be held prisoner by you?” “I am not holding you prisoner,” she said, “because of any wrong you may have done me, but because it’s what I want to do!” “And what, my lady, have you done with my companions?” he said. And she, wanting to torment him, answered, “Your companions are safe and sound; they behaved well enough toward me for me to let them go. If you cared to redeem yourself, I would let you go. Otherwise, you may remain here so long that someone else will have the honor you seek, and you will have lost it.” These words tormented him, and he said, “Don’t kill me, my lady! How well you know that, if Sir Gawain were rescued by anyone from the king’s household and I had no part in it, I would just as well [315] be dead. But if there is anything in the world that I have done wrong, I would gladly redeem myself.” “You are lucky,” she said; “I won’t ask you for anything you can’t give.” “Just tell me,” he said, “and you’ll have it. Even if you were not now holding me prisoner, there is nothing in this world that I wouldn’t readily give you if I had it and you asked for it.” “I ask,” she said, “that you swear to tell me the truth about what I am going to ask!” ‘T’ll gladly do that,” he said. But as soon as he had put out his hand toward her, he realized what he was doing and pulled it back, saying that he would not tell her anything that would sully his honor; he would rather die in her prison. “I will explain,” she said, “what I want you to swear to. You must tell me with whom you are in love, and I’ll have drawn from you what the lady of Malehaut could never draw!” He answered, “Oh, my lady, my lady, I have never been so close to anyone that, if it happened that I fell in love, I would tell it to him before he had heard about it from someone else. So if I were indeed in love, you surely would not hear about it from me.” “No,” she said; “you yourself must tell me.” “As truly as God is my witness,” he said, “that won’t happen.” She answered that he would have to tell. And he, at those words, grew angry; his heart raced and his face turned red and he said, “No, my lady! Your whole life would be gone before you’d ever hear about it!” When she heard that, she realized how angry he was and laughed. She said that he would never leave her prison, and he answered that in that case he wouldn’t leave! [316] “So help me God,” she said, “I’ll let you go a little more easily: just pledge that you’ll come back to me as soon as you have carried out Sir Gawain’s rescue; and back your pledge with that ring that you have on your finger.” “Yes, my lady,” he said; “T will pledge and swear to you, as you like, that I’ll come back. But no one will ever have this ring from me as long as I am alive.” 219 That made Morgan think the queen had given it to him, and she was very sorry that she had not looked at it closely enough to see if she recognized it. And she no doubt would have, if she had looked at it, since it was the ring that the queen had given him the day she granted him her love.? It was a small ring with a flat, grey-brown stone that had the power to end a magic spell as soon as the wearer glanced at it. When Morgan saw that he would not part with his ring, she said that she did not want Sir Gawain’s delivrance to be hindered on her account, “so I will let you go,” she said, “but you must promise me, as a loyal knight, to come back to my prison as soon as Sir Gawain is freed, whether by you or by anyone else. You must not let anyone know where you are going, but as soon as you see my messenger, you must come away and again become a captive as you are now.” He made his promise in the terms Morgan had laid down, and she [317] freed him, then fed him a very hurried meal, since he was impatient to be off on his mission. When he had eaten, his horse was ready and his armor at hand. Morgan then said to him, “Good sir, if you dared take one of my young ladies under your protection, I would entrust you with one who could lead you straight to the Dolorous Tower; you would certainly need a guide to avoid going astray again and again. But if you dare take her along, be careful not to ride too fast.” When he heard the word “dare,” he felt challenged and said that he would dare conduct her right into King Arthur’s court, even if everyone there were her deadly enemy. “Then I’ll give you this one,” she said, entrusting him with the most beautiful of her maidens. But before she mounted, Morgan took her aside for a moment. Then she helped her mount and said to Lancelot that he should come back as soon as the girl bade him; and he promised to do so. Thereupon Lancelot and the young lady left, taking the route that she knew well for having often gone that way. She meant to draw him into conversation about many things, just as her lady had instructed her; so she took pains to be useful to him and to praise him as much as she could, and she found amusing things to tell him and laughed and joked as they rode along. She brought up everything she thought might arouse him, and a number of times she took off her headdress in order to show him the great beauty of her face and hair. She sang Breton lays and other pleasing, lively songs; her voice was high and pure, and she sang well in Breton, French, and many other languages. 2Lancelot’s ring was last mentioned in chapter 95, p. [290], where we identified it as the ring given to him by the Lady of the Lake much earlier, in chapter 22. In the present passage, the apparently same ring is said to have come to Lancelot from Guenevere, but nowhere has the text made mention of such a gift. If the redactor is making a mistake here, it is at least in part because the exchange of rings between lovers is so banal an occurrence that he can assume the ring comes from Guenevere. From this point on, however, the text is consistent in maintaining that origin, and in chapter 100, p. [353], Guenevere affirms it herself. 316 At one moment, she saw a lovely spot and pointed it out, saying, [318] “Look, sir knight! If a man were with a beautiful lady or maiden, wouldn’t it be a shame for him just to pass by a spot like this without a second thought?” She did whatever she could to entice him, but it was all for naught, as Lancelot had no interest at all in anything she might say; indeed, she was so annoying to him that he could not even look at her. When she had annoyed him so much that he could not keep quiet any longer, he said, “My lady, do you really mean what you’re saying?” She answered that she did indeed mean it. “As God is my witness,” he said, “I never knew that a lady could speak in such terms! She dishonors herself, to say to a strange knight what a knight himself would not dare say for shame.” “Now, now, sir knight!” she said. “It happens often enough that a handsome, well-mannered knight asks a beautiful damsel for her love when they’re alone with each other. But if the knight doesn’t ask, whether because he is afraid of her or because his thoughts are elsewhere, it is up to the lady to take the initiative and ask him to satisfy her desires. If he is unwilling, then I am sure he is a disgrace on earth and deserves no rights in any court. Now, you are a fine knight and I a beautiful woman, and so I am taking the lead and asking you to come to bed with me right now, here in this lovely, quiet, restful spot. If you deny me, I won’t accompany you any farther and, in every court where I find you, I'll claim that you are worthless as a man, so that you'll be disgraced everywhere.” “My lady,” he said, “you will accompany me as long as you like; and when you wish, you will go back home; in any case, you are not going to have what you want of me. However, I am sure that you don’t really mean what you have been saying, because [319] no lady has ever come to a knight with such a shameful demand. You said it just to try me! But your mistress has placed you under my protection, and if we part ways, it will be your doing, not mine. If you want to go on with me, say so right now; and if you are thinking of turning back, go back!” As soon as she heard that whatever she did would be useless, she said that she would not leave but would rather go on with him in order to carry out her lady’s wishes. , Then they both rode on, but under cover of her wimple she could not help laughing at his earnest refusal. After they had traveled along awhile, the young woman brought up her demand once more and asked him whether he would deliberately dishonor himself. “It is the custom throughout the kingdom of Logres,” she said, “that a knight does not fail to satisfy the wishes of a lady or maiden, provided he has the power to do so.” “Of course,” said Lancelot, “it is right that knights should help them in every way they can. But if they don’t have the power, aren’t they thereby safe from shame?” She answered, “Yes, of course.” “Then if I don’t do what you have asked me, I won’t be dishonored.” “How so?” she said. “Because I have neither the power nor the will.” “Ah, sir knight,” she said, “the shame is all the greater—if only you could acknowledge it—when you cry defeat to a woman.” Lancelot, Part IT At these words, he looked at her angrily and said, “My lady, I am far more gracious toward you than you are toward me, for you mean your words [320] to upset me, while 1 am not saying anything meant to annoy you. You know how the matter stands? I’ll give you two possibilities, and you choose the one that suits you better: either you come with me and you don’t bring up this folly anymore, or else you go back and I free you of your obligation to lead me to the Dolorous Tower.” ‘But I don’t free you,” she said, “of your obligation to protect me, but rather insist you do so! And if you don’t care to, tell me so! Then I’ll go to my lady and tell her how I failed to carry out her orders because you no longer had the daring to protect me.” It was clear to him that, if he gave up his responsibility, he would be blamed for it; on the other hand, her words bothered him so much that it was a true hardship for him to listen to them. But his heart was so utterly pure and his knightly valor so great that he remained untainted by any cravenness or baseness and was not daunted by effort or annoyance. And he was more fearful of the damsel’s blame, should his protection fail her, than of the bothersomeness of her words, however hurtful they might be. So he said to her that his protection would not fail her, and “even if you behave basely toward me,” he said, “TI will be courteous to you.” Then they both rode on until evening, neither of them saying a word to the other except about the road. But when evening came, the young lady turned to him and said, “Sir knight, it seems time to stop for the night, yet you’re not saying a thing about it.” He answered, “My lady, I don’t mind leaving it to you to find lodgings. You are supposed to think about guiding me to my destination and smoothing the way for me; that’s why your lady put you in my charge. And I am supposed to protect you from any [321] foes.” “Well,” she said, “now we’ll see what your protection is like. I plan to lodge you very comfortably tonight, in quarters where even a king would be satisfied, wherever he might be traveling.” With those words, they rode on until it was dark. At that point, they started across a lovely stretch of open country; the moon had risen and was bright. After they had ridden a good part of the night, they noticed, in the moonlight, a beautiful, splendid pavilion. When they came close enough to see its workmanship, Lancelot realized that it was the tent that Morgan lay in, as was her habit, in the Valley of False Lovers, when he was running after the knight who flung himself under the bed. He said as much to his guide, but she showed no sign of recognizing the tent and rode straight up to it. Then as many as seven youths rushed out to help her dismount, but she ordered them not to trouble themselves about her. “Go to the knight over there,” she said, “and be sure to take good care of him.” Her order was obeyed with no protest or pause; they all ran up to Lancelot, helped him down, disarmed him with great politeness, and offered him a beautiful, elegant couch in the middle of the pavilion. As soon as he had been disarmed, a splendid meal was set out. While they were speaking about one thing and another, a messenger came Lancelot, Part IIT along, and they went back into the pavilion.? Lancelot looked and saw one of the most handsome, one of the most splendid, beds that he [322] had ever seen. The quilting, the sheets, and the blanket showed the finest possible craftsmanship; and the headboard was cushioned with two pillows whose cases were made of splendidly woven heavy silk. The borders were stitched with precious stones of fine properties, and at every corner of the pillows there was a large gold button filled with balm that gave forth the sweetest possible smell. The pillows were rich and beautiful; below them there were two others, with cases made of white silk, which were meant to be lain on. Such was the splendor with which the bed was made. Facing it, nearby, was a small, low bed, looking poor alongside the first. The young woman saw to it that Lancelot undressed and lay down in the splendid bed. “My lady,” he said, “where are you going to sleep?” “Don’t worry about me,” she said. “Just do as I tell you; I won’t be without a bed.” Lancelot went to bed at her command; but it was clear, to look at him, that he was wary of her, as he did not take off his undershirt or drawers, but lay down like a man with no time to spare.* Once the young woman had sent all the squires to bed in the small tents that surrounded the pavilion, she came back to where Lancelot was. It was very bright inside the pavilion, for there were two tall tapers burning in front of his bed. The young lady picked them up, removed them from the chest they had been standing on, and set them down on the floor at some distance, so that the light would not reach [323] Lancelot. Meanwhile, he, more intent on thought than on sleep, was watching everything she was doing, and saw her take off all her clothes except her shift. Then she came up to Lancelot, lifted the bedclothes, and slipped in beside him. When he felt her there, he was extremely embarrassed and said, “Now, now, my lady! Have you lost all sense of shame? I’ve never heard of a lady, young or old, trying to force herself on a knight!” And he jumped out of the bed. “Hah, cowardly weakling!” she said. “May I be damned if you were ever a true knight! And what a disgrace that you ever boasted of going off to rescue Sir Gawain, if one female makes you run away from your bed! Yet I am no less good-looking than you—and no less worthy, since at least I’m not disloyal, the way you are!” “My lady,” he said, “you can say whatever you like, but there is no knight alive, however great, whom I wouldn’t fight if he called me disloyal!” “Fine,” she said, “now we'll see how you can defend yourself] I’ll give you a chance!” Then she reached out to tweak his nose, but she missed and her hand slipped down to the neck of his undershirt and tore it all the way down to the hem. Terribly embarrassed, he seized her by the arms and sat her down on the ground as gently as he could, saying that she would never stand up until she had promised him never to lie 3This sentence seems to follow a brief narrative segment missing from both Micha and the variant redactions cited there; nor has the scene an equivalent in Sommer. 4“like a man with no time to spare”: literally, “like a man in need,” presumably in need of retiring immediately. S17 down in his bed and never to ask for anything distasteful to him. ‘I'll promise you one thing,” she said, “and I'll tell you what.” “Tell me,” he said; “it may be something I can agree to.” [324] “I won't tell you anything I can’t whisper in your ear,” she said. “I don’t know who is listening to us; and if you refused and it were overheard, the shame would be all the greater.” At that, Lancelot bent down and put his right ear to her mouth. She began to sigh and then murmured, “Oh, God! How can I say it?” Whereupon she fell back so suddenly that Lancelot was sure she had fainted. He looked down at her and, as he looked, she sprang up and kissed him. He was almost mad with rage. He left her and ran into the middle of the pavilion, spitting to rid himself of her kiss. But she rushed after him, and when he saw that he could not stop her, he ran for his sword, which was hanging on the center pole of the tent, pulled it out of its sheath, and swore that he would strike her with it if she touched him again. She knew perfectly well that he would never strike her, and said that that was something she’d like to see! Realizing that she was still after him, he did not dare wait, but flung down the sword and turned to flee; but she followed him out of the pavilion. She saw, though, that she could not catch up with him, and began to shout, “Come back, sir knight, faithless coward that you are! You don’t have to be afraid of me anymore: I wouldn’t stoop to run after you!” He answered, “I am not a faithless knight!” “That is what you are!” she said. “You showed your cowardice and disloyalty when you left your bed because of me; and a knight is dishonored if he fails a lady in anything she asks of him.” “What, my lady!” he said. “Is it loyalty to do whatever a lady wants?” She answered, “Yes.” “Oh, God,” he said, “grant me never [325] to have such loyalty! It would hurt me too much.” “Why?” she said. “Am I not beautiful enough for you?” He answered that she could not be beautiful enough for him, “because no true lover,” he said, “could be unfaithful in the flesh any more than in his heart to the creature he loves most in the world.” “T’ll let you go at that,” she said, “if you give me a true answer to one question.” “It might be a question I would answer,” he said, “or you might be asking something I would rather lose my life than answer.” ‘T’ll let you go,” she said, “if you tell me that you are in fact in love. If not, you can’t leave without going to bed with me; or else I’ll shame you in the highest court in the world!” At these words, he was so distressed that he could not answer, for he would find it very hard to boast of loving or of being loved; yet he was so fearful of the woman’s troubling attacks that, to break free of her hold, he would go ahead and say what he was quite certain of. “My lady,” he said, “I’ll tell you, as a loyal knight, that I am loved by such a true lover that I am bound to fear being unfaithful to her 318 more than I would fear the danger of dying or dishonor or any disloyalty.” At these words, she smiled and answered that he had said enough, “and from now on,” she said, “have no fear, for, as God is my witness, I won’t trouble you ever again, unless someone else forces me to. But now go to bed as the most faithful of lovers and the finest [326] knight in the world, and you may be sure that all the trouble I was causing you was meant to test your heart, as I had been ordered to do. I found it a pleasure and a pain: a pleasure because of the great loyalty that I discovered in you, and a pain because I am very much afraid you now hate me. I beg your mercy and beg you, by God, to forgive me!” With that, she fell at his feet, and Lancelot raised her back up. They both went back into the pavilion, and Lancelot lay down in his bed, the damsel in her own, and they slept like that until morning. In the morning they rose, and the young lady ordered the tent and all the rest of the equipment packed up; she discussed with the squires, familiar as she was with the area, where they would stay the following night. Then she told Lancelot that it would be good for him to hear Mass, since in so holy a week® a knight should not pass over any chance to hear Mass. He answered that he would like that, and she took him to a hermitage not far away, where she had a Mass of the Holy Spirit sung for him. Afterwards, they breakfasted on such food as the hermit had, and then left, riding with no stop until about the hour of nones. Then they came to a broad stretch of open country that would have been very beautiful and a delight to the heart if it had been green and flower-covered like all the others; but it was so thoroughly dry that there was not a single patch of grass of any kind that [327] a lamb might feed on. Lancelot was greatly surprised by this and asked his guide what it all meant. “My lord,” she said, “T’ll tell you, but first you are going to see a most extraordinary thing.” They went on riding until they reached a narrow, deep river that flowed on a level with the highest cliff that they had ever seen, and they saw the stream divided before them, as if forming two walls facing each other at a good four yards’ distance, so that you could see the river bottom as easily as the ground outside. In the middle of the trench lay a dead knight in full armor and, beside him, a dead lady who appeared to have been of great beauty. The young woman said to Lancelot, “My lord, now you can see what you asked me. The truth is, the knight that you see there was in love with the lady lying beside him. She had a wicked husband, the cruelest in the world, and she had nothing but pure love for the knight, who many a time would have killed himself, had she not granted him her love. Her lord became very wary, believing their love to be a guilty love, and spied on the knight until one day he killed him treacherously and threw him, in full armor, into this river. Then he went to the lady and did not hide what he had done. She acknowledged right away that she truly loved the knight but had no thought of a guilty love, and she said that she would never stop looking for his body until she had Sku holy a week”: the week of Pentecost. Lancelot, Part [IT found it. ‘Go, then,’ he answered; ‘you can look for the rest of your life.’ “The lady came to this cliff and prayed to Our Lord, right in front of her husband himself and many other people as well, that inasmuch as she had [328] never deceived her husband with this knight or any other, he should reveal the body to her and let everyone else know about it, too. As ‘soon as she had ended her prayer, the water divided, just as you see; and when she saw the knight, she began her prayer again. Then forthwith she threw herself down beside him from the cliff where she had been standing. They have lain there for a long time, and in all these years, throughout the knight’s land, not a handful of wheat or grass has ever grown; it has become a wasteland and no one lives there.” After that, she took Lancelot to a stone cross and, showing it to him, said that the two lovers would always remain where they were until the man came along who could put an end to the wonders of the forest around them. “And let me tell you,” she said, “many knights have tried, and many have drowned.” At that, Lancelot dismounted before she even knew what was happening, and, gathering the knight’s body in his two arms as easily as if he had been lying in the middle of the road, brought him out of the water; then he brought back the lady’s body as well. Seeing this, the damsel was bewildered and said, “In God’s name, you’re no man!” “What am I, then, my lady?” he answered. “What?” she said. “You’re a ghost!” He [329] laughed out loud and asked what he could do with the two bodies. She answered that nearby there was a castle where they could stop; they would say what had happened, and the bodies would be buried. With that, they started off and went as far as the castle. Lancelot went on without stopping, while the young woman told the people at the castle how the lady and the knight had been pulled out of the water, and asked them to bury the bodies. They were amazed by the news and formed a great procession to do what is done for the dead. Lancelot and the young lady® rode on until, late in the day, they reached the place where the pavilion had been set up. They found everything they needed all ready, and they were very comfortable that night, for the yong lady took whatever pains she could to serve Lancelot well. In the morning, they set out and rode together until they came to a religious house. There they heard Mass and ate. Then they rode on until they met the duke of Clarence and Sir Yvain and the others who had come out of the Valley of No Return. They greeted one another with great delight. The duke, meanwhile, had sent his squire to the damsel at Caradoc’s castle,’ bearing the greetings that his cousin had sent and the ring that she had given him so that the girl would do her best to help him. While Lancelot and the others were enjoying their evening together, Morgan’s tent was pitched, and everyone Presumably, the damsel has caught up with Lancelot, whose unexplained failure to stop at the castle may result from a scribe’s momentary lapse. 7the damsel at Caradoc’s castle”: see chapter 82, pp. [185186]. Lancelot, Part LIT said that Lancelot had been in a fine prison, to have come out with such riches. It was not long before [330] the squire came back and reassured the duke that the young lady would help him as much as she could, “and you need to know, too,” he said, “that Caradoc has led two hundred knights and some ten thousand foot soldiers to the Wicked Pass, the place where his land begins, to take a stand against King Arthur, who is on his way with his whole army. That means the court itself is so unmanned that there is almost no one left to fend off an attack.” When the duke heard that news, he was very pleased and said to Lancelot, “My lord, what do you advise we do?” “My lord,” he answered, “you are a greater knight than I am, so you and Sir Yvain, who have witnessed many important things, will decide whiat is best to do.” “As God is my witness,” said the duke, “it seems to us that things are working out very well for us, since we can find the castle unlucky enough to be undefended. By God, I advise we attack it! And you, my lord,” he said to Sir Yvain, “what do you advise?” “Yes,” he said, “I go along with your plan. It’s right that we Should make every effort to free Sir Gawain, since it is on his account that our force and the king have come out.” All the knights agreed to the plan, and then the duke said to Lancelot, “And you, my lord, what do you suggest?” “My lord,” he said, “Sir Gawain, who is the worthiest knight in the world, deserves to be rescued not [331] by underhanded means but through a great act of prowess. And that is how he will be, God willing. I know, for my part, that I would not want to rescue him without meeting any resistance. And I will not enter that castle, please God, before I find someone at the gate to bar my way; I'll go instead where men of daring have a chance to prove themselves. I would rather have the lord of the castle slain or captured than win the castle and everything in it.” With that, he turned to leave. Kehedin said that he would go with him, as did Gaheris of Carahew and Aglin of the Vales; Kay of Estral said that he would take all the knights who had come with him, and all the knights said as much who had been prisoners in the Valley of No Return. The duke of Clarence and Sir Yvain, however, were not in agreement, but said rather that the greatest need was to rescue Sir Gawain and that they would part company with Lancelot. This was a stand for which they were later roundly blamed. Lancelot rode off with all those knights and with Kay’s men, heading straight toward the Wicked Pass. They were led by the young lady who had come with Lancelot and the one who had brought the news to the house of Kay of Estral, since they knew the whole land. But the story speaks no more of them at this point and turns instead to the duke and Sir Yvain, who stayed behind to see if they could indeed rescue Sir Gawain. [323] BD 98. Lancelot Confronts Caradoc’s Men at the Wicked Pass While Yvain and the Duke of Clarence Go Directly to the Dolorous Tower, Where They Are Captured.’ And so Sir Wain and the duke stayed behind,? together with their squire. When they drew near the castle, the squire went his own way, as he was afraid of being recognized; and they both rode up to the main gate. When they reached the entry to the first ward, a dwarf came up to them holding a bloodstained sword and said, “Sir knights, do you wish to come in?” They answered that they did. “You may come in at any time,” he said. “Don’t be ina hurry, because the lord of the castle is still in bed, not yet caring to rise for you. But you can’t both come in together; one of you will have to wait until the other either is captured or can force his way through. If you like, though, we’ll do something else: we’ll gather our men to fight two knights.” “How will you do that?” said the duke. “The custom here,” said the dwarf, “is for one knight errant to do battle with ten men; and if more than one comes along, each one faces ten.” When they heard that news, they were both shocked, and neither was so bold that he would not rather have gone off with the others to the Wicked Pass. Still, the duke said that was not the end of the matter, for, in view of what the squire had told him, he did not believe that there was any knight left in the castle. So he said that, come what might, he wanted to enter. He said to Sir Yain, “My lord, this is a treacherous way in, but there is another entry that isn’t at all as [333] worrisome as this one, and I'll let you choose the one you prefer.” Sir Yvain did not know what the other one was like; and if he did not choose the first, he was afraid that the duke would take him for a coward. So he said that he would choose the entry with the ten knights, since, whatever he truly preferred, he did not want to reject it because the duke was prodding him to enter somewhere else. The duke answered that he would go the other way. With that, they separated and Sir Yvain turned back to the dwarf, telling him to open the gate to him. “It will be opened at once,” said the dwarf. Then he left and went past the first gate, going into the outer ward through the small door. In almost no time, a horn above the gate blew but a single note, and the gate was opened forthwith. Standing there were ten fully armed knights, five on one side and five on the other, mounted on big horses, each holding a thick-shafted lance with a sharp iron tip and each girded with a sword. Sir Yvain went up to the gate and said to the knights, “Good lords, when a knight is captured here, what does he lose?” They answered that he would lose nothing less than his head. 1Corresponds to Micha I:XXVII; Sommer IV:130-131. 2 “stayed behind”: that is, in order to go directly to Caradoc’s Dolorous Tower. 320 “And what if he can force his way through?” One of the knights then said very gently, “Sir knight, we don’t guard this gate for any fiefs or wealth we might gain by it; in fact, we’d like no more knights ever to come along, for many have already lost their lives at our hands, and that bothers us. Now, it is in your interest to withdraw, for if you are defeated and captured here, you will have your head cut off. However, if you defeat us and [334] another knight, who guards the way out of the main tower, you will have conquered this castle and the very large barony attached to it. You see, then, it would be a very big undertaking—and an even bigger achievement. Now you can choose as you like.” “Really,” said Sir Yvain, “can I be sure that I have only you and the tower guard to fear?” “Fear?” he answered. “We have taken an oath on it, and will swear it again to you if you wish.” “Woe to the neck of anyone to whom you swear it!” said Sir Yvain. “If I defeat you, I fear no one in the world!” “Many a worthier man than you has felt fear,” said the man. “I won’t go home,” he answered, “without taking on this adventure!” “Since you want it,” said the knight, “you will have it!” Then they all made ready to meet him. Sir Yvain drew back a little and, looking toward heaven, prayed to Our Lord that He have mercy on him, for his life was running out. Then he commended the king and queen to God, as well as Sir Gawain, whom he thought he would never see again; and he said, “Ah, Lancelot, finest knight in the world, how rash one is to boast of taking on a battle that you spurn! No man will ever be dishonored in your company, for God has destined all successes for you and the men in your party.” Then he crossed himself and, couching his lance under his arm, spurred toward the men who were gathered at the gate. Not one failed to [335] strike him as hard as he could with his lance, so that they made him arch backward over the rear saddlebow and ripped the shield from his neck, tearing, of course, the straps for neck and arm. His horse, which he had won when rescuing Sagremor and the young lady,? was very strong and swift and bore him beyond the other horses into the middle of the courtyard without letting him stir from the saddle; indeed, wounded as he was, he remained pressed against the rear saddlebow. But the anguishing thought that he would soon be dying made him thrust himself forward and throw himself into action. He took sword in hand and did not wait for the knights to attack him, but headed toward them and fought with great skill. His skill, though, was not enough, for in the end they had so pelted and pommeled him that he fell to the ground and they captured him. They carried him off to kill him in the place where they usually killed defeated knights, and they made him tell them his name. At that point they did not dare go ahead, because he belonged to the household of King Arthur; and so they locked him up in an underground cell until their overlord should come. Meanwhile, the duke went to the back door of the great hall and crossed the footbridge in great fear. Once 3See chapter 88. Lancelot, Part II past the door, he was attacked by two knights, one on either side of him, and he fought back hard, like the man of great prowess that he was. He struggled so manfully that he at last fought them off, maiming one and driving the other to give up and flee. Then he went up to the second wall and, as soon as he had gone through the small doorway, looked about and saw that the door had shut behind him. Suddenly, four knights leapt forward and tore away large parts of [336] his shield and wounded him in many places both in front and in back. Nevertheless, he fought back hard, and the knights found him a more hardy fighter than they had thought. In the end, though, he could not last, and they captured him and put him in prison with Sir Yvain until their overlord should come; but they were both gravely distressed, foreseeing nothing but death. Here the story stops speaking of them and turns back to Lancelot and his companions. 99. Lancelot Triumphs over Caradoc, Liberates Gawain and the Others, and Is Then Recalled to Prison by Morgan the Fay.’ When Lancelot and his fellow knights had left the duke and Sir Yvain, who had parted company with them, they traveled under the guidance of the two young ladies all the way to the Wicked Pass, where they saw the great battle between King Arthur’s troops, trying to push through, and Caradoc’s troops, trying to fend them off. Many of the king’s men had already fallen, because they were fighting too recklessly. Then, from behind, Lancelot’s men shouted their cry and plunged boldly into the fray, felling many of the foe as they went. Lancelot performed great feats of arms and would have done more, but he soon saw a general rout. Caradoc suffered to see what was happening, for he was a man of great valor. He was forced nevertheless to turn around and flee as swiftly as his very good horse could gallop. His flight was not noticed by the men in the field, because he went off under cover of the forest. Lancelot, however, did not miss it, for Caradoc was most important to him. He spurred off after him, rebuking him out loud for his cowardice and faintheartedness. One fleeing, the other chasing after, they came after a while to a broad valley, deep and hidden. Caradoc looked around and saw that no one [337] but Lancelot was following him, and he turned toward him with sword in hand. Lancelot, who had not thought he would catch up with him, was delighted; and they gave each other great blows to the helmet, arms, and shoulders, and in a short time they had so trounced each other that even the stronger was spurting bright blood, and the mail of his silvery hauberk turned red. Thus they tried each other for a long while, until Caradoc, not daring to linger anymore, afraid of being taken by surprise, started back toward his castle as fast as he could make his horse go, and Lancelot followed him, sure that he would be robbed of joy forever if he let him escape. As Caradoc neared the castle, he saw how extraordinarily ‘Corresponds to Micha I:X XVIII; Sommer IV:132-139. Lancelot, Part IIT Lancelot’s men and the king’s were chasing down the defenders, who were staggering and falling all around. He was seized with fear for his castle and himself and pulled back as much as he could for safety. Meanwhile, the watchman atop the walls, who had seen the two men come along, ran down to lower the drawbridge and open the gate. But Lancelot, who was following Caradoc very closely, kept slashing with his sword whenever he could reach him. Caradoc, for his part, had turned his shield around so as to cover his back, and Lancelot could then hit him only on the shield. As they neared the bridge, Lancelot became almost mad with alarm, thinking he had lost him. Then, drawing from his horse every bit of energy he could, he galloped close enough to Caradoc to grasp the top of the shield and pull it toward him with all the great strength he had, forcing the man down against the back of his saddle. [338] Finding himself caught like that, Caradoc bent his head back and let go of the armstraps, and the shield slipped away; Lancelot threw it down, while the other rushed onto the drawbridge. The ten knights guarding the gate had their lances couched, ready for Lancelot. When he saw that he had lost his man, he hurled himself past them and seized Caradoc by the collar just as he was pulling himself up. The man was very powerful and afraid of death, and kept himself in place with all his might. Lancelot let go of the armstraps of his shield and seized Caradoc by the left arm. He, feeling himself caught like that, tugged so hard, with all the strength of body and will, that he wrenched Lancelot out of his saddle. But Lancelot held on to him, springing onto the back of his horse right behind him. He remembered that Sir Gawain had made such a leap the day when they were in battle together at the bridge of the Lost Isle.” [339] In this way the horse, which was very strong, carried them both past the three gates, and the ten knights waiting for Lancelot missed him. He kept such a tight hold on Caradoc, with his two hands gripping him under the arms, that he dropped his reins. They went as far as the main tower, with the ten knights following them until they heard the din of the knights in front of the gate, who were attacking in great numbers. Many of the men of the castle were already dead or captured, and many had jumped into the moat, some out of fear, others unwillingly. The knights ran to close the gates and went up to the high towers, more interested in what was happening outside the walls than inside. Lancelot and Caradoc, then, reached the main tower. Caradoc, who was one of the tallest of knights, was strong; he strained so hard that he bore himself and Lancelot to the ground. They both fell head down, so that Caradoc, big and heavy as he was, almost broke his neck; and they sprang apart, both of them remaining dazed for a while. Lancelot was the first to jump up; he took his sword to attack the other, but Caradoc, too, jumping to his feet, whipped out his sword and rushed toward Lancelot. He had no shield, though, which troubled him, and he had no chance, either, to pick one up, as Lancelot had closed in on him and was hacking at his arms with his sword to hurt him 2The allusion seems to be to chapter 70, p. [428]. Bel badly. But he was extremely powerful and gave back as well as he received, knocking off big pieces of Lancelot’s shield and slashing and denting his helmet. [340] The struggle went on without either one of them gaining the upper hand, and both lost much blood. The young lady in the tower was watching them, bewildered.® She was quite sure, looking at Lancelot, that he was the duke of Clarence, and was planning to help him as best she could. This damsel was a prisoner of Caradoc’s, taken away from a knight, a very handsome young man, whom she loved more than anyone else, which is why she could not love Caradoc. He, however, loved her more than any other creature on earth and was indeed so smitten by her that he had put into her keeping something that he would have entrusted to no one else: an enchanted sword. His mother, who was a very skillful sorceress, had foretold that he would not die by any means other than this sword, and she had guarded it for a long time. Lately, though, Caradoc had given it to the young woman, believing that she would love him as much as he did her. She now pondered how she might put the sword into Lancelot’s hands, but she could not think of a way. Meanwhile, the duel between Lancelot and Caradoc raged on, since they were both very powerful men. Lancelot dealt the other’s shoulders and arms so many blows that they became swollen and painful, and Caradoc, able to deliver only weak thrusts, could only hope to seize Lancelot with his hands. But Lancelot was wary of this, feeling him to be strong and powerful enough to hurt him with his grip, which was the only thing he feared. [341] But Lancelot was very nimble and quite strong and not at all out of breath, and he kept darting out of his foe’s way as Caradoc kept reaching for him. They fought together like that for a long time, until Caradoc was so tired that he no longer knew how to protect himself. Little by little he moved toward his tower, while at the same time he was bewildered by all the noise coming from the troops attacking the castle outside. He kept zigzagging, as much out of fear of dying as out of dread of losing a limb, till he reached the steps of the tower; then he started up, but backwards. When he was about to go through the doorway, he recalled that he would be defeated if he went in. As for Lancelot, he kept after him, prodding him on and reviling him for his cowardice. Then Caradoc swung around. When Lancelot saw him coming, he jumped out of the way and down from the steps onto the ground. Back they were in the courtyard, in a close fight, but after a while Caradoc could hardly last. He began to dodge the blows and drew back to the vaulted staircase. Lancelot hopped around him from side to side and dealt him a wicked blow to the neck, but Caradoc, who was frightened, jumped to the side, and the blow landed on one of the steps of the staircase, smashing the sword in two a half-foot from the hilt and sending the blade far up the stairs on the rebound. The young lady had come to the door at the top with the right sword in her hand. From the top of the tower she had seen King Arthur’s army [342] camped around the 3For the first appearance of this damsel, see chapter 85, p. [207]. 322 castle, and it was plain to her that Caradoc was dead the moment his foe had the enchanted sword in hand. She raised it high up, as a sign that he should come take it. Once she was sure he had seen it, she laid it on the top step and closed the tower door; she was so eager for the death of the man she hated more than any other that she was putting her life at risk. Caradoc had not noticed when Lancelot’s sword broke, because all he could think about was dodging his strikes. Now Lancelot dashed up the stairs, seized the young lady’s sword, and threw down at the door what remained of his own. Then he held up in front of his face what remained of his shield and ran back to the knight. Caradoc flung his hands forward to seize him, but he missed, since Lancelot jumped aside. At once Lancelot hit him on the right arm, striking with such power that he sliced right through it, and both hand and sword fell to the ground. Caradoc let out a cry so loud that the whole courtyard echoed with it. With that, three men-at-arms came to rescue him, but they found the way barred, as the young woman had lowered the portcullis to keep them from falling upon the knight. When Caradoc saw that he would have no help, he made a last, wild attempt to defend himself, trying to catch Lancelot with his left hand; but Lancelot quickly sprang back and then, with the good sword held high, lunged forward again. Caradoc recognized the sword and cried out, “Ah, God! Now my death has come! I am betrayed by what I loved the most!” Afraid of death, he [343] dared not linger, but turned and ran straight back to the stairs, for he thought to dash into the tower; but he found the door barred and Lancelot close upon his heels. He dared not linger, but rushed down the stairs, gripping his sword in his left hand. Lancelot, fearing he would lose him, leapt down after him. Caradoc kept running until he reached a hidden passage that led underground from the foot of the tower to the other ward, where the prison cell was; what he had in mind was to kill Sir Gawain now that he himself was doomed to die. Lancelot dashed after him and found him unlocking the door to the hidden passage. When he saw Lancelot so near, he opened the door and rushed in as fast as he could, with Lancelot right behind him. He came to a pit over four yards deep; at the bottom was a heavy iron door that led to the cell where Sir Gawain was being held. His thought was that he would risk death to be sure that he could reach Sir Gawain, and he would have liked Lancelot to jump down after him, as he would sooner die there than escape. Caradoc jumped into the pit and broke a thigh, but his thorough wickedness let him forget much of his pain. He dragged himself up to the door, which was low, and with his left hand pulled out the keys that were hanging from the belt of his underclothes, and he started to unlock the door. Lancelot, meanwhile, was up above, at the edge of the pit, and when he heard the door being unlocked, he thought that it was not too far down and guessed that he could lay hands on his enemy. He [344] commended himself to God and crossed himself, then dropped into the pit and fell onto Caradoc. Caradoc cried out with pain and fainted. Lancelot wrested the helmet from his head and pulled the ventail down to his shoulders, then blindly and at random sliced and slashed until the head fell off and he kicked it Lancelot, Part III through the door into the cell, where it smashed against the back wall. When Sir Gawain heard the noise, he wondered what it could be and heaved a sigh. Lancelot asked who was there, and he answered that he was a wretched, suffering captive. Lancelot recognized his voice, and said, “Oh, my dear companion! How are you?” ‘I am still alive,” he said. “But you, who are you who speak to me and call me your companion? ug Lancelot gave his name, and Sir Gawain was so astounded and so happy that for a long moment he was speechless with joy. When he could speak, he said, “It must really be you! No one else would have dared undertake such a thing; and the Round Table can well boast that you have all the virtues of knighthood and even greater ones.” While Lancelot was in the pit, the young lady went from the tower to join the knights in the other ward, and, looking greatly pained, she told them what had happened. “I want you to know,” she said, “that we are as good as dead, because King Arthur is going to storm the castle.” Hearing those words, the knights were bewildered, and they asked her, sensible as she was, what they could do. [345] She said that they should all go cry mercy to the good knight who had just won the right to the castle, for he was about to become its lord; they agreed. ‘Then she led them to the pit, where she had a ladder lowered and, with a soldier holding a handful of bright candles, was the first to climb down. When Lancelot saw her, he did her the honor of kneeling before her and offering to do her will in all things. Then they took the ladder, placed it against the pillar on top of which Sir Gawain lay, and carried him out of the cell. No one could feel or describe greater joy than the two companions felt! Once they were out of the pit, they all, both knights and men-at-arms, fell to the feet of Lancelot and asked his mercy on both themselves and the castle. Then they led him to the place where Sir Yvain and the duke were being held prisoner; they were unspeakably embarrassed to see him, but very glad that Sir Gawain had been set free. Lancelot at once had the gates to the castle thrown open and greeted the king. He presented him first with his nephew, Sir Gawain, and next with the head of the man who had imprisoned him; the rejoicing was as great as it was bound to be, and everyone had praise for Lancelot’s prowess. Then came the knights whom he had freed from the Valley of No Return, along with the three companions of the Round Table and Kay of Estral, and there was much talk of the great deeds he [346] had performed during the quest. Lancelot’s joy was very great, but it was outdone by the joy shown by Galehaut and by his cousin Lionel, who was now a knight, and the two young women were also very happy. That night, King Arthur was in the castle, together with Galehaut and many of the other barons, and they visited the cell where Sir Gawain had been kept; Sir Gawain praised to the king the damsel who had done so much to help him. That night, the young lady whom Morgan had sent to travel with Lancelot came to him and said that she was 41 iterally, “call me lord and companion.” Lancelot, Part III summoning him to honor his agreement with her mistress. She was sorry, she said, but if she did not do so, she would be breaking her oath. “You will not be forsworn, nor I a liar,” he answered; ‘T’ll go tomorrow morning or even tonight, whichever you prefer.” She said that he was well aware of the agreement that they both had and remembered that he had to go back to prison as soon as he was summoned. At once, he went into the room where the young lady of the tower had put his armor, made ready, then said that she should call for the best horse she thought the castle had, “because I want to get as far as the forest,” he said; “and make sure,” he went on, “if you cherish my love and your honor, that no one knows about it.” She said that he had nothing to fear. Once he had left the castle as secretly as he could, he sent the young lady back to fetch Sir Gawain, so that he could speak with him in private. When he came, Lancelot said to him, “My lord, you are a man from whom I can’t hide anything. I want you to know about a concern of mine that I need to attend to tonight. I can’t tell you what it is, or where, but I won’t be away long. Please let the king and my lord Galehaut know about it, [347] but I beg you, by the faith you owe me, to tell them nothing tonight, because I must not be hindered. Tell them that I'll come back soon.” With that, Sir Gawain began to weep and said, “Oh, my lord, please tell me at least if you’re going somewhere we should worry about!” “Not at all,” he answered; “don’t be afraid.” Then they bade each other goodbye. Lancelot went to meet the young lady, who was waiting for him as planned, together with the men who had carried the pavilion; and they took the straightest road possible back to where they had come from. And so Lancelot went off to Morgan’s prison; and now the story stops speaking about him and turns back to King Arthur and Galehaut and the others who were at the Dolorous Tower. That night, everyone at the Dolorous Tower was asking about Lancelot. When Sir Gawain saw that the king was worried, he said that he wouldn’t be away long. He admitted that he had seen him off, and the king was irked, saying that, Lancelot being the worthiest knight in the world, Gawain should not have kept it hidden. “You may be sure,” he went on, “that it will not be to your honor if he is lost and we can’t get any news of him.” In such terms the king rebuked Sir Gawain, but of all the people there the most downcast and bewildered was Galehaut. He felt, he said to himself, that Lancelot did not love him, for he had disclosed his plan to someone else and gone off unbeknownst to him, Galehaut. And from that arose the bitter disappointment that gripped his heart with a pain which would never fade. But this is not the place to speak of it. In the morning, the king left the Dolorous Tower, giving both the tower and everything attached to it to the damsel, for the [348] help that she had given Sir Gawain. Then he traveled back to London, where the queen was lying ill. But when she learned the news, you may be sure she was then truly ill, though she masked it as best she could lest anyone divine her feelings. Thus the queen fell B23 into double suffering, nor could she mask it so well that her heart and face did not betray the woes she felt. And the king and Galehaut, with their immediate households, settled down in the city of London to wait for any good and trustworthy news of Lancelot. 100. Morgan the Fay Sends a Messenger to the Royal Court to Denounce the Love of Lancelot and Guenevere; Galehaut, Lionel, and Gawain Set Out in Quest of Lancelot.’ At this point the story says that, when Lancelot was back in her prison, Morgan took pains to cajole him, if possible, into disclosing his secret. But it was useless, and she could learn nothing save that he wore a very precious emerald ring. The ring was small and very beautiful, and as soon as she saw it, she recognized it as having belonged to the queen; it was the same one she had noticed just before she had let him go to the Dolorous Tower, and it is true that it had been given to him by the queen.* Morgan was bent upon having the ring and asked for it a number of times, but she was refused; so she decided, now that she could not coax it from him, that she [349] would have it by force. She owned another ring that had belonged to the queen, which was in every way just like the one that Lancelot had, but for its power against witchcraft; besides, Lancelot’s ring could not be won through spells and bewitchment, because in the stone’s setting there were two strange figures, almost invisible, whose meaning no one could make out. When Morgan saw that Lancelot would not give her the ring willingly,® she gave up asking for it, claiming for a long while that she had no interest in it and had merely been testing him. By every means that witchcraft allowed, Morgan tried to secure the ring, but to no avail. Then she took an herb called soporite, which, once anyone has had a taste of it, puts him into a lasting sleep from which he can be awakened only by force; and this herb she gave to Lancelot in a drink. She steeped it in a strong wine and, pretending she wanted to make him comfortable, placed under Lancelot’s head the pillow that she had placed there when she had led him off to prison from the Valley of False Lovers.* That night, while Lancelot was in a deep sleep, Morgan slipped the ring off his finger and slipped her own on instead. She did this so secretly because she well knew that, if he were aware of it, nothing could hold back his wrath. And so, too, she watched him for quite a while afterward, to 1 Corresponds to Micha I:X XIX; Sommer IV:139-143. 2See chapter 97, p. [316], for the first, and different, description of this ring; also see there our note on the problematic source of the ring. 3The text here adds, “or by force,” but it is clear from the preceding paragraphs that Morgan has not yet attempted to use force. 4See chapter 95, p. [303], for Lancelot’s induced sleep, where there is no mention, however, of the pillow. 224 see if he became aware of the replacement, often giving him some reason to look at his finger; but he, who never thought of deceiving anyone, [350] never noticed it. When she saw that he remained unaware of it, she took a very intelligent maiden of hers and sent her to King Arthur’s court with a message that you will soon hear. The young lady went her way to London, where the king and queen were staying; Galehaut was with them, still waiting restlessly for news of Lancelot. At the very time the young lady reached the court, the king, the queen, Galehaut, and Sir Gawain were sitting on a couch, discussing in private what they should do about Lancelot, who they very much feared was dead. Seventeen days had gone by since Pentecost, and they were all so distressed that not one of them failed to show it. The young lady dismounted and, coming into the room where the four were talking, all of them upset, greeted the king and his company, and said, “My lord, I have come here from far away to bring you some very strange news, but first I want to be assured that, whatever I may say, I will suffer no harm or shame at your hands or those of your people; for I do not know whether anyone here will bear me ill will for the news I bring.” The king swore that she had nothing to fear from him or his people. “Speak, my lady,” he said. “No messengers have ever been mistreated in my house, whatever their news; and no young lady, above all, will ever have grounds for fear if I can do anything about it.” Then the damsel began, speaking loudly enough to be heard by everyone, “King Arthur, I bring you news of Lancelot of the Lake. Know that neither you nor any companion of yours will ever see him at your court again, for he has gone away to a place where he cannot easily be found. Nevertheless, if he were found, it would be to no avail, for I daresay he will never again bear a shield.” At these words, Galehaut felt a cold shudder through his whole body; his heart clenched [351] within his chest; and he fainted right there in front of all the others. The king leapt up and took him in his arms, with Sir Gawain by his side. The queen, overwhelmed with anguish, could not stay with people, for she feared a disaster. She rose to go to her rooms, but the young lady barred her way by crying out to the king, “My lord, if you allow the queen to leave, I will never tell you more than you already know!” The king, who was eager to hear all the news, swore that she would stay where she was. Sir Gawain leapt up after her and, holding her back, said, “My lady, in God’s name! If you leave like this, we’ll be left knowing nothing.” Then the queen, in great distress, turned back. When Galehaut came to, he grieved bitterly and said to the messenger, “By God, tell us the truth about the finest knight in the world! Tell us why he won’t ever bear a shield again, and if he is dead or alive! You would be betraying all of us if you said nothing more.” “In the name of God,” she said, “I will tell everything, since the king and you have ordered me to speak. What happened is that Lancelot, when he left the Dolorous Tower, went into battle with one of the best knights in the world. He was wounded by a sword through his body and lost so much blood from the wound that he believed he was Lancelot, Part II going to die. He therefore confessed, in public, to a base and horrible sin: that he had long brought shame to his lord, here present, and to his wife. I was in the room when he made his confession, and he bade me bring news of it to this court. “Once he had admitted this [352] baseness in front of everyone, he pledged before the crucifix that he would never stay in any town more than one night, but would henceforth go about barefoot and in rough woolens, never carrying a shield or wearing armor. Because he wanted this message to be believed, he told me to repeat to Sir Gawain words that passed between the two of them alone on the night he left the Dolorous Tower. Sir Gawain asked him whether he was going to a place where his friends should fear for him, and he answered, “My lord, don’t be afraid; I am going to a safe place.” Sir Gawain recognized his words and was plunged into the deepest possible grief. The messenger then turned toward the queen and, in front of all those present, held out to her the ring that Morgan had taken from Lancelot’s finger. She said, “My lady, like it or not, Iam duty-bound to state my message. I am sorry, but I would be breaking my oath otherwise, as I swore to Lancelot on holy relics that I would hand you this ring, which he is hereby returning to you.” The queen took it but was powerless to respond, for the great anguish in her heart made her faint. Many people took pity on her, and the noblest and most important ran up to comfort her. When she came to, she grieved bitterly and did not let the king or anyone else stop her from weeping and sobbing over Lancelot. She said that whoever wanted to spread ugly tales could go ahead and talk, but she thought, and wanted everyone to know, that she had never heard news [353] so heartbreaking, apart only from the news about the prisoners at the Saxon Rock.® “I want God and everyone to know,” she said, “that between Lancelot and me there never was a guilty love. But he was the most beautiful of men and the best of the good, and Lancelot would have outdone all worthy knights, had he been long under arms; in fact, he had already outdone them, and he was a knight for no more than seven years. There is no good quality of body or spirit in which any knight ever outdid Lancelot, save one: he was given to overstatement. But that came from his highmindedness, which could not bear cowardly or disloyal behavior. If I did nothing more from now on than recount the virtues that Lancelot had, my tongue would fail me before my subject. May God have no mercy on my soul if Lancelot would not have sooner had an eye plucked out than say such an unspeakable thing as this young woman has reported, even if what she said about him and me had been the truth! Nor will I deny anything about the ring or whatever else: I gave him the ring as well as everything I would have denied to other knights. If some people find it reasonable to reproach me, I don’t care; their reproaches are groundless!” Thus the queen defended herself before the whole court. There were those who admired her for it, and the king was not in any way perturbed by it [354] but rather 5See chapter 71. Lancelot, Part IIT held everything the messenger had said to be a lie. He answered the queen’s statement by saying that, so help him God, he would gladly have seen Lancelot marry her, provided he were his companion all his life and would not die young. At those words, the damsel took her leave, asking the king for a safe escort; and the king gave her into the keeping of Sir Yvain. The queen went back to her rooms, accompanied by Galehaut and Lionel and the lady of Malehaut, and they were all sorrowing together. The queen said to Galehaut, “Your companion has betrayed me, hasn’t he? I swear, he is either dead or a traitor in his heart, for I would never have thought anyone could get my ring from him. If he is alive, he’ll pay for his disloyalty, never having my love anymore; and if he is dead, I’ll pay for it much more than he, everyone everywhere knowing about it!” They talked at length about their grief, and Galehaut said that he would set out after the messenger and not stop riding until he found out from her whether Lancelot was dead or alive. Lionel said that he would go with him, indeed would go in any case, and Galehaut said that he did not care to have any other companion. With that, they took leave of the queen, and she wept as she kissed them; then they went to the king to take leave. From there, Galehaut went to his quarters and ordered his whole household to return to Sorelois. He had a light little tent packed up and chose no more than four squires. As he rode out of the city [355] with Lionel, he came upon Sir Gawain, armed as he was, who insisted on joining him; and Galehaut was very glad of it. So they went out of London along the road that they were told had been taken by Sir Yvain and the young lady, and they followed them quickly with all their baggage. They went on like that, following in their steps, until nightfall, and then pitched their tent in the woods and settled down for the night. They ate meatpies that they had brought from London and drank wine from casks they had brought along; and the horses, too, had whatever they needed. They arose early the next morning and continued along the same path, and they wondered why Sir Yvain was escorting the young lady so far. It was almost the hour of tierce when they drew near to a handsome little castle, called Duiche, that stood on the banks of the Targejure. There the squires found what they needed for the midmorning meal while the knights went ahead. When they came down into the broad meadow, they sighted Sir Yvain and his fellow traveler; and when they caught up with them, they were delighted. Sir Yvain said that he was delighted to have their company, as he had, like them, no desire to go home until he had news of Lancelot, if that was at all possible. [356] They went to a stand of trees that was in the field and there dismounted and ate; and once they had eaten, they asked the young lady to lead them to Lancelot, and they would “be her knights forever.” But no promise or plea could make her lead them to him or give them any news, and they swore that she would never take a step without them until she was back at the place that she had come from. When she saw that she would be forced to yield, she decided to deceive them all. She promised to take them to a2) the spot where Lancelot had left her, “but from that point on,” she said, “I don’t know what became of him.” That was her promise, and they trusted her, so they stopped talking and rode on until evening. Then she led them off the road, somewhat to the right. When they had traveled over a league, they came to a vavasor’s house that stood at the edge of the woods by a little stream that flowed from a beautiful spring not far from there. The young lady took them there for the night, and they were welcomed with great warmth and honor. As soon as they were in bed, she, rather than go to bed herself, approached two of the vavasor’s sons, who were her [357] cousins, and had them escort her out right then. They rode all night to reach the place where Lancelot was held captive. When Morgan heard what her messenger had learned at court, she was very upset, for she had expected the queen to be disgraced; and she realized, listening to the report, how much Lancelot and the queen loved each other. It troubled her that the queen had the most faithful of all lovers; nor was she, Morgan, holding him because of any hatred for him, but because she hated the queen more than any other woman. So she intended to keep him for a long time, because she wanted his imprisonment to drive the queen to such despair that she would either die or go mad. But at this point the story stops speaking for a little while about Lancelot and Morgan, and turns back to the four knights in quest of him. 101. Galehaut Discovers Lancelot’s Shield and Battles Successfully, Though Not Without Being Wounded, to Gain Possession of It.’ The story says that, when Galehaut and his companions woke up the next morning and did not find Morgan’s messenger with them in the vavasor’s house where she had lodged them, they were shocked and disappointed. They left the place in great sorrow and worry, for the vavasor could not show them the right road; in their distress they rode on without stopping until well into mid-morning. At that point, on Galehaut’s advice, they separated, the better to [358] scour the countryside. Their search, however, could not succeed; even if there had been a thousand of them, they would never have found Lancelot as long as he remained in Morgan’s prison, because the witchcraft that she knew only too well did not let him be discovered. The story nevertheless speaks of the adventures of the four knights, and first of all those of Galehaut, who was more uneasy than his companions. Galehaut now went off with his four squires. He met no man or woman whom he did not question for some trace of what he was seeking, but none had any facts to tell him; he rode around like that for two whole days without anything happening that the story need speak of. On the third day both face and body showed that he was in a very sad state, Corresponds to Micha I:XXX; Sommer IV:143-146. 326 his worry over Lancelot having taken away much of his appetite for food and drink. He rode until the hour of tierce, then came into a large, old forest full of tall trees. By midday the sun was hot, as it is in June, and he was overcome by such an urgent desire to sleep that he could not travel any farther, so he dismounted, lay down in the deepest shade he saw, and slept soundly for a long while. During his sleep he had a dream, in which it seemed to him he was in a garden under a tall tree that was so dense with leaves and blossoms that it was wondrous to see. [359] He went to rest under the tree, because he was tired, and he lay down on the green grass. When he looked around, he saw blossoms and leaves drop from the tree. He was so frightened in his sleep that he woke up and mounted at once; and he and his squires rode off as chance led them. He had taken off his helmet and folded down his ventail, and rode now downcast and mulling over his dream, pondering in his mind what it might mean. He brooded so much that he forgot himself entirely, and the pain in his heart made heavy tears roll down his face. And as he rode along so lost in thought, it happened that a little branch struck him in the face and made him bleed. This shook Galehaut out of his pensive mood. He looked up and saw a young woman on a saddle horse trotting smoothly along. Her hair was unbound and blown about, and she was weeping bitterly and clenching her hands and wailing as no forlorn woman had ever done. At the sight of her, Galehaut was deeply moved, and he asked her what was wrong. “And what of you, sir knight?” she said. “You too are weeping.” [360] “My lady,” said Galehaut, “if the grounds for your sorrow are as great as mine, it is right for you to grieve as I do. Iam weeping for the finest knight who has ever borne a shield, who is now lost.” At that, she cried out, “Good God! Everyone is overwhelmed by what’s happened to Lancelot!” Galehaut wondered who she was, and asked her, “My dear young lady, for God’s sake, tell me if you have any word of him!” “I know enough to believe,” she said, “that you will never lay eyes on him again, for he is in a prison from which you can’t ever get him back.” When he heard that, Galehaut shuddered and, falling forward, lay senseless on the neck of his horse, while the other, with no time to waste, went on her way. She was the damsel who had taken Lancelot and Sir Yvain to Escalon the Dark, and now she was going as fast as she could to find the Lady of the Lake, who had brought Lancelot up and who he had told her was the only person able to set him free. For a long while, Galehaut lay in a faint on the neck of his horse; the squires ran up to him at once and held him in place until he came to. He thought he would speak to the young lady, but she was too far away to be seen. They set out again and rode until late afternoon, when they came to a castle that their route went through. They went in, then, and rode right through, and when they came out on the other side, Galehaut saw straight ahead a beautiful *See chapter 91. Lancelot, Part II battlemented house, moated in the Welsh way and protected by tree-stump hurdles. When he came up to the gate, he saw in the courtyard a great crowd of ladies and maidens and knights, singing and dancing in rounds and enjoying themselves. In the middle [361] of the courtyard stood a pole with a hook on it, from which hung a shield that seemed very much to be that of a worthy knight, as it had very large lance-holes both above and below the raised center and showed the slashes and slices of swords on top and bottom and was splintered and broken. But enough of its colors remained to make it recognizable: it had a silver field crossed by a diagonal band of red.? The shield was displayed right in front of the round-dancers, and every time the knights or ladies came to face it, they would bow before it as before a holy relic. For a long while Galehaut watched how they were honoring the shield. He recognized it and was sure that it was the shield that Lancelot carried from London when he rushed after Sir Gawain;* and he was very glad to see it, because it gave him to understand that he would now have news of Lancelot. Thereupon, fully armed as he was, he rode through the doorway toward the shield. An elderly knight came up to him, and Galehaut asked him whose shield it was and why all those men and women were bowing before it. “My lord,” said the good man, “it belonged to the finest knight in the world, and that’s why we are treating it with such rejoicing and honor.” Galehaut then asked him please to give him [362] whatever news of the knight he might have; and the man answered that it was nothing he could vouch for, “but news did reach us that he is dead, and this castle was for three days plunged into such grief that no one would have dared show a sign of joy. But yesterday evening his shield was brought here to comfort us, and we are rejoicing over it, as you see.” Galehaut thought to himself that, if he could not have the knight, he would have his shield. He took it then and, carrying it out of the courtyard, handed it to one of his squires. “What are you doing?” said the old knight. “Do you mean to take it away?” “Yes,” said Galehaut; “or else I’ll die.” “Well,” he answered, “you’ll do just that very soon, because there are many brave knights here who will fight you for the shield!” Galehaut did not go on talking, but galloped back to his squire and ordered him to rush ahead to the nearby woods as fast as his mount could go. The squire did as ordered, while Galehaut rode more calmly behind him. He had not gone far when he became aware of an armed knight galloping up after him. When he drew near, he bellowed out that Galehaut would be sorry to have taken the shield. Then Galehaut asked? for his helmet, 3This shield first appears in chapter 24, p. [320], where it is the first of the three magic shields sent to Lancelot by the Lady of the Lake. 4The episode in question occurs in chapter 81, which contains no reference, however, to Lancelot’s shield. 5 “asked”: that is, asked the three squires still with him. Lancelot, Part IT laced it on, put on his shield, then took a lance of the sort he used, with a thick shaft and sharp iron head. Then, furiously, like a man more eager for death than for life, he attacked the knight. He delivered a blow above his shield and, the tip being sharp [363] and the attacker strong® and furious, he pierced him right through the heart and threw him down dead to the ground. Then he looked toward the castle and saw over a score of well-armed men storming out, but he gave no sign of noticing them and went on riding toward the woods. Then one of them caught up with him and shouted out a challenge and dire threats. Galehaut spun around and struck him so fiercely that rider and horse fell in one heap to the ground, and in falling the man broke his right leg. After this, Galehaut saw a third knight outstrip all the others on a wonderful horse. Under his arm he couched his lance, which was still sturdy and whole, and flung the man right down to the ground. One of the squires, fearful for Galehaut because of the strength of his pursuers, said to him, “My lord, make me a knight and I would help you, and so could one of my companions! You can’t hold out against all these knights by yourself” “Quiet!” said Galehaut. “God willing, I’ll yet make you a knight, but not out of fear!” “And I’ll be [364] what I have never yet been.” “What’s that?” said Galehaut. “A good knight.” Galehaut faced those who were storming after him, meeting them one by one as they came along, and he unhorsed four of them one after another. Then his lance shattered, but he took a second and returned to the fray. He undid three men with the new lance before it broke, thus defeating ten with two lances. Just then a tall knight struck him at an angle, ripping his hauberk and wounding him badly. Provoked by the hit, he cast aside his lance, which was still whole, drew his sword, and went after the man who had wounded him; he struck him such a blow that his head flew off onto the field. That stirred the other pursuers, who closed in on Galehaut from right and left and kept striking him. He defended himself bravely, and he was greatly helped by the squire who had urged that he knight him, for the youth killed all the horses of those who were on horseback, so that they were left without mounts. The others found Galehaut so strong that anyone he touched with a direct blow was either killed or laid out flat; and he fought so well, wounded as he was, [365] that everyone was astonished. That was how he fought; that was the man who had fought and won great battles. It did not take long before the old knight appeared who had spoken to him when he had taken the shield. He saw the bodies of the defeated, the wounded, and the dead, and the wonder of it all made him cross himself again and again. And when he saw Galehaut dripping blood onto the ground, he felt deeply moved and thought he could not possibly allow the man to die. He came forward and said that he should surrender rather than be killed, and 6«strong” (fors) as in Micha variants; Micha has “wicked, treacherous” (fel). e/ Galehaut answered that he did not see why, for he was still winning the battle. “As God is my witness,” said the good man, “you are of such noble heart that I would not take a kingdom to let you die on my land for so slight a wrong.” Then he ordered the remaining knights to withdraw, granting him safety. After that, he himself attended to his wound, dressing it as needed. Meanwhile, Galehaut asked him for God’s sake to say whether he knew Lancelot was really dead and where his body lay; but the man answered that he could not tell him any more than he had already said. They parted on friendly terms. The old knight asked Galehaut to tell him his name, which he did, and then the two took leave of each other; the good man would gladly have had him stay on if possible, but he could not persuade him. Galehaut went away anguished [366] and grieving over the death of Lancelot. Rapt in the deepest mourning, he realized that he could not live on after him and resolved to lay his body open to all the risks it could bear, barring, however, anything that would damn his soul. With such mournful thoughts he rode until evening, when chance brought him to a religious house; the monks received him very honorably, and he spent the night there. It happened that one of them, who used to be a knight, could attend to his wound, since he knew about such things; and so Galehaut stayed at the house until the wound had almost healed, but his general state grew steadily worse. Afraid of not dying the right way, he decided to go back to his land and found churches and hospitals; he would give alms generously for the soul of his friend and for his own as well. Thus he left the monastery that had tended him in his pain and that later, with his gifts, grew into a large, rich abbey. But now the story turns back to Lancelot. [367] 102. Morgan the Fay Releases Lancelot, but on Condition That He Not See the Queen Before Christmas.’ In prison, according to the story, Lancelot more and more lost his good spirits, to the point where nothing he saw could bring him any pleasure. One day, as Morgan happened to order him out of his cell, he asked her whether she wanted to hold him prisoner forever. She answered that, unless he told her what she had asked him at the beginning, she would indeed hold him for a long time. “In that case,” he said, “you will be holding me all the days of your life and mine; and if you hold me for long, it will be the death of me, for I cannot go on for long in this torment.” “What the devill” she said. “Didn’t the lady of Malehaut hold you prisoner for a year and a half?”? “Yes, my lady,” he said, “of course. But my state was different then from what it is now, and I couldn’t bear 1 Corresponds to Micha I:XXXI; Sommer IV:151-152. 2See the end of chapter 48 for the beginning of Lancelot’s captivity. 328 captivity now the way I could then, even if I were given the world to do it. Besides, you may keep my body in [368] prison, but you can’t hold my heart. So I ask you, in God’s name, to let me go, since I am innocent of any wrongdoing. Or if you don’t want simply to give me up, then let me be ransomed; no price would be too high for my freedom if a certain man I know were told of it.” “So help me God,” she answered, “you will not leave here before many people have been upset by your imprisonment!” “My lady,” he said, “I can’t go on this way.” With that, they stopped speaking. Lancelot was put back into his cell, which was one of the handsomest and most comfortable rooms in the world. From that day on, there was nothing he would eat, and three days later he could no longer stand. When Morgan saw that force would be useless, she said to him, “Lancelot, are you really going to let yourself die like this?” “My lady,” he said, “there is now nothing I want more.” “Would you like me to give you up?” she asked. “My lady,” he said, “there was a time I would have liked it more than now, but you [369] would not consider it then. And now that I am dying, you’re willing to give me up! Still, I'll have myself ransomed, if you like; just say how.” “I'll tell you,” she said, “but if you refuse to do it, you will never leave this prison. You must swear on holy relics that for a whole year you will not enter the house of King Arthur and that you will not spend a single hour in the company of any man or woman of his household.” He answered, “My lady, I would rather you killed me. And it seems to me that, if you wish, you will do it. Indeed, God forbid you not cut off my head, you who are the most treacherous and disloyal woman who has ever lived!” It was clear to her that he was beside himself with rage. She said, “What do you mean, Lancelot? Would you pay no price to be free? In the name of the creature I love the most, if you do not accept the first ransom I propose, you will not escape me until I’ve held you as long as the lady of Malehaut! Now, do you know what you have to swear? That between now and Christmas you will not enter any place where the queen is.” At that, he felt such a stab of pain that his heart almost dropped out of him, and he cursed the day he was born. Then he said to Morgan that she should treat him as her prisoner, for he would never take that oath. And she swore that in that case he would rot. Thereupon, he was put back into his room, and he went through that night, too, without eating. Morgan, meanwhile, did not stop pondering [370] how she might trick him. Since she could not make him eat, she put a potion into his drink that was brewed with magic spells; and it so muddled his brain that in his sleep that night he dreamt he found the queen in bed with another knight. He ran for his sword, wanting to kill him, when she jumped up and said, “Lancelot, why do you want to kill this knight? Don’t be so bold as to put your hand on him! Don’t you see I am his! And take care, if you value your life, never to enter any place where I am.” Morgan made him have such a dream in order to make him hate the queen; and in order to ensure that the next day he would recall the event as true, she had him taken Lancelot, Part Ill out of his room at midnight and placed on a litter, just as she had done in the Valley of No Return,” and carried, asleep as he was, to one of the most beautiful heaths in the world, some three leagues away. She herself went along and had her guards keep close watch on him. The next morning, it seemed to Lancelot that he was in one of the handsomest pavilions ever made, facing a bed just like the one in which he had seen the queen and her knight and still holding in his hand the sword with which he had wanted to kill the man. Then he was so crushed that he almost lost his wits, for he was sure that what he had dreamt was the truth. But [371] he was even more crushed by the queen’s prohibition than he was by the presence of the knight, for he could not swear to be so brave as never to set foot where she would be. When he saw Morgan’s men, he felt ashamed and wretched. Morgan herself then came forward and said, “What is this, Lancelot? Are you so loyal as to run off without my leave?” Hearing this, he was sure that she was accusing him of disloyalty, and he was so distressed that he almost went out of his mind. He took the sword that he thought he was holding and was about to plunge it into himself, when Morgan stopped him and admonished him, saying that many people are disloyal for a moment who then are perfectly loyal for the rest of their lives. “My lady,” he said, “I cannot go on like this, and it would be better for me to forsake and forswear the world than die here. Yesterday evening you offered to let me go if I swore that until Christmas I would never enter any place where my lady the queen was. Well, I am ready to take that oath!” “All right,” she said, “but take care not to violate it, because I would cover you with shame at the court of my brother the king.” He answered that he [372] would rather die. ‘T’'ll tell you what to do,” she said. “You are so thin and weak that there is no question of your riding anywhere. Stay here with me until you have recovered your strength, and then you will take the oath and go about your affairs.” He agreed. Then she took him back and fed him all sorts of dishes that were good and that she thought he would like. She kept him with her until his beauty and his strength had come back, and then, once he had sworn the oath, he took his leave. He went away downcast and gloomy, not knowing which way to turn; nor could he find comfort in anything but weeping and sorrowing day and night. Thus he rode on, wearing the beautiful and costly armor that Morgan had given him. But here the story stops speaking of him awhile and turns back to Lionel, who was very worried as he rode, quite sure, because of the news he had heard, that his cousin was dead. 3See the end of chapter 95. Lancelot, Part IIT 103. Lionel Is Led to Believe That Lancelot Js Dead, but Then Learns the Truth by Catching Sight of Him Himself; Lionel Rejoins Galehaut and They Both Go to Sorelois.! Once Lionel had left Galehaut and the others,? he traveled about for three days without [373] hearing any news of Lancelot or the others. On the fourth day he arose early and heard Mass at a hermitage along the road. As he left the chapel, the hermit walked with him to the door. Seeing the tears flowing down Lionel’s face, the hermit was deeply moved and asked in the kindest way what was wrong, and he answered that he had all the woes a man could have. “Well, good sir,” said the hermit, “to me you can say what is wrong, and you should. I ama priest, and it may be that I could help with the counsel of an understanding man.” “The truth is, my lord, I am weeping for my cousin and lord, who is dead or lost somewhere. He was the finest knight in the world and most admired at the court of King Arthur, which is home to all worthy knights.” “My lord,” said the priest, “I know whom you mean: Lancelot of the Lake. He is also being sought by a tall knight, a very important man who is sick in bed at a monastery not far from here. We have some companions of yours there,> who have told us something of his background.” Lionel easily understood that he was speaking of Galehaut. “Good Lord, sir,” he said, “tell me where he is!” He told him, and then Lionel asked whether it was a matter of illness or injury. He answered that he had been very badly wounded right through the chest; “but he is mending very nicely,” he said. “Oh, my lord,” Lionel said, “for God’s sake, [374] see that I get to him! I’ll never be at rest until I see him.” The hermit then ordered his clerk to lead him to The Charity of Our Lady, as the place of Galehaut’s confinement was called. Before leaving, Lionel asked the hermit if he had any word of Lancelot, and the man answered that he knew nothing certain about either his life or his death, only that he was utterly lost, as if he had melted into the earth. At that, Lionel began to weep, and he took leave of the hermit. He and the clerk went to the monastery, where they found one of the brothers at work in the garden. Lionel asked him how Galehaut was doing, and he answered that he was mending very nicely. “My lord,” said Lionel, “when do you think he will be able to ride again?” Corresponds to Micha I:X XXII; Sommer IV:148-151,152. *The action of this chapter, in which Lionel espies Lancelot under guard, precedes that of chapter 102, which recounts Lancelot’s liberation. Some redactions of the tale, though not that of Micha’s edition, present the two chapters in chronological order. 3“companions of yours”: that is, the monks used to be knights. 329 “My lord, a brother of ours who is taking care of him has said that he thinks he will be able to bear arms and ride in two weeks.” Then he recounted, as he had heard it from the squires, Galehaut’s extraordinary feat of arms when he had carried off Lancelot’s shield by force. Lionel decided that he would not go in to see him until he himself had done something in combat, thinking it would be shameful for him to appear not to have fought anyone in the days since he had left Galehaut. He said goodbye to the monk and to the clerk who had brought him there, and went where chance [375] would take him. He was pained by the thought of Lancelot’s death, and he rode about like that for four days without anything happening that is worth reporting. On the fifth day, at the hour of prime, the morning was very lovely and Lionel was riding. He came to a stretch of open country, where he met a fine damsel of great beauty who was weeping bitterly. He asked her why she was crying. “Because of the finest knight in the world,” she said, “who lies dead not far from here, killed by a faithless traitor.” When he heard that, he thought it was his cousin, and he fainted. The young lady took him in her arms and, when he revived, she asked him why he had fainted. “Ah, my lady,” he said, “I think it’s Lancelot!” “It is,” she said; “no doubt of it.” At that, he fainted once more. When he came to, he asked her, for God’s sake, to take him to the body. “T will,” she said; “very gladly.” Then she turned away, and he followed her. They rode as far as an old church whose walls enclosed a very large, well-tended graveyard in which many knights lay buried. Among the graves Lionel saw one that was new, and the young lady said to him, “There lies Lancelot.” He fainted once again. When he came to, he saw at the head of the grave a tall wooden cross from which hung a golden shield with a diagonal band of blue. He asked if that was the shield belonging to the slain knight, and she said yes. He therefore thought that it was Lancelot’s shield, as Lancelot hardly ever carried one without a band; besides, the shield was all in pieces. Then he looked up and saw a knight on horseback coming out from behind a fence. [376] The young woman shouted at him, “Dirty traitor! Now you wouldn’t be so bold as to admit you killed a fine knight, because you’d pay dearly for it!” But he answered that he didn’t yet see any reason to deny it. At that, Lionel made straight for him, and the man moved to defend himself. They dealt each other such blows that their lances broke, and as they galloped past each other, they collided head on with such force that they were both thrown out of their saddles and lay a long while on the ground. Lionel, who was more nimble and swift, was the first up. He pulled his shield off his neck and held it up over his head, then drew his sword and ran toward the knight, who was wounded from the fall. As the man was trying to stand up, Lionel came along and struck him on 330 the helmet as hard as he could, and he fell forward on his hands. He was an extremely strong, quite remarkable knight, however, and he pulled himself together quickly enough to stand up again and draw his sword, which was a good one. A man who had been in many battles, he fought back well and hard. Still, he had been badly hurt in the clash and fall, and was not as well rested as Lionel, so he kept dodging to the right or the left, as he deemed fit. Their duel lasted a long time. Their shields were torn apart on top and bottom, their helmets dented and battered, their hauberks ripped [377] through and undone, and they themselves wounded in a number of places. At last, the knight grew weary and weak, while Lionel was so fast and unwinded that his foe, who could barely do more than let himself be hit, was utterly astounded. Lionel pressed him harshly, and the man kept moving toward a grave. When Lionel saw him close to it, he struck such a remarkable blow to his helmet that the metal band snapped and the helmet slipped down over his eyes. Then he struck him on the shoulder and toppled him backward over the grave, then leapt onto him, pulled off his helmet, and pommeled him so with the hilt of his sword that his face and head were all covered with blood. Then Lionel pulled his ventail down over his shoulders and raised his sword to cut off his head. The young woman, watching this, was delighted. Suddenly, at that moment, another young lady came along, riding a sweat-covered mule. Seeing the knight in such danger, she was stirred to pity and jumped down from her mount to run up to Lionel. She asked him what the knight had [378] done wrong, and he answered that he had betrayed and killed the finest knight in the world. “What was his name?” she said. He answered, “Lancelot of the Lake.” “In the name of God, my lord,” she said, “Lancelot is as healthy and well as he ever was! I saw him last night in the prison where he is still held.” Lionel started at these words and said, “My lady, can that be true?” “I swear to you,” she said, “that I left him this morning perfectly healthy and well, and I am on my way to the king’s court to report that news.” : Lionel answered that he would never believe her or anyone else if he did not see Lancelot with his own eyes. She, eager to save the knight’s life, thought for a moment, then asked Lionel whether Lancelot was a kinsman of his. He said yes, his first cousin. “In that case,” she said, “you will see him. I'll show him to you before nightfall. And since I don’t want you to think that I mean to fool you, this knight, disarmed, will come with us. But if I can’t show you Lancelot, let this knight be right back under your sword.” Lionel agreed, and so did the knight. The young lady who had brought Lionel there was astonished and very disappointed. [379] Lionel said to her, “My lady, didn’t you tell me that this knight had killed Lancelot?” “The truth is, my lord,” she said, “that I’ve never met Lancelot, but I said what I did because the man had killed my lover.” With that, they mounted and rode away, following the young lady until evening, when they reached the place Lancelot, Part HI where Lancelot was. She then said to Lionel, “Sir knight, if you wish to see Lancelot, you will give me your word not to let yourself be recognized. I want you to know that you would die and I would be disgraced.” He gave her his word. Then she had him take off his armor and led him behind a very beautiful garden where Lancelot came to,take the air every evening. Once it was quite dark, Lancelot came out, guarded by ten soldiers armed with axes and swords, and Lionel saw him so clearly [380] that he was sure it was Lancelot. Afterward, the young lady had him arm himself again, and the three of them mounted and rode some two leagues to a convent, where she had them spend the night. In the morning, they left. After a short distance, the damsel released the defeated knight, who, when Lionel asked him his name, said it was Swagar of Hungary. He then left, and the young lady asked Lionel where he was heading; he answered that he had to go to a religious house called The Charity of Our Lady. “I know very well where it is,” she said, “and will lead you far enough so you won’t lose your way; and from there I'll go to King Arthur’s court.” And so she led him along, and they rode two days together. On the third day, they had come far enough, and she went on her way. He then rode up to the house, but found that Galehaut had already left; he was told that Galehaut was not at all well and was traveling slowly. Lionel was shown the right road and after a while caught up with him. Galehaut was overjoyed to hear that Lancelot was healthy and [381] well. Then they traveled together to Sorelois. There Galehaut distributed alms as he had planned to do, for the soul of his friend and for his own as well, and he built as many as thirty abbeys and other churches. But at this point the story speaks no more of Lionel or him, but turns back to Sir Gawain, whom it has not mentioned for quite some time. 104. Yvain Comes upon Gawain in Combat and Helps Him; They Discover Lancelot ina Tournament, but He Refuses to Return to Court with Them.’ When Sir Gawain, so goes the story, left the others, he rode through the whole day and the next without coming upon any adventure. On the third day, it happened that, as he was going along lost in thought, he came upon an armed knight at the edge of an open stretch of country. As soon as the knight saw him coming along, he shouted, “Stop, sir knight! Your arms and horse are mine!” “Why, good sir?” said Sir Gawain. “Because,” he answered, “I guard this heath.” “You guard it?” said Sir Gawain. “And in whose name?” “In the name of Morgan the Fay,” said the man, “to whom I will hand over your horse and arms.” Corresponds to Micha I:X XXIII; Sommer IV:146-148, 152, 153-154. Lancelot, Part IIT Then he ordered [382] him to dismount, and Sir Gawain said that he had not yet defeated him; and he answered that he would soon do so. Thereupon, he kicked his horse with his spurs and came straight toward Sir Gawain, hitting his shield so hard that his lance broke apart. Then Sir Gawain struck him so hard that both rider and horse fell into one heap, with the horse lying on the man’s right leg. Sir Gawain left him at that and started away. The man cried out, “Whoa, sir knight! Are you going to leave me like this? It could well look like cowardice. But help me get up, and Ill go to my castle and stay there, because I am badly wounded.” “I won’t stop you,” said Sir Gawain. And he went over to an oak that was nearby, hitched his horse to it, and stood his lance against it. Then he came back to the knight, pulled the horse away from him, and helped him mount. Meanwhile, the knight was showing every sign of being badly injured. Once he was in his saddle, Sir Gawain went back to his horse, intending to mount. But the knight spurred forward and, before Sir Gawain was aware of anything, struck him with the chest of his horse and sent him sprawling onto the ground. In no time at all, though, Sir Gawain jumped up, pulled out his sword, and ran toward the knight. He, however, rather than wait for him, withdrew. Sir Gawain then mounted his horse and spurred after the man, who was galloping away as fast as his horse could move; in fact, his headstart was such that Sir Gawain could not catch up with him. Then, too, he had an awful stroke of ill luck, for his [383] horse fell, and he himself was so badly injured that he thought his heart had burst inside him. When the knight fleeing noticed Sir Gawain on the ground, he turned back, with sword drawn; and when he came near, he realized that he was lying there senseless. Then he rode back and forth across the body two or three times. Suddenly, along came a knight errant, fully armed, who saw the knight who had been fleeing, then saw the other fall and the first return; he saw what he did and saw that he was going to take away the horse of the knight who had fainted. Now he came up to him and shouted, “Dirty coward! You take that horse and you'll pay dearly for it!” With that, he dashed forward, while the other darted to the side, leaving the horse and then turning to flee toward the forest. The newcomer took hold of the horse and led it back to Sir Gawain, who was coming out of his faint. He recognized him easily and jumped down from his saddle, weeping bitterly. Sir Gawain looked at him and, recognizing Sir Yvain, his cousin, threw his arms around his neck, wounded as he was. Sir Yvain asked whether he was injured, and he answered yes, inside his body. “Had I known it was you,” said Sir Yvain, “that knight would never have got away from me!” Then he helped Sir Gawain onto his horse, and until late afternoon they traveled along the road that Sir Gawain had been taking. At that point they met a vavasor who had just come through the forest and now invited them very nicely to spend the night with him; they both thanked him. [384] Together with the vavasor was a squire who had a deer trussed up and two hares, and had two greyhounds on a 331 leash. The vavasor told him to go on ahead and make ready both lodgings and food, and the fellow did so. The older man stayed with his guests, riding at a good pace until, in the early evening, they reached the house, where they were very richly served. Sir Gawain stayed there until he was better, and Sir Yvain stayed, too, not wanting to leave his side. When he was well again, they left together, never parting for a moment. One day, as they were riding along, downcast and disappointed because they were making no progress in their search, they came upon a large crowd of knights tourneying in a beautiful meadow. They went to one side and asked a squire what the stakes were,” and he answered that they were tourneying to win horses and capture knights. “And can anyone take part?” asked Sir Gawain. “Yes,” said the squire, “and be on whichever side he likes.” Then Sir Gawain looked around and saw a [385] knight from the other side galloping up. As soon as he joined the fray, the men from the near side, unable to hold their own, scattered; and as soon as he turned away, they came back and did better than the others. Once he had been in the battle long enough for the near side to be routed, he would ride away and let the two sides come together again; and when he saw that his men were doing badly, he would return to the fight. That is what he did five or six times as the two companions watched. Then they charged into the tourney themselves and began to perform such deeds of arms that everyone marveled. When the good knight saw that, he was almost driven to rage. Leaving the field, he withdrew toward the woods, sheathed his sword and threw down his shield, and he went along striking one fist against the other and weeping and wailing so loudly that he could be heard even from afar. Sir Gawain became aware of this and said to Sir Yvain, “Good cousin, do you know who this knight is?” And he answered that he did not recognize him. “So help me God,” said Sir Gawain, “if it’s anyone, it’s Lancelot!” With that, they spurred after him. Sir Yvain picked up the shield that he had dropped, and said that the shield of such a worthy knight would not remain on the ground for anyone who might come along. They followed him all the way into the woods, watching what he would do, and they saw him dismount, remove his helmet, tie up his horse, and go through a terrible fit of pain and anger, [386] calling himself a cowardly weakling, cursing the day he was born, and wondering why he was still alive. The fit was so terrible that he fainted and fell to the ground. Then they hurried up to him and saw that it was really Lancelot and held him in their arms until he came to. Sir Gawain had taken off his helmet, and when Lancelot saw him, he was extremely embarrassed; but the two companions comforted him, saying, “My lord, we have been searching for you for a long time. The word at court was that you would never be seen again by anyone who knew you.” And that was all they said. 2Literally, “how the knights were tourneying.” B32 Then Lancelot answered that he would not return to court at that point, and “don’t ask me to, because it simply cannot happen. Just leave me and say to those you think would be happy to hear it that Iam healthy and well in life and limb.” When Sir Gawain saw that it would be useless to urge him, he said, “My dear friend, in the name of whatever you have loved most, tell me, if you can, why you were so overcome with sorrow.” “I had every right to it, Sir Gawain,” he said. “I had never seen such an extraordinary thing! I had never yet been in a battle so daunting that I couldn’t win it. Well, today I was [387] defeated in a petty tournament! It bothers me. What ability have I ever had, if it failed me like that today?” Then he stood up, the pain in his heart making it impossible for him to remain with them any longer; he put his helmet back on and mounted his horse. Sir Yvain returned his shield, hanging it around his neck; then Lancelot rode off, and the two companions went their separate way. They traveled back to court, and their news made everyone happy, since they had all thought Lancelot was dead. But now the story stops speaking of the court and turns back to Lancelot, who was utterly bewildered and did not know where he was going. 105. Lancelot Goes to Sorelois, Only to Find that Galehaut Has Departed; He Too Leaves, but in Circumstances That Suggest Suicide.’ When Lancelot parted from Sir Gawain and Sir Yvain, he pondered and wondered where he might go; in the end, he made up his mind to go to Galehaut, who had always been so good to him, and he started on his way to Sorelois. If he had known that Galehaut was away looking for him, he would not have gone there; but Sir Gawain had forgotten to tell him, and he would soon be extremely disappointed. When he reached Sorelois, he was welcomed very warmly, but of Galehaut he found no trace, since he and Lionel had gone off to search for him. Lancelot was so deeply disturbed by that that he almost took leave of his senses, since he did not know whom to turn to for comfort, and all the joyous warmth of his welcoine only galled him. One night, he stole away from Galehaut’s people at midnight, taking only his tunic, shirt, and underclothes. His great anguish had made [388] his nose bleed while he was still in bed, and he had lost a whole bowlful of blood. Then Corresponds to Micha I:X XXIV; Sommer IV:154. Lancelot, Part IIT he went away. When the blood was found the next morning, he was thought to have been killed, and the mourning for him was endless. But now the story has no more to say about him for the moment and turns back instead to Galehaut, who was searching for him. 106. Galehaut, at Court, Hears that Lancelot Is Back in Sorelois; He Returns, Only to Hear the News of Lancelot’s Apparent Suicide, and Dies Heartbroken. When Galehaut and Lionel left Sorelois, they went first to court and there found Sir Gawain, who gave them news of Lancelot, saying that he was quite sure he had gone to Sorelois, “since I forgot to tell him that you were looking for him.” Then Galehaut went back to Sorelois, but when he heard how Lancelot had disappeared and heard about the blood in his bed, he was sure that he was dead and had even killed himself. From that time on, there was no comfort for Galehaut, who could surely have found some comfort had he not been convinced that Lancelot was dead; but this thought made him lose all hope, so that he spurned all food and drink. Whatever comfort he had came from Lancelot’s shield, which he kept at all times before his eyes. Lancelot’s death, says the story, made him go without eating or drinking for eleven days and nights, to the point where the men of religion who often came to see him claimed that, if he died as a result, his soul would be [389] damned. So they forced him to eat, but it was to no avail, for too much harm had been done by the long fast. Besides, another problem arose, in that the wound that he had received when fighting for the shield, having been poorly treated, festered and made his flesh rot. And then he fell into an illness that made his body and all his limbs turn dry. Galehaut languished in that way from the Feast of Mary Magdalene to the last week of September. Then he took leave of this world, according to all reports, as the worthiest man of his age during those times. It would not be easy to recount all his deeds of charity. He invested his nephew with his lands and secured for him the homage of his vassals, and he did many other good works. Here the story finishes telling of him and turns back to Lancelot. ‘Corresponds to Micha I:XX XV; Sommer IV:154—155.