LANCELOT - GRAIL THE OLD FRENCH ARTHURIAN VULGATE AND POST-VULGATE IN TRANSLATION VOLUME I I Introduction The History of the Holy Grail The Story of Merlin II Lancelot, part I Lancelot, part II Lancelot, part III III Lancelot, part IV Lancelot, part V Lancelot, part VI IV The Quest for the Holy Grail The Death of Arthur The Post-Vulgate, part I V The Post-Vulgate, part II Chapter summaries Index of names Garland Reference Library of the Humanities (Vol. 941) 56 “tone citrumens. cme fel | fouMenr Daun mefhrer By matic f Fey << “Merlin and Nimue (Viviane) With Harps.” London, British Library, MS. Add. 38117, fol. 185. LANCELOT-GRAIL ri] THE OLD FRENCH ARTHURIAN VULGATE AND POST-VULGATE IN TRANSLATION Norris J. Lacy, General Editor VOLUME I Introduction by E. Jane Burns The History of the Holy Grail translated by Carol J. Chase The Story of Merlin translated by Rupert T. Pickens Garland Publishing, Inc. ¢* New York and London # 1993 AUG 25 1997 © 1993 Norris J. Lacy All rights reserved Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Lancelot (Prose cycle). English Lancelot-Grail : the Old French Arthurian Vulgate and post-Vulgate in translation / Norris J. Lacy, general editor p- cm.— (Garland reference library of the humanities; vol. 941) Includes bibliographic references. ISBN 0-8240-7733-4 Contents: v. 1. The History of the Holy Grail / Carol J. Chase, translator. The Story of Merlin / Rupert T. Pickens, translator. 1. Lancelot (Legendary character)—Romances. 2. French prose literature—To 1500—Translations into English. 3. Merlin— Romances. I. Lacy, Norris J. II. Title. III. Series. PQ1489.L2E5 1993 843’.1—dc20 92-1674 CIP Printed on acid-free, 250-year-life paper Manufactured in the United States of America Contents Preface by Norris J. Lacy Introduction by E. Jane Burns THE HISTORY OF THE HOLY GRAIL ND RO ND ODD OND ODD OND Ot Om OF BP OF DO KH SC O OTD OF RP OF DN KH © KO NO NO © 0 ~J OW OTH oR OND . Prologue . Joseph of Arimathea Lays Christ’s Body in a Sepulcher and Is Imprisoned. . Vespasian Is Healed; Joseph of Arimathea is Liberated. Joseph and His Followers Depart; Joseph Preaches Before Evalach in Sarras. . Evalach’s Vision. Joseph Prays for Evalach’s Conversion. . Josephus’s Investiture. . Josephus Preaches Before Evalach; Evalach Battles Tholomer. . Evalach and Tholomer Join in Battle Again. . The White Knight. . The Story of Sarrasinte’s Conversion. . Evalach’s and Seraphe’s Conversion. . Josephus Is Healed; the Grail Quest Is Announced. . King Mordrain’s Vision. . Nascien’s Imprisonment. . The Rock of the Perilous Port. . The Silver Ship and the Black Ship. . Nascien’s and Celidoine’s Liberation. . Flegetine Sets out to Seek Nascien. . Description of the Turning Isle. . The Tree of Life. . Nascien’s Lack of Faith. . Celidoine Converts King Label. . Celidoine’s Adventures at Sea. . Messengers Set out to Seek Nascien. . The Story of Hippocrates: His Powers, His Trouble with Women, and His Downfall. . The Messengers Are Tested and Reunited with Nascien. . Nascien Departs for Britain; His Adventures on Land and Sea. . Flegetine Has the Towers of Judgment Built. ix 101 107 113 118 v1 30 31. oa 33. 34. 35. 36. of. 38. 39. 40. 4] . Josephus and Some of His Followers Cross the Sea Without a Ship and Arrive in England. Nascien Arrives in Great Britain With the Rest of Josephus’s Followers. Duke Ganor’s Conversion; The First Christian Victory over the Saracens in England. King Crude! Imprisons the Christians; Mordrain Defeats Crudel and Liberates Them. King Agrestes Becomes a False Christian; Moses Sits at the Grail Table; Bron’s Son Alan Is Named Future Guardian of the Grail. Joseph Converts Matagran; The Christians Cross a Deep River, Then Visit Moses; Canaan and Simeon Sin. Canaan’s Burial and Peter’s Illness. Peter’s Healing and King Orcant’s Conversion. Josephus’s Brother Galahad Is Made King of Hoselice; He Lightens Simeon’s Torment. Josephus Makes a Cross on the Shield Mordrain Used in Battle Against Tholomer and Then Dies. The Holy Vessel Is Passed on to Alan. Nascien’s Death; Celidoine’s Lineage. THE STORY OF MERLIN . Merlin’s Conception and Childhood Deeds. . Merlin Explains Why Vortigern’s Tower Will Not Stand. . Uther Pendragon and the Round Table; the Perilous Seat. Uther’s Love for Ygraine; Arthur’s Conception and Birth. . The Youth of King Arthur; the Sword in the Stone. . The Brother Kings, Ban and Bors, Pay Homage to Arthur. . The Six Kings’ Renewed Forces; the Brother Kings, and Arthur’s Victory over the Saxons. . Merlin as a Bird Catcher. . Rebels’ Defenses Against the Saxons. . King Lot’s Young Sons; Mordred’s Parentage. . Young Sagremor; Dispersal of the Routed Rebel Leaders. . Young Galescalain and King Lot’s Sons; Battle with the Saxons. . Gawainet and His Brothers Defeat the Saxons. . Arthur’s Support of King Leodagan Against the Saxons. . Guenevere Witness to the Battle Below Carhaix; the Two Gueneveres. . Rout of the Saxons at Carhaix. . The Victorious Arthur Falls in Love with Guenevere. . News of the Young Heroes; the Battle Before Arundel. . King Urien’s Sons and Nephew; King Neutres Against the Saxons. . Dodinel the Wildman. . The Plight of the Saxons; King Clarion Opposes the Saxons. Contents 119 ah 124 130 136 140 147 149 155 156 157 160 167 ee 185 199 212 223 227 78 Fo) 235 237 238 239 ae 243 246 248 202 254 256 260 262 Contents 22. oo. es 25. 26. . Help from a Mysterious Knight. . Merlin Warns Leonce of Payerne, Then Meets Viviane and Teaches Her His King Clarion of Northumberland and Duke Escant; Sagremor’s Arrival in Britain. Merlin and the Young Heroes Against the Saxons. The Victory of King Clarion and Duke Escant; Bylas Attacks Urien’s Sons. Merlin as Messenger Boy; King Yder and the Exploits of Arthur’s Nephews. Ascendancy of the Young Heroes; Growth of the Heroic Circle. Magic. . Arthur Weds Guenevere; Battle Against Rion. . Victory of Leodagan and Arthur over Rion. . Arthur Fights the Saxons. . Bors Kills Amant; Gawain and his Brothers Knighted. . Arthur’s Forces Battle Claudas’s at Trebes. . Victory of Arthur’s Forces; Elaine’s Dream. . Merlin and the Emperor of Rome. . The Saxons Defeat the Rebellious Princes. . The Tournament at Carhaix; the False Guenevere. . Bertelay Condemned; Arthur to Hold Court. . Lot Surrenders to Arthur, and Gawain Becomes the Queen’s Knight; News of the Grail. . Arthur to Propose a Truce with the Remaining Rebellious Princes. . Gawain and His Brothers Battle the Saxons. . The Children of Pelles; Galahad Predicted. . Agravain and Gaheriet Discuss Love; the Saxons Routed. . Agravain Quarrels with his Brothers; Gawain and Eliezer Rescue a Lady. . The Saxons Again Routed; The Rebellious Princes Agree to a Truce. . Merlin Visits Blaise; the Queen’s Knights Battle Knights of the Round Table. 47, . A Great Victory over the Saxons. . The Castle of the Fens. . Arthur’s Mid-August Court; King Rion’s Challenge. . The Battle Before Carhaix. . King Flualis’s Dream and Roman Claims Against Britain. . The Expedition to Gaul and the Giant of Mont-Saint-Michel. . Battles with the Romans; Arthur’s Victory. . The Devil Cat of the Lake of Lausanne; King Claudas’s Men Routed. . The Birth of Hector; Merlin’s Imprisonment. Eliezer Knighted by Gawain; Further Battles Against the Saxons. . Merlin’s Imprisonment. . Evadeam, the Dwarf Knight. . Gawain, Merlin, and the Dwarf Knight. . The Birth of Lancelot and the Loss of Benoic. vu 264 265 269 271 274 277 280 283 289 oT 301 309 315 321 329 332 340 342 353 355 359 361 365 369 374 380 384 389 392 395 398 403 406 410 413 415 417 420 423 > > = hte Preface Norris J. Lacy THE VULGATE AND POST-VULGATE CYCLES During the second half of the twelfth century, Chrétien de Troyes developed and fixed the form of the Arthurian episodic romance. In the process he popularized King Arthur in French, as Geoffrey of Monmouth had done in Latin, but he also contributed to the legend new characters and themes unknown to Geoffrey. These include in particular the love story of Lancelot and Guenevere and the quest for the Grail. Several texts, notably the works of Robert de Boron, from the end of that century, transformed the mysterious Grail into the “Holy Grail,” the Chalice of the Last Supper and the vessel in which Christ’s blood was collected after the crucifixion. Then, between 1215 and about 1235, an anonymous author or group of authors composed the Lancelot-Grail Cycle (also called the Vulgate Cycle, the Prose Lancelot, or the PseudoMap Cycle) of Arthurian romance. This cycle of five imposing romances can only be termed monumental, owing in equal measure to its enormous length, its complexity and literary value, and its influence. The romances run to several thousand pages of text, and they offer many hundreds of characters and countless adventures intricately interlaced with one another. Most important, they constitute the most extended attempt to elaborate the full story of the Arthurian era and to set that era in a framework of universal history. The two romances that stand first chronologically were actually composed after the other three. The Estoire del saint Graal (translated in this set as The History of the Holy Grail) opens the cycle by tracing the early history of the Grail, from Joseph of Arimathea to his son Josephe, who becomes the first Christian bishop, and eventually to Alain, the first Fisher King, who places the Grail in Corbenic Castle and begins the wait for the arrival of the chosen Grail Knight. The Story of Merlin depicts the role of the seer and magician in Arthur’s conception and birth, in his designation as king following the Sword in the Stone revelation, and in the establishment of the Round Table, a replica of the Grail Table (itself modeled after the table of the Last Supper). Merlin also directs Arthur’s major victories over his rebellious barons. These two romances are followed chronologically (but preceded in order of composition) by the Lancelot Proper, La Queste del saint Graal (The Quest for the Holy Grail), and La Mort Artu (The Death of Arthur). The first of these, constituting fully half of the entire cycle, presents Lancelot’s youth, his love for Guenevere, and a long series of exploits that he performs in her service. The second depicts the Grail Quest undertaken by a number of knights (Gawain, Bors, Perceval, and others) but finally accomplished by the chosen hero, Galahad. Concluding the cycle, The Death of Arthur traces the tragic decline and dissolution of the Arthurian world, due in large part to the sin of Lancelot and Guenevere, and closes with an account of the death of the king. The Vulgate Cycle was soon followed by an anonymous Post-Vulgate, based on the earlier cycle but characterized by the omission of the Lancelot Proper and, consequently, of the empha sis on Lancelot and Guenevere. The second cycle thus focuses squarely on the Grail quest and related pious themes. It includes versions of the other four romances represented in the Vulgate and even borrows the text of the Merlin intact; on the other hand, the Post-Vulgate Death of Arthur romance is a significantly abridged adaptation of its model. Without a Lancelot Proper, the second cycle is far shorter than the first, but it remains daunting nonetheless in its dimensions and in its complexity. The Post-Vulgate Cycle is further complicated for modern scholars and readers—and this is a complication almost beyond resolution—by the fact that some portions of the Old French text have long since disappeared, whereas others have survived only in fragments or in translations into Portuguese and Spanish. Extraordinary scholarly efforts, especially by Fanni Bogdanow, have made it possible to reconstitute significant portions of the texts. The importance of the Vulgate Cycle and, to a only slightly lesser extent, of the Post-Vulgate is almost incalculable. Portions of them (most often the Vulgate Lancelot-Quest—Death of Arthur) were translated or adapted into a number of other languages. Authors rendered much of the Vulgate narrative into German and Dutch, while the Quest was translated into Irish and Welsh. Italian and Hispanic authors too translated it or drew on it, although, as suggested, the PostVulgate proved more influential on the Iberian Peninsula than did the Vulgate. But for English-speaking readers, the importance of the Vulgate is indicated most clearly by its influence on Sir Thomas Malory, who took the cycle as the principal of his numerous sources: although each part of his work has multiple sources, his first, third, sixth, seventh, and eighth tales were drawn largely or principally from the Vulgate Cycle. He even gave his work, Le Morte Darthur, a title that indicates his indebtedness not only to related English romances like the Alliterative Morte Arthure and the Stanzaic Le Morte Arthur but to the final component of the Old French cycle. E. Jane Burns’s introduction offers a much more detailed presentation of the cycles, concentrating on content, authorship, techniques, and meaning. (A separate introduction to the Post-Vulgate will be included in Vol. IV.) NOTES CONCERNING THE TRANSLATIONS Owing in large part to the cycles’ length (and to no small degree to the inadequate editions of some of the texts), until now only a small fraction of the material has been translated. The only romances to have been translated in their entirety are the two shortest: the Quest and the Death of Arthur. A few scattered ex- Preface cerpts of the other romances are available in English. These volumes thus present the full cycles to modern readers for the first time. Malory scholars, whose need provided the initial impetus for this translation, will now have access to texts that are crucial to their work; they and others will also discover fascinating romances, each one distinctive in focus and narrative method but intricately linked to the others by themes that are continued, in interlaced form, from one romance to the next. The full set will comprise five volumes, in which the material is divided as follows: J. a. Introduction, by E. Jane Burns. b. The History of the Holy Grail, translated by Carol J. Chase c. The Story of Merlin, translated by Rupert T. Pickens II. a. Lancelot, part I translated by Samuel N. Rosenberg b. Lancelot, part II translated by Carleton W. Carroll c. Lancelot, part III translated by Samuel N. Rosenberg III. a. Lancelot, part IV translated by Roberta L. Krueger b. Lancelot, part V translated by William W. Kibler c. Lancelot, part VI translated by Carleton W. Carroll IV. a. The Quest for the Holy Grail, translated by E. Jane Burns b. The Death of Arthur, translated by Norris J. Lacy c. The Post-Vulgate, beginning, translated by Martha Asher . The Post-Vulgate, continued, translated by Martha Asher b. Chapter summaries for both cycles c. Index of proper names in the Vulgate and Post-Vulgate, compiled by Samuel N. Rosenberg The fact that the nine translators are affiliated with nine separate institutions has naturally complicated the process of discussing and resolving editorial and translation problems. That process was materially aided by a major grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities, which, in addition to providing released time and other assistance, enabled the entire team to meet for several days on two occa- Preface sions. Most of the translators were also able to gather for discussions during three different meetings of the Medieval Institute of Western Michigan University. A good deal of the work, however, had to be done by mail, electronic mail, phone, and fax. The translator whose name is attached to each text retains final responsibility for that portion of the work, of course. In addition, at least one other member of the translation team has read each part for accuracy, and the general editor has read and edited the entire text to ensure reasonable consistency of approach from text to text and, especially, within the Lancelot Proper, the only romance that is the work of a number of translators. To make the Vulgate romances accessible to our audience, we have divided them into numbered and titled sections or chapters. Summaries of all romances, keyed to the chapter divisions, are included in the final volume. Notes give information about textual and cultural matters and offer a key to internal cross-references. The first note in each section indicates which pages of the translator’s principal source or sources are included in that section. Locating a particular passage in the Old French is made even easier by the insertion of a bracketed page number every time the translator begins a new page of the original. Each text, of course, has a distinct style and thus presents its own problems for translators. Writing of the last three romances of the Vulgate Cycle, Alfred L. Kellogg (in Chaucer, Langland, Arthur, Rutgers University Press, 1972, p. 11), describes the Lancelot Proper as “immense and brightly colored,” underlines the “emphatic piety” of the Quest, and characterizes the Death of Arthur as “compact, sober.” We have made every effort to respect and translate stylistic differences from romance to romance. We have also taken as our common purpose the need to respect both the medieval originals and the demands of contemporary English style. We have thus made a reasonable attempt to __avoid archaism, except where the Old French passage itself is archaic. The qualification here, indicated by “reasonable,” reflects our conviction that, without being intentionally archaic, the Old French romances were recognized by their readers as being fundamentally “unreal.” That is, the audiences who read these texts in a) the thirteenth century surely took them as a highly fictionalized account of a remote past that may or may not have existed. The translators’ problem in such a situation is thus to walk a thin line between a style and vocabulary that tend to update the texts and cast them in a pseudo-realistic mold and a style that, conversely, situates the romances clearly in a “fairy tale” world. We have therefore avoided modern colloquialisms, although we have not hesitated to use direct, matter-of-fact translations when they accurately render the flavor of the original. Other stylistic features of the romances require comment. First of all, the Old French texts tend to offer sequences of personal pronouns with little regard for noun referents. An example from the Merlin reads, in literal translation, “He had come so close to him that he could not get away from him, and he saw such a great number of men coming behind him that the whole field was clothed with them, and he saw clearly that if he stood his ground against him, he would put himself in great danger of being killed.” Although Old French style, unlike that of English, permits such a construction, the referents are occasionally obscure. Whenever the English translation is unclear, or even when such sentences are clear but nonetheless distracting, we have substituted the appropriate nouns for one or more pronouns. Thirteenth-century narrative style tends to be highly redundant. Texts often double or triple adjectives that present little or no distinction of meaning: typical examples, drawn from the History of the Holy Grail, include “he was frightened and afraid,” “nothing could make her joyful, happy, or content,” and “he could not see or perceive. .. .” We have retained a number of these expressions, for they convey the flavor of the original, but since English tolerates them far less well than does Old French, we have eliminated a good many examples. Some of the Vulgate texts, and especially the History of the Holy Grail, are redundant in another sense as well: passages have a tendency to “double back” on themselves, emphasizing narrative progression and consequence by structures such as “He opened the book. After he had opened the book... .” We have greatly reduced the number of such repetitions, since they quickly become intrusive and tiresome in English. Again, however, as they are a pervasive xu and characteristic feature of the History of the Holy Grail, we have kept as many of them as English style will support. We have dealt freely with a number of Old French rhetorical devices, such as typical statements of the kind, “He was so strong that no one could have been stronger.” We have reduced that, in most cases, to “he was the strongest man in the world” or “no one could have been stronger than he” or “he was as strong as could be.” Such modifications we have taken as nothing more than the normal procedures required to move a composition from one language to another. On the other hand, there are some expressions and structures that we have taken as essential elements of the authors’ rhetorical texture and have consequently retained. One is the expression, very common in Old French narrative, “then you could have seen/heard . . .”; for example, “when Lancelot rode into battle, you could have seen knights struck down left and right.” Although the sense of the passage is rendered equally well by “when Lancelot rode into battle, knights fell left and right” or “Lancelot rode into battle and struck down knights left and right,” neither translation retains the original’s sense of a relationship between a narrator and his audience. Some of the geographical locations cited in the text are real; thus, Norhomberlande or Norhombellande indisputably refers to Northumberland; in this and similar cases, we have used the familiar modern form of the name. On the other hand, a number of such locations are obviously imaginary. In a few cases, there is serious doubt about the reference: Carduel is often taken as Carlisle, for example, and Taneborc may be Edinburgh, but the identifications are by no means certain. In such instances, we have generally retained the Old French form rather than risk misleading the reader. We have dealt with characters’ names by translating their descriptive element. For example, we might have kept the form “Yvain le Grand,” which sounds perfectly acceptable. But in fact, “le Grand” means something specific, and we have preferred to present that meaning to our readers; the character in question is thus “Yvain the Tall.” Preface As indicated above, the translators have tried to steer a middle course. Our primary concern was to present a reliable and readable text to modern readers, but we have also made an effort to retain a certain number of the stylistic features of the Old French romances, provided those features were reasonably compatible with the characteristics of modern English usage. THE HISTORY OF THE HOLY GRAIL AND THE STORY OF MERLIN The History of the Holy Grail, far more than most texts of the period, has a convoluted, dense style that, at times, can only be described as turgid. In the Vulgate Cycle, only the Quest approaches it in terms of stylistic density and redundancy; moreover, if the Quest, as Kellogg suggested, demonstrates “emphatic piety,” the History of the Holy Grail is more emphatic and scarcely less pious, though considerably less graceful and subtle. The author appears to be far more concerned with substance and symbolism—everything possesses symbolic meaning, and everything is explicated in detail—than with concision and grace. At times, the text advances with acceptable ease, but often it frankly plods. Although, by necessity, the translator has in some cases presented a text that is clearer and more accessible than the original, we have thought it important to retain enough of the characteristics of the Old French to give a clear notion of the style and, particularly, of the stylistic distinctions between the History of the Holy Grail and the texts that follow it. In one crucial way, the two texts translated in this volume present common problems: neither translator was able to work from a single, authoritative critical edition. Rupert Pickens has based his translation of the Merlin primarily on the Sommer text, emending where necessary from manuscript variants and from Micha’s edition (which covers roughly the first eighty pages of the Sommer text). With the History of the Holy Grail in particular, the translator must deal with textual difficulties: the early Hucher edition has been the standard text, but it is entirely unreliable; Sommer offers little improvement, while the recent and generally superior Ponceau edition is still unpublished. Thus, to a good extent, Carol Chase has found it necessary to establish a Preface text as she translates the work. She worked primarily from Hucher but emended that text freely by referring to Sommer, to manuscript variants given by Hucher, and to the Ponceau thesis. Because our translations are intended to meet the needs of scholars as well as students and more general readers, notes offer information not only about cultural and literary matters but, especially for the History of the Holy Grail, about textual questions and the process of text construction. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The editor and translators wish to acknowledge the assistance of a number of institutions and individuals. The translation of the Vulgate Cycle has been supported by a generous grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities, an independent federal agency. We are indeed grateful for the agency’s support. We also owe a particular debt to the Indiana University Foundation, for generous financial and administrative support. For offering released time and/or financial, editorial, and clerical assistance to some of the translators, we are pleased to acknowledge as well the following institutions: Washington University in St. Louis; the Sterling and Francine Clark Art Institute; Hamilton College; Knox College; the University of Kentucky; the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill; Oregon State University; the University of Texas, Austin; the Camargo Foundation. We are grateful also to publishers who accorded us rights to critical editions of the principal texts from which we translated: Max Niemeyer Verlag, Tubingen; Librairie Droz S.A., Geneva; Editions Slatkine (Champion-Slatkine), Geneva. A large and complex project, such as this is, owes a great deal to many persons who provided advice, philological expertise, and material or editorial assistance. Because we have preferred to think of the Vulgate translation as a single collaborative undertaking rather than a group of discrete volumes, we have chosen to list our debts here, rather than divide them among volumes; additional acknowledgments will be added, as appropriate, in subsequent volumes. We are happy to express our appreciation to the following: Clifford Chase; James F. Jones, Jr., Southern Methodist University; Edward D. Kennedy, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill; Elspeth Kennedy, St. Hilda’s College, Oxford (Emerita); Sherron Knopp, Williams College; Jay Paul Mann, Knox College (Emeritus); Michéle Perret, Université de Paris X-Nanterre; Anson C. Piper, Williams College (Emeritus); Claude Roucard; Thomas Scott, Knox College; Mary Springer and Norman Springer, St. Mary’s College; John Strassburger, Knox College; Lois Hawley Wilson, Eagle Point, Oregon. For their technical and other assistance, we gratefully acknowledge the efforts of Faith Burdick, Tracy Calvert, Louisa Dixon, Daniel Golembeski, Chad Langford, Anne P. Longley, Constantinos Takles, and Jackie Uhlmann. The general editor wishes to thank in particular Donna Nix, whose generous assistance and extraordinary editorial skills contributed substantially to the completion of this first volume. Finally, we are grateful to Gary Kuris, of Garland Publishing, for the enthusiasm with which he received the initial suggestion for this project and the support he has provided throughout. thi : ( | 7” Mil a | a I 7 ’ ii Ht hi i it yD | ’ ei ; ile Nth Lh Introduction E. Jane Burns The Arthurian Vulgate Cycle lacks focus, rambles, gives you a headache, and puts you to sleep. Such were the observations of the seventeenth-century epic poet Chapelain, one of the cycle’s earliest commentators.! These remarks come from a reader who expects to find in the Arthurian prose romance of the thirteenth century a post-Cartesian logic wholly foreign to literary works of the High Middle Ages. But if Chapelain’s remarks can be dismissed as the naive product of an era long past, echoes of them ring loudly in the assessments of more contemporary critics. Many literary historians in our own century have mistakenly sought in Arthurian romance a recognizable ancestor text for the modern novel since the same French word, roman, designates extended narratives of both periods. Disappointment at not finding in the Vulgate Cycle a viable precursor for nineteenth-century literary sensibilities is often registered in comments decrying the cycle’s lack of unity, claims that these prose romances constitute one of the most disjointed European literary works ever written,? or that their highly repetitive narrative structure creates a monotony bordering on the offensive.* It is certainly true that the complex amalgam of five Arthurian tales constituting the Vulgate Cycle does not present the modern reader with an easily definable “text.” The corpus can be sectioned, on one level, into independent tales that begin chronologically with the Prose Lancelot 1Albert Pauphilet, Le Legs du Moyen Age (Melun: Librairie d’Argences, 1950), 30. 2J.D. Bruce, The Evolution of Arthurian Romance (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1923), 410. 3Ferdinand Lot, Etude sur le “Lancelot en prose” (Paris, 1918, rpt. Paris: Champion, 1954), 63-64. This statement is especially significant since it comes from one of the cycle’s most ardent defenders. But after great effort to prove unity for the entire cycle, even Lot concedes reluctantly that coherence does not prevail. See also p. 262. XU (1215-20), a protracted story of the chivalric exploits undertaken by the quintessential knightlover whose adulterous liaison with Guenevere will subsequently cost his success on the Grail quest. This account prepares us for the Queste del Saint Graal (“Quest for the Holy Grail,” 1220-25) in which Perceval and Bors undertake the Grail adventure alongside the chosen hero Galahad, who is Lancelot’s spiritually pure son. But Lancelot’s continued adultery with the queen unleashes an inexorable chain of tragic events— narrated in La Mort le Roi Artu (“The Death of King Arthur,” 1225-30)—that culminate in a final holocaust on Salisbury Plain, where King Arthur and his bastard son Mordred kill each other. These three tales are preceded in terms of narrative chronology by two others that were actually composed after the initial Lancelot-Grail trilogy. The Estoire del Saint Graal (“The Story/ History of the Holy Grail,” after 1230) tells of the transfer of the Grail vessel from the Holy Land to Great Britain and subsequent miracles it performs there, and the Estoire de Merlin (“The Story/History of Merlin,” after 1230) chronicles the marvelous feats of the prophet-enchanter responsible for Arthur’s conception, his rise to power, and his exceptional military victories. The unwieldy mix of spiritual and chivalric modes that crisscross unevenly throughout this protracted prose narrative mark the Vulgate Cycle as a product of the emergent social and political tensions in thirteenth-century France. The rise of French vernacular literature in the mid-twelfth-century that had popularized chivalric tales about King Arthur and the knights of the Round Table underwent a significant shift around 1200 as the standard Arthurian adventure story was infused with Biblical allusion and the religious mystery of the Holy Grail. As verse accounts of courtly love and prowess, once delivered orally, were recast into prose narratives, possibly destined to be read, appeal was made xu simultaneously to two authoritative written traditions: historical chronicle and the Divine Book. Latin prose previously had been the medium for Geoffrey of Monmouth’s pseudo-history of the British kings, which featured, among many monarchs, the legendary King Arthur. Vernacular prose had formerly been used for religious purposes—in sermons, psalters, translations of Latin religious texts, and indeed the Bible itself (first translated into Old French at the beginning of the thirteenth century). Prose thus carried for many medieval authors a truthtelling value absent from the rhetorical artifice of purely literary verse accounts that by the thirteenth century were sometimes condemned as “vain pleasures.” Lady readers, in particular, were exhorted after 1200 to abandon the deceptive tales of Arthurian knights in favor of texts that would provide a more accurate and edifying truth.4 If the Christianization of Arthurian legend was encouraged by Church officials who, in the spirit of Thomas Aquinas’s Summa theologica later in the century (1274), sought to harmonize the sacred and secular worlds within totalizing systematic interpretations, that Christianization of a distant Arthurian past also served the political aspirations of the new Norman dynasty. King Henry II of England who first sought to legitimate his power by proclaiming the historical King Arthur as a revered ancestor, may also have cultivated around 1191 claims issued by the monks of Glastonbury that the tombs of Arthur and Guenevere had been “discovered” in the abbey church and that the Holy Grail had, according to their reading of Robert de Boron’s Joseph of Arimathea (ca. 1200), been transferred from the Holy Land to Glastonbury. Initially, the myth of a Christianized Arthur would have provided the Norman kings with a heroic ancestor figure to rival that of Charlemagne on the Continent. But by the time of the Vulgate Cycle’s composition, the Arthurian prose romances offered a model of comportment to the feudal aristocratic class, one that attempted to combine the irreconcilable interests of earthly chivalry and military conquest with the spiritual quest for peace. That attempt may reflect the struggle of the lesser nobles to carve out a place 4Daniel Poirion, Précis de la littérature francaise du Moyen Age (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1978) , 94. Introduction for themselves among the competing interests of the higher, landed aristocracy on the one hand and the Church on the other. But what the Vulgate Cycle charts more than synthesis is the ongoing struggle of an impossible task. Through its seemingly endless proliferation of chivalric adventures, its repeated narrative expansions and extensions, its elaborate genealogies of ancestors, origins, and putative authors, this wandering, disjointed narrative records a struggle without resolution, a struggle— characteristic of many literary and philosophical texts of the thirteenth century in France—to give a comprehensive account on an enormous scale, the very size of which might somehow tie competing and disparate elements together. Known by many titles, the Arthurian Vulgate Cycle derives its most common name from the first—and the only complete—edition of the cycle, undertaken by H. Oskar Sommer between 1908 and 1912.5 French scholars speak typically of the Lancelot-Grail Cycle, although this appellation does not include the Merlin and sometimes omits the Estoire® Attribution of the Lancelot, the Queste, and the Mort Artu to Walter Map has fostered occasional reference to the whole corpus as the Pseudo-Map Cycle. The titles hold one key word in common; all refer to a “cycle” of tales, depicting thereby an expansive narrative structure that generates a textual corpus of uncertain dimensions. Unity does not rank high on this compositional agenda. As we move from the episodic verse romances of the twelfth century, which tend to focus on the exploits of an individual knight such as Lancelot or Perceval, to the voluminous prose cycles of 5H. Oskar Sommer, The Vulgate Version of the Arthurian Romances, vols. 1-7 (Washington, D.C.: The Carnegie Institute, 1908-12). Using British Museum Additional manuscripts 10292-10294, Sommer provides a text of LEstoire del Saint Graal (vol. 1), L‘Estoire de Merlin (including the Livre d’Artus as its continuation, vol. 2), L’Estoire de Lancelot du Lac (vols. 3-5), La Queste del Saint Graal (vol. 6), La Mort le Roi Artus (vol. 7). Sommer includes in notes variant readings from other manuscripts, often without citing their source. Corrections are also made in the text based only on consultation of London manuscripts and without consistent documentation. For these reasons, subsequent editions of all texts have been undertaken (see bibliography). SFerdinand Lot uses the term to refer to the Vulgate Lancelot, Queste del Saint Graal, Mort Artu, and Estoire del Saint Graal. Introduction the thirteenth century, which chronicle the deeds of whole generations of knights across numerous volumes of text, it becomes increasingly difficult to discern where one tale ends and another begins.” Just where the text of the Vulgate Cycle is to be located, or what constitutes any one textual unit that may or may not be judged as unified remains in debate. Are we dealing with one composite work or a set of relatively autonomous and individualized tales? And who or where is the author responsible for their composition? The cycle’s earliest commentators struggled tirelessly with just such questions. Indeed, their frustration with the Vulgate’s rambling narrative style was often exacerbated by an uneasiness concerning the anonymous status of these and so many other Old French texts. Chapelain’s exasperated assessment of the Vulgate Cycle as a literary “dungheap” in which one might locate a few textual diamonds, led to the inevitable conclusion that the work’s author must have been a barbarian.® Later critics, who more accurately attributed the Vulgate’s lack of focus to an unmonitored succession of authors and redactors,? expressed an equally acute dismay at the absence of a known author’s governing hand. The pronounced predilection for single authorship even structured counterarguments 7For a discussion of intertextuality in Old French romance that addresses the difficulty in defining the parameters of a medieval text, see Matilda T. Bruckner, “Intertextuality,” The Legacy of Chrétien de Troyes, ed. Norris J. Lacy, Douglas Kelly, Keith Busby (Amsterdam: Rodopi, 1987), 2:224-265. Other essays in this volume help situate the Vulgate Cycle in relation to twelfth- and thirteenthcentury romance. See especially Norris J. Lacy, “The Typology of Arthurian Romance,” 33-56; Colette-Anne Van Coolput, “La Réaction de quelques romanciers postérieurs,” 91-114; Roberta L. Krueger, “The Author’s Voice: Narrators, Audiences and the Problem of Interpretation,” 115-140; Emmanuéle Baumgartner, “Les Techniques narratives dans le roman en prose,” 167-190; and in vol. 2 of the same study Jean-Charles Huchet, “Le Nom et l'image. De Chrétien de Troyes 4 Robert de Boron,” 1-16; Rupert T. Pickens, “Histoire et commentaire chez Chrétien de Troyes et Robert de Boron: Robert de Boron et le livre de Philippe de Flandre,” 17-40; Carol J. Chase, “Double Bound: Secret Sharers in Cliges and the Lancelot-Grail,” 169-186. 8pauphilet, Le Legs du Moyen Age, 30. 9Albert Pauphilet, “Etudes sur le Lancelot en Prose,” Romania 45 (1918-19): 514-534; J.D. Bruce, p. 399, n. 55; A. Jeanroy, Histoire de la nation frangaise, 2:371. XxUI1 proposed by scholars attempting to establish unity in the Vulgate corpus. Varied efforts by Ferdinand Lot, Albert Pauphilet, Jean Frappier, and most recently Alexandre Micha to demonstrate textual unity rely ultimately on the belief that a coherent conceptual plan preceded the composition of the prose romances—a plan thought to derive from the well-ordered mind of a hypothetical author.!° Whether in positing the existence of a single masterly creator for the entire cycle, an ideologically inspired writer for one volume, a governing architect whose initial project was later faithfully executed by a number of authorial hands, or a literary composer who fashioned in words the equivalent of a symphony in three movements, these theories help to explain away or effectively obscure the lapses in textual integrity that so bothered Chapelain. When Ferdinand Lot states emphatically that the enormous bulk of the Vulgate Cycle only appears to be incoherent but is actually as “wellcomposed as a tragedy in five acts” (p. 74), we find an appropriately exaggerated answer to Chapelain’s overblown “dungheap.”!! And when 107 ot, 7-8; Jean Frappier, Etude sur “la Mort le roi Artu” (Geneva: Droz, 1961): 144-146; Alexandre Micha, Essais sur le cycle du Lancelot-Graal (Geneva: Droz, 1987), 297-313. See also Rosemund Tuve, Allegorical Imagery: Some Medieval Books and Their Posterity (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1966), 369-370; Eugene Vinaver, The Rise of Romance (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971), 80; Myrrha Lot-Borodine, Trois Essais sur “Le Roman du Lancelot du Lac” et de “La Queste del Saint Graal” (Paris: Champion, 1919), 3. 11More recently, claims to unity in the Prose Lancelot have been advanced by Charles Méla, La Reine et le Graal (Paris: Seuil, 1984), for whom a network of thematic echoes creates “un tout indissociable, concu et rédigé par un méme auteur, dans un méme esprit” (“an indissociable whole, conceived and composed by a single author, of a single mind” 343), and Alexandre Micha, whose thorough study of allusions to previous textual moments, announcements of events to come, repetition of thematic analogues, interlocking quests (85-127), leads him to agree with Méla that the Prose Lancelot is “un, de conception et de facture” (“one, in conception and structure” 16). For more on the repetition of thematic analogues, see also E. Jane Burns, Arthurian Fictions. Rereading the Vulgate Cycle (Columbus, Ohio: Ohio State University Press, 1985, chap. 8; Micha 227-250). Mela’s findings are elaborated by Francois Suard, “Lancelot et le chevalier enferré,” and Marie-Luce Chénerie, “L’aventure du chevalier enferré, ses suites et le théme des géants dans le Lancelot,” both in Approches du Lancelot en prose, ed. Jean Dufournet (Paris: Champion, 1984). xvtt Lot asserts subsequently that each page, indeed almost every line, of the “Agravain” attests to a consummate art of careful narrative “preparations” for events yet to come (pp. 7174), he implies the existence of a purposeful creator, a competent craftsman who stands in clear opposition to Chapelain’s negligent “barbarian.” The critical positions of the Vulgate’s de tractors and defenders are less radically opposed than they might first appear. Whereas Chapelain rejects the cycle as formless, concluding that this literary voyage is not worth the trip, Lot and his followers provide a map for effectively charting the unwieldy romance terrain. Through the theories of entrelacement (or narrative interlace) and consistent chronology advanced in his Etude sur “le Lancelot en prose,” for example, Lot makes the disparate landscapes of the Vulgate Cycle navigable for the uninitiated or skeptical reader (pp. 17-28, 29-64) .12 He shows in essence how the seemingly random mingling of individual chivalric adventures actually follows a consistent and logical plan. As the conte, the “story” or narrative line, switches furtively from detailing the exploits of Lancelot to following the adventures of Bors or describing the deeds of Gawain, the apparent narrative chaos is anchored in a clear chronology of dates and times. We follow the principal characters day by day and hour by hour along twisting paths that actually conform to a surprisingly rigorous calendar of events. The precise correlation of names and dates supplies a tangible record of the author’s mindful participation in the tale. They serve as footprints leading us back to his former and formative presence. Lot’s analysis attenuates and legitimates the randomness of the adventure story by attributing it to a hypothetical author deemed as conscientious as a Beaumarchais, Scribe, or Sardou (p. 28). In the move from Chapelain’s outraged denunciation of no unity to Lot’s concerned if exaggerated imposition of perfect unity, we can chart a constant preoccupation with origins, an unspoken desire to validate the literary artifact by returning to its authorial source. !$ 12For a recent treatment of the phenomenon of interlace, see Micha, Essais, 94—1 22. 13}; is curious that Vinaver accepts Lot’s theory of unity for the Vulgate Cycle but finds it inapplicable to Malory. In Introduction The fact that Lot’s case for entrelacement and consistent chronology in the Prose Lancelot does not hold for other texts of the Vulgate Cycle weakens considerably his arguments for unity and single authorship. But even the calendar of interlaced events that so carefully maps the terrain of the Prose Lancelot gives us only part of the picture. It neglects the more elusive and certainly more problematic portions of the tales, those that stubbornly resist the confines of the literary-historical map. The task of accounting for these more anomalous but very prominent features of the Vulgate Cycle has fallen to scholars in the past fifteen years. Redirecting the illusory search for absent authors, origins, and textual unity, they have begun interrogating instead the complex relations between author and text as they appear on the pages of the lengthy prose cycle.!4 Accepting digression in narrative development, repetition of stock motifs, the plurality of authorial voices, self-contradiction, and ellipsis as givens of the prose romances, some recent studies embrace head-on the issues of narrative recasting and discontinuity as essential aspects of thirteenth-century prose composition. Examining linguistic fragmentation and interruption, analyzing the thematization of textual genealogy and paternity of literary characters, and invoking processes of intertextuality and rewriting, scholars have formulated new questions that set the prose romance squarely within the context of medieval manuscript transmission while underscoring simultaneously its theoretical modernity. Scholars have recently rethought the persistent tendency to seek in the medieval French prose romance a relatively stable and coherent text whose literary worth could—for so doing, he invokes an argument similar to the one we have brought to bear on the Vulgate texts: “When modern literary scholarship seeks to rehabilitate a literary masterpiece it invariably resorts to the favourite classical criterion of perfection which is, of course, unity... ,” “The Problem of ‘Unity,’” The Works of Sir Thomas Malory, ed. Eugene Vinaver, 2nd ed. (1967), 1:xliv. Leys. pioneering article by R. Howard Bloch appeared in 1975: “The Text as Inquest: Form and Function in the Pseudo-Map Cycle,” Mosaic 8, 4 (1975): 107-119. Book length studies by Alexandre Leupin, Le Graal et la littérature (Lausanne: L’Age d’Homme, 1982), and E. Jane Burns, Arthurian Fictions: Rereading the Vulgate Cycle, are accompanied by a range of pertinent articles to be discussed below. Introduction the Romantic imagination at least—be vouchsafed by the signature of a verifiable historical author.15 THE UN-UNIFIED TEXT Standing behind current attempts to reformulate the problematic notions of authorship and textual coherence is an implicit recognition that the Old French prose romance, shrouded in the anonymity that so often accompanies literary works of the High Middle Ages in France, forms part of a manuscript tradition that allowed texts to be constantly recast and rewritten in many variants. Such works derive ultimately from the cumulative efforts of successive authors, scribes, and reader/reciters.!© The result in the case of the Vulgate Cycle is a corpus of five tales whose interdependence is both obvious and difficult to pinpoint. Taking as their subject the entire history of the Grail from its origin in the Passion of Christ to the successful accomplishment of the quest by the chosen hero, the prose texts adopt the comprehensive scale of literary and theological summae of the thirteenth century: Jean de Meun’s Roman de la Rose, Vincent de Beauvais’s Speculum Naturale, and Thomas Aquinas’s Summa Theologica. Like these structural analogues, the Vulgate’s summa arthuriana knots its component parts together in a relatively seamless whole. Potential boundaries separating the standard courtly narratives of love and chivalry found in the Lancelot, Mort Artu, and the Merlin from the Grail legends of the Queste and Estoire are skillfully obscured by an elaborate matrix of crossreferences that tie the whole together. The Lancelot announces at its beginning that Lancelot was given the baptismal name of Galahad, thus forging a crucial link between the archetypal knight-lover and the chosen hero of the Queste del Saint Graal. In the last third of the 15For a theoretical discussion of authorship that can be applied fruitfully to medieval texts, see Michel Foucault, “What Is an Author?” Textual Strategies, ed. Josue Harari (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1979). 16Gerald Bruns, “The Originality of Texts in a Manuscript Culture,” Comparative Literature 32 (1980): 113129; C.S. Lewis, “The Genesis of the Medieval Book,” Studies in Medieval and Renaissance Literature, ed. Walter Hooper (Cambridge: University Press, 1966), 18-40. XIX Lancelot, we learn that Lancelot is in fact Galahad’s father, having engendered the Grail hero during a visit to King Pelles’s daughter at Corbenic. The son far surpasses the more courtly Lancelot in spiritual achievement. Galahad represents the ideal conjunction of religious and chivalric modes, and of past and future epochs. Descending from King David on his father’s side and from Joseph of Arimathea and the Grail kings on his mother’s, he is the embodiment of Biblical history destined to cure the ills of the Arthurian world. His success at the task is ultimately undermined by events in the Mort Artu that lead inevitably to the downfall of King Arthur, the end of his realm, and the twilight of Arthurian chivalry previously established by Merlin’s creation of the Round Table. This concerted interweaving of individual narrative strains suggests that we should perhaps read all of the Vulgate tales together as a whole. But must we do so? And to what extent? Must we read the Mort Artu as deriving from and inextricably tied to the Queste Do we risk seriously misreading the Queste if we isolate it from later developments of the Mort? Alternatively, should we consider the Estoire or Merlin to be discrete textual entities, and can we justify reading the more lengthy Lancelot independently of its companion tales? A look at the extant manuscript tradition shows that neither option we have been discussing—whether taking the composite of all five tales as a textual whole or isolating individual tales as independent works—reflects medieval practice. Surviving manuscript evidence indicates that individual volumes of the cycle appeared only occasionally alone; they were accompanied more commonly by some or all of the companion tales, and in a surprising way. Grouping all five tales together was frequent but not the rule. Only nine out of some ninety-six _ surviving manuscripts contain the entire cycle. The corpus is most commonly sectioned into three groupings that regularly split apart one of what we would consider to be the cycle’s individual “texts”: the Lancelot. In the manuscript tradition as we now perceive it, the Estozre, the Merlin, and the continuation of the Vulgate Merlin (termed the Vulgate suite) most often fall xX together as one unit.!” The first two parts of the lengthy Prose Lancelot form another segment. And the last third of the Lancelot joins the Queste and Mort Artu in a final grouping. Of the extant manuscripts containing all or part of the Vulgate _romances, none offérs the entire Prose Lancelot ",intact.18 And the array of variation in textual presentation across the corpus is maximal. If the Queste appears at times alone, at times with the Lancelot and Mort Artu or alternately as part of a five-volume corpus as we have said, it also combines in some instances with the Lancelot alone, and in others with only the Mort. At least one manuscript joins the Estoire with the Queste and Mort.}9 These groupings suggest that a variety of possible readings were built into the highly flexible narrative structure of the long and rambling Vulgate tales and that textual boundaries as we know them actually varied from one reading/performance to the next. There is, then, no single definitive text of the Vulgate romances, and this not by oversight. Editors of Old French texts are well aware that the literary artifact in the High Middle Ages lies somewhere between the plurality of manuscript versions available to us on the one hand, and the lack of complete textual genealogy for any one tale on the other. If we are plagued by the loss of documentation through the years, by the absence of manuscript versions that could potentially tell us a good deal about the historical transmission of an individual text, we must also recognize that any text in the High Middle Ages was, in an important sense, fragmentary.?° This is perhaps best illustrated by the verse continuations of Chrétien de Troyes’s Perceval (1189-91). Within fifty years of the composition of Chrétien’s unfinished Grail romance, there appear four continuations: the Gawain Continuation and the Perceval Continuation both written before the end of the twelfth century, followed by Manessier and Gerbert de 174 discussion of the various Merlin texts is offered below. 18Alexandre Micha, ed. Lancelot: roman en prose du 13e siécle, vol. 1 (Geneva: Droz, 1980), ix—xxiii. 19 bert Pauphilet, ed. La Queste del Saint Graal (Paris: Champion, 1921), iii-xiv. 20Paul Zumthor, “Le Texte fragment,” Langue francaise 40 (1978): 75-82. Introduction Montreuil’s thirteenth-century texts. Two prologues to the cycle, the Elucidation and the Bliocadran, were composed subsequently. The process of narrative elaboration attested by these continuations constitutes an accumulation of materials that remain nonetheless fragmentary. From them we get a clear sense that the desire for a conclusion to the tale becomes an excuse for narrative amplification. No matter how many lines are added to Chrétien’s base text, they can never produce a single finished or unified work. And the problem is not simply that only a portion of the original manuscript corpus survives. For even if we had access to all the manuscripts that once existed for the Perceval material, or for any Old French text, we would not necessarily be better able to define the precise parameters of that text. Rather, we would be reminded all the more of the extent to which there was generally no definitive version of the medieval tale. This is the phenomenon of mouvance as Paul Zumthor has described it, a kind of textual variability that consistently undermines the authenticity of any Old French text.?! THE ELUSIVE AUTHOR As verifiable textual fixity recedes before our modern eyes, so too does the medieval writer’s potential authority. Indeed, recent work on Provengal lyric has shown that, for certain authors at least, the presumed existence of a single holograph of a particular poem is doubtful. It appears for example that Jaufré Rudel authored several distinct versions of a given poem, and that he did so not as an attempt to supplant an early version by a more accomplished or definitive successor, but simply as a means of expanding, elaborating, and diversifying the text at hand.?? We have no reason to believe that this process did not also inform the composition of Old French works, including texts in prose as well as in verse. In the case of the Vulgate Cycle, it is entirely possible that two interdependent phenomena served to blur the potential boundaries of a discrete text: the scribe could add sections to the text he copied, becoming in a sense 21 Essai de poétique médiévale (Paris: Seuil, 1972), 73. 22Rupert Pickens, The Songs of Jaufré Rudel (Toronto: The Pontifical Institute of Medieval Studies, 1978), 23. Introduction an author in his own right as he recast his model into an “original” version of the tale,2° and the author could redo his own work without clearly distinguishing the original from the rewrite.24 The Vulgate Cycle then provides us with a text that is not a text in the modern sense of the term, a text that is always fragmentary but always a composite of more than one text, a text located somewhere and uncertainly in the complex relation between many narrative versions created by many authorial if not authoritative hands. The literary map accurately representing this cycle of tales would contrast starkly with Lot’s set calendar. It would be a map that changed continually as we move through the narrative terrain it charts. Although it might incorporate on one level and for the text of the Prose Lancelot in particular the existence of a predictable calendar of events, a map detailing the whole of the Vulgate Cycle would have to reflect a much looser and more flexible narrative structure. It would be a map with no fixed perimeter, and no set or authorized format, a map that could shift and reshape itself at successive moments and with successive readings. This is precisely the kind of map that the Vulgate Cycle provides through its own overt references to textuality and authorship. Signaling us at every turn not to look for textual unity or single authorship among these pages, the cycle offers numerous literary signposts to guide our path in other directions. The clearest example is found in the elusive figure of the text’s putative author, a man whose actual role in the composition of the Vulgate Cycle remains as uncertain as the boundaries of the text he is reputed to have penned. This author’s name is itself a map: Walter Map. But in stark contrast to Lot’s calendar, this map does not deliver reassuring proof of an author’s controlling presence. 23Roger Dragonetti, La Vie de la lettre au Moyen Age (Paris: Seuil, 1980), 48. 24Fmmanuéle Baumgartner notes that by the end of the fourteenth century there existed five or six clearly distinct versions of the Prose Tristan: Version I, a short version that preceded the Vulgate Cycle; Version II, the longest and most popular; Version Il, a mix of versions I and II plus an interpolation of a fragment from the Prose Lancelot, Version IV, which combines Versions I, II, III and additional interpolations; and other interpolated versions. Le Tristan en Prose: Essai d’interprétation d'un roman médiéval (Geneva: Droz, 1975), 85-87. xx1 Credited with composing the Lancelot, Queste, and Mort, the historical Walter Map was a jurist and a man of letters at the court of King Henry II of England. An influential court figure, Map was also an author in his own right. Drawing on his experience as a canon and precentor, chancellor of Lincoln from 1186, and archdeacon of Oxford from 1197, Walter Map composed a satiric work about life at King Henry’s court called posthumously the Courtier’s Trifles (De Nugis Curialium). The epilogue to the Vulgate’s Queste casts Walter Map as an author in another capacity, making him responsible for transcribing official court records of Arthurian adventure from Latin into French. “When they had dined, King Arthur summoned his clerks who were keeping a record of all the adventures undergone by the knights of his household. When Bors had related to them the adventures of the Holy Grail as witnessed by himself, they were written down and the record kept in the library at Salisbury, whence Master Walter Map extracted them in order to make his book of the Holy Grail for the love of his lord King Henry, who had the story translated from Latin into French.”29 But Walter Map’s purported role in composing the Vulgate Cycle can be readily dismissed. He died in 1209, approximately five to ten years before the composition of the first tale that bears his name.2® Scholars have speculated that the anonymous authors of the Vulgate Cycle chose to append Map’s name to their fictive tales of knights and ladies in order to lend an air of historical veracity to the world of Arthurian wonder. Map’s association with Henry Il’s court was well established. And Henry enjoyed a legendary association with King Arthur. What better way to assert the historicity of Arthurian adventure than to make it flow from the pen of a master storyteller who had rubbed shoulders with the very king reputed to have launched the discovery of Arthur and Guenevere’s graves at Glastonbury? Yet even Map’s name as it appears in the Vulgate texts presents a curious anomaly. Some 25 Queste, ed. Pauphilet, 279-280. 26For extended discussions of the Vulgate Cycle’s dating, see F. Lot, Etude sur le Lancelot en prose, 126-140, and “Sur la date du Lancelot en prose,” Romania 57 (1931): 137-46, and J. Frappier, Etude sur La Mort le roi Artu, 20. xx12 think that “Walter Map” was a kind of joke, a nickname derived from the Welsh vab or mab or ap meaning “son of,” a tag used by the English to denote their Welsh friends on the border.27 In this case, the signature “Walter Map” that appears in the Vulgate Cycle would translate nonsensically as “Walter son of,” an unfinished epithet, a name that gives the illusion of identifying a historical author without doing so in fact. Repeated allusion to this name that does not really name reminds us pointedly that individual authorial contributions to the Vulgate Cycle are as difficult to discern as the boundaries separating one narrative “text” of the cycle from another. Map’s potential authority is diluted further by repeated reference to the textualized voice of li contes (“the story”) throughout the tales attributed to him. The epilogue citing Walter Map as the author of the Queste also cites li contes, a sort of inanimate narrative protagonist, as the official teller of the tale. The story ends not when Map stops speaking but when lL contes has nothing more to say about the Grail adventures, we are told. Map’s authoritative written record comes to us then only through a wholly fictive voice that speaks from the pages of Arthurian romance. If the authority we might attribute to the signature of this author is attenuated by the circumstances of his death and the uncertain status of his name, the potential force of his presence in the text is reduced all the more by the voice of i contes that accompanies and encloses it. The invocation of Walter Map as author of the Vulgate Cycle undermines the very purpose of citing an author as guarantor of a text’s worth. By taking us back to a reputed origin that it then withholds and obscures, this map turns us away from the empirical search for an original historical author and allied efforts to establish a coherent literary work where one clearly does not exist. And it is not the only signal guiding us in that direction. 27Walter Map, De Nugis Cunalium: Courtier's Trifles, ed. and trans. M.R. James, rev. C.N.L. Brooke and R.A.B. Mynors (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983). Introduction THE ESTOIRE DEL SAINT GRAAL AND THE MERLIN The titular author of the Estoire and the Merlin, one Robert de Boron, provides similarly suspect clues. Thought to have composed an early Grail story in verse, Joseph d’Arimathie (ca. 1200), Robert de Boron is also credited with subsequent prose elaborations of this tale known as the Roman du Graal (“Romance of the Grail”) and with their later development in the Vulgate texts. The Vulgate’s Estoive cites Robert as a scriptor who translated the tale we read from Latin into French, “et mesire Robers de Borom, qui ceste estoire translata de latin en francois.”28 The closing lines of the Merlin cite Robert de Boron as the teller of a tale derived from a book in the vernacular, the Livre dou Graal, “And I Robert de Boron who retell this book according to the teaching of the Livre dou Graal (“The Grail Book” ], it is fitting that I speak and recount the story just as the book tells it.”29 But Robert’s actual contribution to the composition of volumes of the Vulgate Cycle that bear his name remains as nebulous as the fictive genealogies advanced for these tales. If the Merlin were merely a copy of a single Grail story (Li Livres dou Graal), as the text states, it would not contain the deeds of Merlin and Arthur’s knights that it does in fact record. But how do these narrative strains come together? Merlin explains that the book he dictates to his scribe Blaise—an account of the reign of Uther and Pendragon—will be joined to the Grail story (“Joseph’s book”) when Blaise meets with the Grail people. But this crucial event in the development and transfer of the story we read never takes place. Merlin’s book predicts one set of events—Blaise passing on his narrative to the “gens du Graal” (“Grail followers”)—but narrates another—Merlin being seduced by Ninane and dying without ensuring that the book he wrote with Blaise’s help ever merged with a separate Grail narrative. Alongside the genealogy 28Eugéne Hucher, ed., Le Saint Graal (Le Mans: Monnoyer, 1875), 3:194, 269. Whereas Sommer’s edition provides a short version of the Estoire, Hucher’s text based on Cange MS. BNP 748 and Le Mans 354 offers a more elaborate narrative rendition. 29 Alexandre Micha, ed., Merlin: roman du XIIle siécle (Geneva: Droz, 1979), 290-291. Introduction that posits Robert de Boron as an author /translator of a text deriving from a mixture of an authoritative Grail book and pseudo-historical accounts of the Arthurian past, we find another genealogy establishing the fictive character Merlin as the only possible author for all the texts in question. If Merlin’s composite work remains distinct from the Livres dou Graal that Robert retells, then Robert’s exact contribution to the Merlin as we know it remains in doubt.?? We are left wondering how to reconcile the roles of two authors, Merlin and Robert de Boron, and how to weld together two fragments of a textual genealogy that do not fit together logically. The proposed genealogy for the Estoire is equally incomplete. This romance claims that its author, who figures as a character in the tale, transcribes a book that was previously written by Christ.3! As Christ hands the inscribed author a book containing the story of the Holy Grail, he directs him specifically to copy its contents, thereby guaranteeing the accuracy of the sacred text that becomes the Grail story we read (2:38). What then is the relation between Robert de Boron, the inscribed author, and the original creator, Christ? When Robert de Boron is said to have translated the estoire from Latin into French it appears that the estotre furnished the subject matter or source material for Robert’s French text. However, the term estoire is also used in this tale to refer to the current narration, Robert’s French translation as well as to the textualized voice that recounts it (3:269). The estoire is here said to tell the tale of the Grail story much as li contes does elsewhere in the cycle. This coupled with the fact the Robert’s text is called alternately the Estoire dou Saint Graal (3:269) and Li Contes dou Saint Graal (3:194) makes it impossible to establish a clear distinction between the Latin “source” and the subsequent French “translation.” Furthermore, it is unclear whether Robert de Boron, the purported translator of the Estoire, is to be identified with the author/narrator who appears in the tale. Is the “I” who addresses us merely the narrator of the orig- 301 arry Crist, “Les Livres de Merlin,” Senefiance 7 (1979): 197-210. 31Qn the function of the medieval scribe as an author of disjointure in the Estoire, see Douglas Kelly, “Invention dans les romans en prose,” The Craft of Fiction, ed. Leigh Arrathoon (Rochester, Mich.: Solaris Press, 1984), 119-142. XX111 inal text whose voice has been translated into French—and if so whom does this “I” represent? Or has the original “I” been appropriated by the new author? The trio formed by Robert, “I,” and the estoive is grounded in the same authorial ambiguity that characterizes the group of voices that recount the other Vulgate narratives: Map, li contes, and Arthur’s knights whose depositions are recorded by scribes and later retrieved by Walter Map to “make his book.” If the Vulgate’s textual genealogies demonstrate an obsession with origins that parallels that shared by Chapelain and Lot, they reveal simultaneously how, in the case of these narratives, the preoccupation with origins leads consistently to no verifiable authorial source. We are left rather with a plurality of authorial voices and competing subtexts that cannot be aligned in logical sequence. Credit for narrative invention falls on a cohort of fictive authors that range from the chivalric heroes who speak their adventures at King Arthur’s court to the fictive dictator Merlin and his vernacular scriptor Blaise, to the bogus author/translator Walter Map, the storyteller Robert de Boron, and the oracular voice of Christ. Amid all these references to creators and their sources, both written and oral, no mention is made, curiously, of the actual textual antecedents for the Vulgate Cycle. Yet there are many. The Vulgate Estoireis preceded historically by a prose Joseph attributed to Robert de Boron (alternatively called Le Grand Saint Graal), which derives in turn from Robert’s verse Joseph (Le Petit Saint Graal, Le Roman de L’Estoire du Graal). To this oldest known ancestor text for the Estoire are appended 504 extant verses of a fragmentary Merlin that remains unsigned. Different from subsequent reworkings for which there is a relatively rich extant manuscript tradition, these seminal texts in verse appear in a single manuscript edited by William Nitze as Le Roman de VEstoire dou Graal (Paris: Champion, 1927). As Robert’s original tales were recast into prose beginning around 1210, they emerged sometimes in a trilogy, Le Roman du Graal, that~\ recounts the history of the Grail vessel (Joseph d’Arimathie), its arrival in Great Britain along with the discovery of the future king Arthur (Merlin), the quest for the Holy Grail, and the subsequent demise of Arthur’s world (Perceval, known widely as the Didot Perceval). \ \ \ XXLU The assumption that Robert also penned a verse Perceval that served as a model for the later prose trilogies has recently been challenged. Of the fifteen surviving texts of the prose Joseph and fifty-five of the prose Merlin, only two Manuscripts contain the prose Perceval. These manuscripts are the best known because they have been edited: the Modena manuscript (E. 39 from the Bibl. Estense in Modena) edited most recently in its entirety by Bernard Cerquiglini and previously for the Joseph and Perceval segments only by William Roach.*? But it is highly probable that the texts of the prose Perceval, which do not bear Robert’s name, were composed from a combination of Chrétien de Troyes’s Perceval, the Second Continuation, and Robert’s Joseph and Merlin.*5 The verse Merlin too spawned serial prose rewrites. Having itself descended from Geoffrey of Monmouth’s Historia Regum Britanniae and Vita Merlini, passing into the French tradition through Wace’s Roman de Brut and other vernacular translations of Geoffrey’s Historia, the prose Merlin appears in fifty-five extant manuscripts, including Modena and Didot. It is recast again in the Vulgate Merlin and somewhat later in the Huth Merlin. The Modena Merlin represents the first stage of this elaborate prosification and offers the shortest version, devoid of a suite. The Vulgate Merlin expands Robert’s narrative by detailing Arthur’s military campaigns against rebellious barons in what is known as the Vulgate suzte; and the Huth Merlin (sometimes referred to as the Suite du Merlin) supplies a series of elaborate romance episodes. This rendition forms part of the post-Vulgate Roman du Graal (ca. 1230-40), formerly known as the pseudo—Robert de Boron Cycle, which is composed of a remodeled Vulgate Estoire, Queste, and Mort Artu, portions of the Vulgate Lancelot (taken from the “Agravain” section), segments 32Bernard Cerquiglini, ed., Le Roman du Graal: manuscrit de Modéne par Robert de Boron (Paris: Union Générale d’Edition, 1981); William Roach, ed., The Didot Perceval According to the Manuscripts of Modena and Paris (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1941); “The Text of the Modena Prose Joseph d’Arimathie,” Romance Philology 9 (1955-56): 313-342. 33Rupert Pickens, “Mais de ¢ou ne parole pas crestiens de troies...: A Re-examination of the Didot Perceval,” Romania 105 (1984): 492-510. Introduction from the prose Tristan (and the Suite du Merlin) .34 The compositional system charted here is one of extensive rewriting. The Vulgate Cycle expands the prose Perceval into two separate stories: the Queste del Saint Graal, which draws additional material from Chrétien de Troyes’s Conte du Graal and the Perceval Continuations, and the Mort Artu, which recasts source material from the chronicle tradition—Geoffrey of Monmouth’s Vita Merlini and Wace’s Roman de Brut—by adding the love story of Lancelot and Guenevere from Chrétien de Troyes’s Chevalier de la charrete (“The Knight of the Cart,” 1178-80). Unlike its predecessors, the Vulgate Cycle devotes a full half of its narrative to developing a lengthy rendition of Chrétien’s Lancelot story, perhaps using a predecessor of the Middle High German Lanzelet by Ulrich von Zatzikhoven (ca. 1200) to fill in details of the hero’s childhood. The prose Joseph and Merlin are similarly recast into the Estoire del Saint Graal and the Estoire de Merlin respectively. Rewriting of this material continues when authors of the Post-Vulgate Roman du Graal, the prose Tristan, and the Palamedes (late thirteenth century) pick up where the Vulgate authors left off. Not unique to the Vulgate material, the process of rewriting characterizes the majority of Old French texts. Most vernacular authors in the High Middle Ages based their writing on some preexisting materia in either Latin, French, or another language. Their texts also contain frequent comment on the very process of literary borrowing, explaining how their work either copies dutifully or diverges purposefully from its base text.35 Whereas the earliest French romancers build their narratives on Latin sources—on Statius’s Thebaid, Virgil’s Aeneid, an account of the Trojan War by pseudo-Dares and pseudo-Dictys, or various accounts of the life of Alexander the Great—Marie de France turns to Breton lais, explaining that she wants to recast them in French. Both Marie and authors of the French romances of antiquity see their literary 34¥For a detailed study of the Roman du Graal, see Fanni Bogdanow, The Romance of the Grail (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1966). 35Douglas Kelly, “Theory of Composition in Medieval Narrative Poetry and Geoffrey of Vinsauf’s Poetria Nova,” Medieval Studies 31 (1969): 117-148. Introduction task as one of adapting a previous text, of transforming an existing narrative into something only partially new. This practice, which had the widest currency in the Middle Ages, effectively blurred potential distinctions between original and copy, author and impersonator. In the medieval system of rewriting, a reformulated text becomes to a degree the author’s own invention without ever really losing its former character. The literary work resides in a continuum of transformations, each different from but as valid as its predecessor. THE PROSE LANCELOT A particularly apt illustration of the process is provided by the Vulgate Lancelot The longest of the five Vulgate romances, the Lancelot alone accounts for half of the cycle, occupying three volumes of Sommer’s seven-volume edition. It is built around a central core supplied by Chrétien de Troyes’s Chevalier de la charrete. But Chrétien’s contribution to this narrative is thoroughly obscured; no clues indicate where his portion of the tale begins or ends. And rather than heading the narrative sequence, as is the case with Chrétien’s Perceval in the verse continuations, the Charrete is embedded in the middle of a narrative scenario that radiates out from it.%6 The “Galehaut” portion of the prose text— which includes the reworking of Chrétien’s tale—appears in volume 3 of Sommer’s edition, the “Suite de la Charrete” in volume 4, and the “Agravain” in volume 5.37 In elaborating Chrétien’s 7,126 lines of verse into roughly 2,500 pages of prose, the Vulgate Lancelot does not simply add new narrative material to its base text. Certain key scenes in the Charrete—the mounting of the cart and the tournament at Pomeglai for example—are actually reduced in the prose version, while details are provided to flesh out other scenes left enigmatic and vague in Chrétien’s text. The prose romancer tells us how Kay and Lancelot 36For a detailed discussion of narrative elaboration in the Prose Lancelot see Bruckner on “Intertextuality.” 37Alexandre Micha’s edition begins in medtas res so that to read the Lancelot story chronologically in this edition one must begin with volumes 7 and 8 and then proceed to volumes 1 through 6. XxXU meet, under what circumstances Kay and Meleagant fight together, and how Lancelot and Meleagant do battle on two occasions, thereby providing answers to questions that Chrétien’s richly ambiguous text leaves open. In the prose Lancelot, scenes are often displaced from their original narrative sequence and expanded through a process of doubling: the cart episode repeats with Bors and other knights stepping aboard after Lancelot’s fateful move and the cemetery scene features two tombstones necessitating two tests for the initiate knight.*8 But even this thorough absorption of Chrétien’s text into the Vulgate’s narrative does not create a clearly unified whole. The prose redaction seems to have existed in at least two major narrative versions. Although the Vulgate —\ | | Lancelot is generally called the Prose Lancelot, one must distinguish between the Vulgate version of the tale and the noncyclic Prose Lancelot, a shorter version designed possibly to stand independently of the Queste and the Mort Artu.*° Both cyclic and noncyclic Lancelos recount the hero’s childhood, education, and knightly adventures up to his installation as a knight of the Round Table. The shorter version then offers a brief account of the journey to Sorelois and False Guenevere episodes with no narrative bridge to the Queste and Mort Artu. The longer, cyclic version elaborates those same episodes to prepare the reader for the Grail material that will follow in subsequent texts. The two prose Lancelots thus reflect two stages of narrative development within the prose rewrite itself: the first stage exalting earthly love and chivalry between Lancelot and the queen, the second casting those very practices as highly problematic and dangerous. Certainly one of the major shifts as we move from courtly romance of the twelfth century to the cyclic Grail material of the thirteenth is the shift from a secular quest for the Arthurian lady to the spiritual search for the venerated if mysterious Grail object. As the Vulgate Lancelot enlarges the legendary biography of its hero by 38 Bruckner, “Intertextuality,” 242-243. 39EIspeth Kennedy, Lancelot and the Grail: A Study of the “Prose Lancelot (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1986), and Elspeth Kennedy, ed. Lancelot du Lac: The Non-Cyclic Old French Prose Romance (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1980); and Micha, Essais, 31-83. XXUI adding a long series of highly stylized adventures, its central character becomes simultaneously more glorified and more marginalized. He is displaced ultimately by Galahad, the chosen quester whose chastity and purity allow him to overcome terrestrial limitations of the flesh along with the temptation of fleshly women. *° Chrétien’s classic tale of courtly love, which followed the erotic model of troubadour lyric, has now assumed an antierotic and antifeminist pose.4! In positing the love of women as a substantial hindrance to male chivalric success, this text allows us to glimpse more readily than ever before how courtly love, even in the earliest Arthurian texts, introduced more problems than solutions to the charged interaction between male and female protagonists. In the Prose Lancelot, the troublesome scene from Chrétien’s text in which Guenevere rejects Lancelot’s love service in a disturbingly uncourtly gesture remains relatively unchanged. But the companion scene of reconciliation between the lovers in which Chrétien has Lancelot kneel down and venerate the queen before spending the night in her bed is severely truncated in the Prose Lancelot. Amid an abbreviated narrative of the couple’s amorous embraces we find Guenevere narrating to Lancelot the death of his friend and companion at arms, Galehaut.*? The insinuation of Galehaut between the lovers in this scene would be of little consequence if it were not for the concerted emphasis earlier in the work on the intimate friendship between the two men. Lancelot, it has been pointed out, wants to sleep with Galehaut, to lie next to him ty 40 As far as we know, Galahad had no prior existence in Arthurian legend and was invented for the Vulgate Cycle. 41 For an analysis of how the femininity and female sexuality that structure the beginning of the Prose Lancelot are displaced to allow for the development of the chivalric hero, see Francoise Paradis, “La Triple Mise au monde d’un héros, ou trois images d’une femininité maitrisée dans le début du Lancelot en prose,” Approches du Lancelot en prose, ed. Jean Dufournet (Paris: Champion, 1984), 157-176. 42 “When Lancelot entered the bed, the queen felt the blood dripping from him; it was from his hands that had been torn by the sharp bars. But she thought it was sweat and neither of them noticed it. And then she told him about Galehaut’s death, of which he knew nothing. He would have lamented it greatly but it was not the place for that. Then they shared great joy with each other” (Micha 75-76). Introduction in bed and tomb, suggesting that the bond between Lancelot and Galehaut is in fact stronger than the tie holding Lancelot to the queen.** The tension between male and female protagonists that is suggested in so many of Chrétien’s texts now comes into fuller relief, enabling us to perceive more clearly what is really at stake in courtly love. In the Prose Lancelot, Lancelot’s interest in the queen appears at times to be more political than personal. If he is attracted to Galehaut emotionally, and perhaps sexually, he favors Guenevere as a conduit to another powerful man, the king. When Chrétien’s phrasing about mutual love and enjoyment between Lancelot and the queen is replaced by a discourse of explicit seduction between Lancelot and Galehaut, the classic configuration of courtly love takes on a new dimension. As Galehaut transforms his original plot to steal Guenevere from Arthur into a plan of capturing Lancelot’s love and attention, he invokes the standard discourse of courtly love to express undying affection for another knight, not a lady: “It would be worth having my great honor turned to shame, if I could be as sure of him [Lancelot] as I would wish him to be of me.™4 The apparently passionate and abiding union that links Lancelot to Guenevere is here shown to be fraught with substantial dissonance and disunion. If rewriting the tale of Lancelot and Guenevere has made it longer, fuller, and more abundant in words, it has also explored the cracks between these amplified segments of narrative. That we have more of a story does not mean that we have more synthesis, resolution, or controlled structure. In fact, the opposite is true. The protracted process of recasting and elaborating fragments of preexisting literary texts that generates the Vulgate Cycle as we know it creates a narrative that spreads in many contradictory directions across the manuscript page. To chart this spread accurately, we would need a literary map devoid of clear directional bearings. Taking 43Tean Frappier, “La Mort Galehot,” Histoire, mythes et symboles: Etudes de littérature francaise (Geneva: Droz, 1976), 137-147; Christiane Marcello-Nizia, “Amour courtois, société masculine et figures du pouvoir,” Annales, économies, sociétés, civilisations 36 (1981): 969-982. 447 ancelot du Lac, ed. Elspeth Kennedy, 1:333-334. Introduction us forward and backward simultaneously, these tales range over the narrative landscape with the changing vision of a moving camera as opposed to the frozen frame of a cartographer’s sights. From the former vantage point, images are distorted, accuracy is accompanied by exaggeration, directional control gives way to flux. The three-dimensional whole, while still composed of the sum of its parts, no longer possesses the artificially imposed completeness of its twodimensional representation, though it claims to do just that. THE WHOLE AND ITS PARTS It is this anomalous condition of fragmentation posing as wholeness that some recent studies have attempted in different ways to capture. Linguistic analyses have shown how the very prose style of the Vulgate romances creates a vision composed of many isolated and atomized details, suggesting that the story we read is more realistic than its enigmatic twelfth-century precursors. Yet the numerous indications of time and place in the Prose Lancelot, for example, form part of a succession of fixed images that resist any final comprehensive synthesis. The Vulgate’s abundance of precise detail does not contribute in the end to a fuller or more realistic picture of the whole.*® Similarly, repeated reference to the speech act, which would seem to prioritize the communicative role of speech in the prose Joseph, actually calls attention to the ephemeral or questionable status of speech in the prose setting. The uninterrupted flow of direct discourse between interlocutors that characterizes the earlier verse composition of Robert de Boron is replaced in the prose rewrite by a constant, rhythmic reference to the fact that the speakers are speaking. Direct address is typically prefaced by remarks to the effect that “this person now speaks,” or “that one now responds.” And the stream of narrative events in twelfth-century romance, often punctuated by direct authorial intervention, is here replaced by repeated allusion to the textualized voice of 45Qn the distinctive way that certain prose narratives emphasize their material character, see Michele Perret, “De espace romanesque 4 la matérialité du livre,” Poétique 50 (April 1982): 17-37. 46 Baumgartner, “Les Techniques narratives,” 186. XXUI1 contes as the principal teller of the tale we read. When we hear constantly that “the tale tells us...,”° “the tale speaks...,” or “the tale now turns from one hero to recount the deeds of another”—a rhetorical technique used widely in the Vulgate narratives themselves—the predominance of the narrator’s “I” is significantly diluted and diffused.4” In both cases, the illusion of full-bodied and unmediated speech—generated either between literary characters or between author and audience—is fractured by incessant reminders of the textual, written medium that records that seemingly plentiful voice. The chronology of the Vulgate romances reinforces this sensation of nonlinear time, returning us constantly to sources and origins of characters and the narratives they inhabit only to reveal all too cogently that those origins are irretrievable and artificially constructed.48 As a text written late in the development of the Vulgate Cycle but positioned near the head of the literary series, the Merlin offers a richly atemporal view toward past and future narrative events. While exploiting factual antecedents already related in the Lancelot it announces them as events to be recounted subsequently. The text stands in the Vulgate corpus as a predecessor of the Lancelot-Grail trilogy but a predecessor curiously cognizant of its own future development. The apparent linear sequence we follow from the Estozre to the Merlin, Lancelot, Queste, and Mort Artu is actually predicated on a narrative circularity that allows later texts to influence their seeming precursors. The elaborate genealogical trees attesting to the sources and origins of individual characters in the corpus are structured similarly so as to turn in circles. In the Merlin, Sagremor the Unruly offers an especially cogent illustration of the instability of paternal relations. His incestuous origins label him alternatively as the son, the grandson, or the nephew of the emperor of Constantinople. And the long list of names that evoke his genealogical roots cannot be arranged into a logical or consistent 47Bernard Cerquiglini, La Parole médiévale (Paris: Minuit, 1981), 77, 112. 48For a detailed study of the obsession with origins in Old French literature, see R. Howard Bloch, Etymologies and Genealogies: A Literary Anthropology of the French Middle Ages (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983). NXVILI family tree.49 Appearing so full in its detail, this character’s genealogy is composed ultimately only of fragments. The incompleteness of Sagremor’s lineage, like that of Galahad and so many other protagonists in the Vulgate Cycle, goes hand in hand with the discontinuous romance narrative. It has in fact been suggested that the very objective of the Huth Merlin is to reveal how paternity—whether that of the son owing his existence to his father or that of the literary text dependent on a textual origin—validates the potential importance of origins while also undercutting their absolute worth.5° For all its talk of origins and sources, when emphasizing the details of a character’s identity or history, the source of a speaker’s voice, a text’s words, or a character’s lineage, the Vulgate Cycle demonstrates vividly how those sources are necessarily superseded by elements in the narrative that hark back to them: the text we read then becomes both an image or representation of its purported sources and a renun- { ciation of them. One is led by these false ge- nealogical clues to wonder why the Vulgate Cycle insists so actively on spurious, fictive origins, obscuring all the while its actual debt to tangible literary sources. Why do these tales evoke the names of Walter Map and his archival record, Robert de Boron and his livre, the oral deposition of Arthur’s knights, Merlin’s oral dictation to Blaise, Christ’s instructive and creative word, while never mentioning Chrétien de Troyes or Geoffrey of Monmouth? Of course, the invocation of false authors and fake textual genealogies was common practice in medieval text production generally. Geoffrey, of Monmouth himself claims, in the Historia Regum Britanniae, to be translating a Breton text given to him by one Walter, archdeacon of Oxford. Layamon purports to have derived his Brut from an unattested text by Augustine and Albin. Much later, Chaucer cites as his source for Troilus and Criseyde a Latin author Lollius instead of crediting Boccaccio. And Malory typically refers to his “French book” at those moments 49Claude Roussel, “L’art de la suite: Sagremor et l’intertexte,” Annales, économies, sociétés, civilisations 41 (1986): 27-42. 50Kate Cooper, “Merlin Romancier: Paternity, Prophecy and Poetics in the Huth Merlin,” Romanic Review 77 (1986): 1-24. Introduction when he has no authoritative source to validate his remarks. But the Vulgate Cycle’s particular version of this pervasive medieval tendency to cite invented sources can perhaps best be understood in relation to the complex shift from verse to prose that shaped the evolution of Arthurian romance from the twelfth to the thirteenth century. VERSE AND PROSE Just why prose emerged around 1210 as a viable medium in the writing of Arthurian romance is not yet fully understood. But this crucial stage in the development of Old French narrative calls up questions of oral versus written delivery, fantasy versus truth telling, fictive elaboration versus historical documentation. These fundamental questions address the very role and function of vernacular textuality in the High Middle Ages and raise in yet another way the question of origins. Prior to the thirteenth century, vernacular prose, like its Latin counterpart, had been reserved largely for recording legal and religious truths. It appeared in juridical texts, charters, religious writings, translations of the Bible, and sermons. Prose was used in the thirteenth century to document historical events in the chronicles of Villehardouin, Robert de Clari, Henri de Valenciennes, and, in the fourteenth century, the Histoire de Saint Louis by Joinville. But obviously fictive tales of Arthurian knights that were probably delivered orally to a listening public had previously appeared only in verse. As prose became an acceptable means of telling stories of love and adventure in the early thirteenth century, the polarity between orally delivered vernacular tales and more erudite writings in Latin began to collapse. The scope of the courtly narrative became simultaneously more historical and more religious, as the Vulgate Cycle readily attests. The newly cast prose romances began to incorporate within their narrative structure frequent claims to authenticity and veracity de signed, it would seem, to obscure their fictive origins. The closing lines of the Mort Artu present Walter Map as the author of an accurate and truthful written document: “And now Walter Map has no more to say about the Story of Lancelot, because he has brought it to an end Introduction and told everything that happened; his book ends here, and anything else that might be added would be a lie.”! This assertion combined with the allusion to Walter Map’s task as author/translator of the Queste discussed above reflects a mode of composition that mimics the writing of chronicle. Purporting to offer a truthful, authoritative record of past events, the system outlined in the Queste and Mort Artu moves from an eyewitness oral account of what are posited as actual events—the adventures of Arthur’s knights—to a recording of those events in writing, and a subsequent retrieval and translation of the archival document. The Estozre evokes a different avenue to establishing a truthful narrative: by capturing words from the mouth of the divine Creator, setting them down in writing and producing exact copies that preserve their valued essence. The veracity of the final text, here obviously a product of a nonsacred and vernacular tradition of storytelling, is guaranteed by repeated allusion ‘to the tale being true, as true as Scripture, as accurate as the apostles’ tales (2:388, 428, 439). If these textual genealogies attest to an overwhelming desire to legitimate the fanciful Arthurian stories of knights and ladies by anchoring them in the apparent accuracy of historical chronicle or the acclaimed Truth of Scripture, they reveal at the same time how vernacular romance is incapable of both tasks. God and King Arthur are equally removed from the realia of thirteenth-century existence. It is as difficult to represent the transcendental signified in tales of adventure as to revive the historical past in Arthurian prose. What the Vulgate tales offer as an alternative is the fictional creation of both God and Arthur ex nihilo, a kind of representation that does not depend on the meaningful Truth of Scripture or the truth of historical document, but on fictional intertexts that are more present and “real” than God or Arthur could ever be. It is these intertexts that structure the cycle’s elaborate textual genealogies. For Arthur’s knights, the antecedent story that guides the creation of their tales lies in those episodes previously recounted at King Arthur’s court. They seek pointedly for adventures that are “worth telling,” adventures that re- 51a Mort le roi Artu, ed. Jean Frappier (Geneva: Droz, 1964), 263. XXX semble as closely as possible those feats of heroism already undertaken, told aloud and written down at Arthur’s court. The source of their oral narrative could not be more literary. For Walter Map, the privileged intertext is found in the written record of chivalric deeds housed in the archive at Salisbury, an invented record deriving ostensibly from those same oral accounts that draw in turn on the Arthurian adventure story. Blaise composes his text from the dictation of a fictive character Merlin, and Robert de Boron draws on a “Livres dou Graal” that cannot be traced to any verifiable source. The Estoire's author rewrites a story that has been written previously by Christ; we read a secularized, chivalric version of a tale transformed. In all cases, the supposed copy of an original source proves to be an original text itself, a wholly literary text whose claims to greater authority both mask and reveal its implicit project. What we hear in the Vulgate Cycle’s claims to possessing the authority of chronicle or the truth of Scripture is not an evocation of actual sources, but a subtle appropriation into the literary sphere of the legitimacy that those sources traditionally provide. While stating so emphatically that their narratives derive from historical and scriptural sources, the Vulgate romances say at the same time: these are wholly literary texts, as accurate as history, as true as Scripture, as legitimate as any truthtelling narrative. But the truth told here is obviously of a different sort. It is a truth not of events or revelations, but a truth anchored solidly in the pleasurable, rhetorical use of words.>? Herein lies the answer to critical objections raised by Chapelain and Lot. For the insistent repetition of too many words that put Chapelain to sleep and offended the aesthetic sensibilities of Ferdinand Lot lies at the very heart of the Vulgate’s project to validate the literary text over and above its more erudite predecessors. Repetition serves in many ways as the hallmark of the Vulgate romances: repetition of authorial voices, of stock motifs and thematic material, or of whole segments of narrative lifted from the Queste and relocated in the Estoire. And that repetition draws attention to the specifically literary character of the Vulgate romances, undermining their professed pretentions to more lofty theological or historical expression. 52Burns, Arthurian Fictions, chap. 1. XXX In the Neoplatonic Christian tradition of the Middle Ages, repetition is conceived of primarily in a Vertical dimension; repetition of an event is a further concretization of the abstract Idea or Christian Ideal that precedes it.54 In transposing repetition to a horizontal plane, the Vulgate romances recast the process of theological representation into a literary system of intertextual rewriting and narrative reprise In Augustinian terms, this would constitute an overt and extreme case of textual idolatry, since preference is given clearly to the letter not the spirit, to the proliferation of words at the expense of the Word of God.54 The Vulgate Cycle cultivates, above all else, the seductive verbal trap that the Church Fathers warned against. Augustine’s denunciation of literature as fables, falsehoods, and lies that delight men instead of leading them beyond the text to the Word, may have been taken to heart by believers like St. Peter Damian, who during the eleventh century took Christ as his “literature.”°> But the medieval lay audience was apparently harder to convince. Thirteenth-century clerical pronouncements deplore the falsehoods and lies written about Perceval and the Holy Grail, lamenting those who have abandoned religious truth in preference for stories about Lancelot and the secularized holy relic. If the Grail material is the most religious component of the Vulgate corpus, it appeared as most irreligious to medieval Church authorities. LA QUESTE DEL SAINT GRAAL Of all the Vulgate romances, the Queste del ‘Saint Graal goes the farthest in attempting to mask the literariness of vernacular romance by imposing upon it a grid of religious interpretation. Within its narrative of chivalric exploits, the Queste, thought by some to reflect the dogma and practice of the Cistercian order, embeds a host of resident hermits who explain each knightly ad- >3Peter Haidu, “Repetition: Modern Reflections on Medieval Aesthetics,” Modern Language Notes 92 (1977): 875-887. 540n Christian Doctrine, trans. D. W. Robertson (Indianapolis: The Bobbs Merrill Co., 1958), Book One 4:4, Book Two 23:36, 25:39, Book Three 5:9, Book Four 4:31. 55Epistle 8, Patrologiae: Cursus Completus, Series Latina, ed. J.P. Migne, 144, 476. Introduction venture as it occurs. Does this mean that the vernacular adventure story has successfully escaped the limitations of earthly speech and narrative fabrication, acceding to the status of a religious tract, as Albert Pauphilet thought?56 Or should we more accurately read this narrative as a romance text whose Arthurian paternity has traditionally been denied by an _ overly Christianized interpretation?>’? When we look closely at exactly what is altered by the hermits’ presence in the Queste, we can see how this most religious of the Vulgate narratives joins its companion tales in cultivating the horizontal repetition of rewriting rather than offering a vertical representation of transcendent meaning. Although the hermits are asked typically to pro vide the vérité or truth of a preceding adventure or to relate the senefiance or meaning of chivalric exploits, they most often simply recast the initial event in another narrative register, evoking a parallel tale from the Biblical or chivalric past. Rather than providing interpretive glosses in abstract language, the hermits’ pronouncements tend to disperse the core of the adventure story into a series of intertexts, which, like the plural authorial voices in the Estoireand the Merlin, result in an anomalous combination of proliferation and repetition.5® Meaning in the Queste is not first hidden and then revealed, but rather it is systematically displaced from one textual segment to the next.59 In recasting tales from Scripture into the vernacular and placing them squarely within the world of Arthurian adventure, the hermits’ remarks subtly collapse the crucial distinction between sacred and secular narrative, legitimizing the vernacular enterprise under the guise of al- 564. Pauphilet, Etudes sur la “Queste del Saint Graal; Etienne Gilson, “La Mystique de la grace dans la Queste del Saint Graal,” Romania 51 (1925): 321-347; Pauline Matarasso, The Redemption of Chivalry (Geneva: Droz, 1979). 57The latter case is argued persuasively by Emmanuéle Baumgartner, L’Arbre et le Pain: Essai sur “la Queste del Saint Graal” (Paris: SEDES, 1981), and Nancy Freeman Regalado, “La Chevalerie celestielle: Spiritual Transformations of Secular Romance in La Queste del Saint Graal,” Romance: Generic Transformation from Chrétien de Troyes to Cervantes, ed. Kevin Brownlee and Marina Scordilis Brownlee (Hanover, N.H.: University Press of New England, 1985), 91-113. 58] eupin, Le Graal et la littérature, chap. 3. 59} ean-Charles Huchet, “Les Déserts du roman médieéval: le personnage de l’ermite dans les romans des 12e et 13e siécles,” Littérature 60 (1985): 89-108. Introduction legory. If the hermit here poses as the official and final voice of Arthurian romance, the influence his fictive presence exerts on the composition of the vernacular tale is no more religious than Walter Map’s participation in that same enterprise is historical. LA MORT ARTU The most chronicle-like of the Vulgate narratives is perhaps the Mort Artu, which exhibits less of the repetition so common in the other Vulgate tales.°° But the Mort Artu effects a narrative sleight of hand analogous to that of the Queste, allowing in the end for the most fundamental narrative repetition of all. Evoking the finality of historical events and the chronicles that record them as a model of narrative composition, this last volume of the Vulgate Cycle announces at the same time how, despite these pretensions, its own narrative remains essentially ahistorical. Offering a chilling and brutal finale to the seemingly interminable tales of adventure that precede it, the Mort Artu lays out an inexorable chain of cause and consequence in which the continued love affair between Lancelot and Guenevere rekindles a clan vendetta between Arthur’s family and Lancelot’s that eventually draws the king away from his kingdom and makes his bastard son Mordred’s treason possible. A final battle on Salisbury Plain, where King Arthur and Mordred kill each other, brings the cycle to a definitive close. As the Arthurian family line dies out, romance adventures come to an abrupt end. With the seeming precision of historical documentation, this tale records the end of an era. Or so it seems. When King Arthur dies, his grave is marked by a tombstone proclaiming his might and fame: “Here Lies King Arthur Who by His Valor Conquered Twelve Kingdoms” (La Mort Artu, 251). Prior to assuming this final resting place, however, Arthur is seen striding gallantly aboard a fairy ship, his horse and armor in tow, as if to continue his chivalric deeds forever in another 60For a detailed analysis of the compositional processes at work in this text, see Jean Rychner, L’articulation des phrases narratives dans “La Mort le roi Artu” (Geneva: Droz, 1970). On the “linear perspective “ of the Mort Artu, see Norris J. Lacy, “Spatial Form in the Mort Artu,” Symposium 31,4 (1977): 341, 343. XXX land. The finality of the words inscribed on Arthur’s tombstone are thus undermined by the enduring possibility that the legendary king may indeed return. This miraculous gesture implies that the story is not yet over and that the romance tradition has not yet died. The very moment of literary closure is here cast in a mode of open-endedness that puts the status of inscription in doubt. We see elsewhere in the Mort Artu how Arthur’s court writes its history on the tombstones of knights that lie in cemeteries, the inscriptions appearing to stand as a durable testament to events that took place. But it is revealed in certain cases that these funerary inscriptions are not wholly accurate.®* And as their status is called into question, so too the status of that other inscription—the writing down of Arthurian adventure from the knights’ oral deposition—loses even more of its potential authoritative force. When read against the tenuous finality of Arthur’s tombstone, the Mort Artu’s claim to truthful finality sounds a hollow note. If the text’s bold contention that Walter Map here provides a complete and accurate record of everything that actually happened to King Arthur’s knights lends an air of historical veracity to the Vulgate tales, it exposes at the same time the fallibility of Arthurian claims to historical accuracy. Recent studies of the Vulgate Cycle have made two things especially clear. They explain, if without meaning to do so, the compulsion of so many earlier scholars to discern systems of coherence in the Vulgate corpus. They demonstrate, in an unexpected way, how early arguments for narrative unity or authorial control were not conditioned by the critical predilections of their practitioners alone. Current work has amply revealed how the Vulgate corpus issues a host of false clues to the unsuspecting reader. Mention of named authors, allusion to authoritative textual paternity, a concerted emphasis on the genealogy of characters, claims to possess the historical veracity of an eyewitness account, alignment with authoritative Biblical predecessors, and invocation of meaningful 6lLeupin, Le Graal et la littérature, chap. 6. 62Helen Solterer, “‘Conter le terme de cest brief’: linscription dans La Mort le roi Artu,” Actes du 14e congrés international arthurien (Rennes: Presses Universitaires de Rennes, 1984), 558-568. XXXII prophecy all lend an air of accuracy and believability to these otherwise obviously fictive tales. But these leads, often embraced unquestioningly by scholars who find in them comfortable echoes of their own critical predilections, do not reflect the whole narrative picture. Indications of authorship and authoritative origins are countered at every turn in the complex and richly varied prose texts by narrative strategies that undermine and question the very possibility that narrative coherence and authorial mastery might prevail in a literary text. On the strictly material level, elaborate narrative repetition, interruption, and fragmentation undermine the wholeness of purported textual genealogies, or characters’ established paternity. These ruptures lead to larger but related questions that the Vulgate narratives invite us to pursue. What does it mean when obviously fictive tales call their fabrication true? When they create false signatures, sources, and origins for themselves? Or claim to possess the historical truth of chronicle or the sacred truth of Scripture? How does the function of authorship change along with the passage from verse to prose at the turn of the thirteenth century? What happens when secular romance poses as allegory (as it does in the Queste)? Or as chronicle, as in the Mort Artu? And what becomes of courtly love that provided the mainstay of twelfth-century romance? These are some areas of inquiry that the Vulgate Cycle explores, not in a predictable way that could be charted on a definitive map but by wandering across the uneven and evocative terrain of Arthurian romance. In their narrative wandering, the thirteenthcentury prose tales of love and adventure remind us that when analyzing them we need not look for a reassuring map to guide our literary voyage. And that in taking this trip we need not choose necessarily between unity and disunity, coherence and incoherence, between the ingenious author’s masterpiece and the barbarian’s literary dungheap. These excessively polarized options are perforce limiting and exclusionary in their own way. Possessing all the apparent fullness of a Mercator map, they necessarily distort the world they represent. But that very distortion can lead us to ask more productive questions, in particular questions about those sectors of the literary terrain that the quest for authority Introduction and textual unity has so often marginalized or effaced. SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY For further explanation of texts and authors cited in this essay, see The New Arthurian Encyclopedia, ed. Norris J. Lacy et al. (New York: Garland Publishing, 1991). More detailed bibliography can be found in the Bulletin bibliographique de la Société Internationale Arthurienne. Editions Bogdanow, Fanni, ed. La Folie Lancelot: A Hitherto Unidentified Portion of the Suite du Merlin Contained in MSS B.N. fr. 112 and 12599. Beihefte zur Zeitschrift fur Romanische Philologie. Tubingen: Max Niemeyer, 1965. Frappier, Jean, ed. La Mort le roi Artu: roman du XIIIe siécle. Geneva: Droz, 1964. Hucher, Eugene, ed. Le Saint Graal. Vols. 1-3. Le Mans: E. Monnoyer, 1875. Kennedy, Elspeth. Lancelot do Lac: The Non-Cyclic Old French Prose Romance, 2 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1980. Magne, Augusto, ed. A Dehanda do Santo Graal. 3 vols. Rio de Janeiro: Imprensa Nacional, 1944. Micha, Alexandre, ed. Lancelot: roman en prose du XIIle siécle. Vols. 1-8. Geneva: Droz, 1978-82. . Merlin: roman du XIITe siécle. Geneva: Droz, 1979. Paris, Gaston, and Jacob Ulrich. Merlin: roman en prose du XIlIle siécle. Paris: Société des Anciens Textes Francais, 1886. Pauphilet, Albert, ed. La Queste del Saint Graal Paris: Champion, 1921. Ponceau, Jean-Paul, ed. LEstoire del Saint Graal Doctoral thesis (Paris [V-Sorbonne), 19839, vol. I. Sommer, H. Oskar, ed. Die Abenteuer Gawains, Ywains und le Morholts mit den drei Jungfrauen, . . . nach der allein bekannten HS Nr. 112 der Pariser National Bibliothek herausgegeben. Beihefte zur Zeitschrift fur Romanische Philologie, 47. Halle: Max Niemeyer, 1913. , ed. The Vulgate Version of the Arthurian Romances. Vols. 1-7. Washington, D.C.: The Carnegie Institute, 1908-16. Introduction English Translations Cable, James, trans. The Death of King Arthur. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1971. Carman, J. Neale, trans. From Camelot to Joyous Guard: The Old French “La Mort le roi Artu.” Ed. with intro. by Norris J. Lacy. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1974. Corley, Corin. Lancelot of the Lake, with an introduction by Elspeth Kennedy. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989. Matarasso, Pauline, trans. The Quest of the Holy Grail. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1969. Paton, Lucy Allen, trans. Sir Lancelot of the Lake: A French Prose Romance of the Thirteenth Century. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1929. Critical Works Approches du Lancelot en prose. Ed. Jean Dufournet. Paris: Champion, 1984. XXXII Burns, E. Jane. Arthurian Fictions: Rereading the Vulgate Cycle. Columbus, Ohio: Ohio State University Press, 1985. Frappier, Jean. Etude sur La Mort le roi Artu. Geneva: Droz, 1961. Kennedy, Elspeth. Lancelot and the Grail: A Study of the Prose Lancelot. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1986. The Legacy of Chrétien de Troyes, 2 vols. Ed. Norris J. Lacy, Douglas Kelly, Keith Busby. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 1987, 1988. Leupin, Alexandre. Le Graal et la littérature. Lausanne: L’Age d’Homme, 1982. Lot, Ferdinand, Etude sur le Lancelot en prose. Paris, 1918; rpt. Paris: Champion, 1954. Micha, Alexandre. Essais sur le cycle du Lancelot-Graal. Geneva: Droz, 1987. . Etude sur le Merlin de Robert de Boron. Geneva: Droz, 1980. Pauphilet, Albert. Etude sur la Queste del Saint Graal. Paris: Champion, 1921. Szkilnik, Michelle. L’Archipel du Graal. Etude de | Estoire del Saint Graal. Geneva: Droz, 1991. Whee Ahi te He ‘q °s THE HISTORY OF THE HOLY GRAIL translated by Carol J. Chase The History of the Holy Grail 1. Prologue.' The one who, by order of the Great Master, is setting* in writing the high and noble story of the Grail first sends greetings to all those men and women [II: 2]3 who believe in the glorious Holy Trinity, that is, the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit—the Father, who creates [3] and gives life to all things; the Son, who [4] delivers all those who believe in Him from perpetual pain and brings them to the high joy without end; the Holy Spirit, who sanctifies and purifies good things. The name of the writer of this story is not divulged at the beginning. However, the words that will be said herein will permit you to know a great deal about his name,’ his life, and his ancestry. But he does not wish to reveal his name at the beginning, for three reasons. First, if he gave his name and said that through him God had revealed such a noble and lofty story as that of the Grail, the foundation of all stories, the treacherous and envious might interpret it as boastfulness. The second reason is that someone who knows him might hear his name, and thus might prize the story less, because it had been written down by such a humble person—for he holds himself to be the most humble and despised person ever created. The third reason is that if there were anything improper in the story, through either the omissions or the [5] naiveté of writers who later transmit it from one place to another, all the blame would be placed on him. For there are now in our times more mouths that recount evil than good,> and a man? is blamed more for doing a single bad deed than he is praised for one hundred good ones. For these three reasons he does not wish his name to be completely revealed, even though no matter how much he may wish to cover it up and hide it, it will be better known’ than he would like. However, he will clearly reveal how the high history of the Holy Grail was confided to him and when, and who gave it to him. 1 Corresponds to Hucher II: 1-39; Sommer I: 1-12; Ponceau §1-15. Because Ponceau’s edition is presently unpublished, paragraph numbers are cited instead of page numbers. 2Verb corrected to singular, as in Ponceau. 3} enceforth, all page numbers refer to Hucher, volume II, until the point in Chapter 24 where volume III begins, where the same system will be used for that volume. 4“His name” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. Here and in following notes, “Hucher variants” are those reported at the bottom of the relevant page of Hucher’s edition. 5 Apparent lacuna in text; “than good” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 6A man” supplied from Ponceau. 7 Known” supplied from Ponceau. Seven hundred seventeen years after the Passion of Jesus Christ it happened that I, the most sinful of all sinners, was lying in a small hut, at the [6] hour called the vigil of the night. The place where I was lying, as God knows (who knows all thoughts), was far away and remote. And I can say this much: it was in a wilder place than there is in all of fair Britain.8 Nevertheless, it was very delightful and pleasant, for when Our Lord wants to work His way in one of His Christians, He has soon prepared him so that all the things the world despises please him, and all those the world prizes annoy him. That night, I was lying down as you have heard—it was the night between Maundy Thursday and Good Friday—and may it please Our Lord, I had done the matins? service called Tenebrae.!® And then there came over me a great desire to sleep, so I began to doze in my bed where I lay. Hardly had I begun to doze when I heard a voice that called me three times by name and said, “Wake up and listen: three things are the same as one, and one is the same as three;!! [7] one can do as much as the three, and they are naturally none other than one.” At these words I awoke and looked around me and saw such brightness that nothing so great could issue from any earthly light. After that I saw a man standing in front of me, so handsome and charming that his beauty could not be described by any mortal man’s tongue. And when I saw him, I was so awed that I did not know what on earth to say or do. He looked at me and said, “Did you understand anything at all of the words I spoke to you?” Trembling, I answered him, “My Lord, I am not at all certain.” He spoke again. “I have brought knowledge about the Trinity.” He said this!* because I had been in doubt about how the Trinity could have three persons and yet only one deity and only one power. Nor had my faith ever allowed of doubts on any other point but this. Then He said to me, “Do you know who I am yet?” 8The adjective “fair” was chosen to approximate “bloie,” an adjective used here and elsewhere to qualify Britain. °Times of day in the Middle Ages were based on the canonical hours laid out in the rule of St. Benedict. Since these hours were regulated by the sun, the exact time varied according to locality and season, but the following approximations can be given: prime, or first hour, was at sunrise; tierce fell at midmorning (about 9:00 A.M.); sext, at midday; nones, at midafternoon (about 3:00 P.M.); vespers, at sunset; complin was at about 9:00 P.M.; matins, at midnight; and lauds, at about 3:00 A.M. 10The office of matins and lauds sung on the last three days of Holy Week. Mare the same... three” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 12“About the Trinity. .. . this” supplied from Ponceau. And I replied, “My Lord, my eyes are mortal and thus do not have the power to look directly at the Light of all Lights, nor does my mouth have the strength to say what would confound all sinning tongues.” He leaned down toward me and blew upon my face, and then it seemed to me [8] that my eyes were one hundred times clearer than ever before, and I felt in my mouth a great marvel of tongues. And He said to me, “Do you know who I am yet?” When I opened my mouth to answer, I saw a fiery brand leap from my body, just like burning flames. I was so terribly afraid when I saw it that I could not say a word. And when He saw my fright, He said, “Be not afraid, for the fountain of all certainty is here before you, and be assured that I have come here to teach you the truth about everything you question, for I hold the true teachings concerning! all doubts. I am He through whom all good knowledge is learned, for I am the Great Master through whom all earthly masters know all the good they have learned; yet masters are they not, for none can be master except Him who has all knowledge. I am the Master to whom Nicodemus said, ‘Master, we know that you came from God.’!4 I am He about whom the Scripture said, ‘All knowledge comes from God Our Lord and is with Him and always has been since before the beginning of time.’!5 [9] Because I am the perfect Teacher, He who is the fountain of all knowledge, I have come to you, for I want to teach you about all the things that puzzle you; thus I will make you certain and wise about something about which no mortal man was ever certain, and through!® you, it will be plain and clear to all those who ever hear it told.” At these words He took me by the right hand and put in it a small book no longer or wider than the palm of a man’s hand. As I held the book, He said to me, “Do you want to know what I have given your” I replied that I would very much like to know, and He said, “This is the book in which you will find greater marvels than any mortal heart could conceive. Nor will you ever have any doubts that will not be set straight by this book. Inside are My secrets, which I Myself put there with My own hand, that no man might see if he be not purged beforehand by confession and by three days of fasting with bread and water; and after that he must speak in such a way that he speaks the language.of the heart and not that of the mouth. For these secrets cannot be named by any mortal tongue, lest [10] all the four elements be disturbed: it will rain blood, and there will be other marvels; the air will be troubled, the earth will shake visibly, and water will change its color. All this will happen by the power of the words that are written in this book. “And there is more: any man who looks often inside this little book, as one should, will win the two greatest joys that exist: joy of the soul and joy of the body. For there is For Thold... concerning” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 14See John III, 2. 15see the Apocrypha, Ecclesiasticus, I, 1. Reference given by Ponceau. 16«Through,” as in Hucher variants and Sommer (Hucher has “pour,” “for your sake”?). The History of the Holy Grail no mortal man, no matter how distressed, if he can see!” inside sincerely, as he should, whose heart will not be delivered at that moment of all anguish and filled with all the joys a mortal heart can have, so pleasant and delightful are the words within; this is the joy of the body. And on the other hand, his soul will be gradually illuminated by spiritual love, so that if he desires earthly things, it will be to put them to work {11] for his Creator; nor will anyone who has held and seen this little book one time die a sudden death, no matter what sin he has committed in this life. This is the joy of the soul.”!8 When He had said this, a voice cried out like a trumpet; then came such a loud noise from on high that it seemed to me that all the firmament had fallen and that the earth had plunged into an abyss; and if the light had been very bright before, it was one hundred times brighter then, for I was so overcome by it that I thought I had lost my sight. And so I fell to the ground as if in a faint. After quite some time, I regained my senses and opened my eyes, but I saw nothing living around me, nor did I know what to think about what I had seen; rather I would have considered it all to be a dream, had I not found the little book in my hand, just as the Great Master had given it to me. I arose at once, very happy and joyful, and, holding {12] all the while the little book with both hands, I fell into prayers, until God brought the day, which I had been longing for. When it was light enough for me to make out the letters, I began to read. At the beginning I found a ttle that said: “This is the beginning of your lineage.” When I saw this, I was very happy, for there was nothing on earth I desired so much as hearing about my lineage. After I had looked at it so long that the hour of prime had passed, it seemed to me that I had read nothing, since so much remained to be read. For I saw there so many words that I was completely baffled how they could be amassed in such a little book, since it seemed to be no larger than the palm of a man’s hand. I marveled so much that I myself would have doubted even as J looked at it, if it had not been given to me by the One who can put a great many words in a small place, and who can fill a large place with very little. Thus I looked at the book until about the hour of tierce, till I had learned a great part of my lineage. [13] There I saw the names and lives of so many valorous men that I hardly dare say or acknowledge that I am descended from them. For when I saw their good lives and the great travails that they had suffered on earth for their Creator, I could not imagine how I could better my life in order that it be worthy of being remembered!9 with theirs. Nor did it seem that I was a man compared with them, but a mere imitation of a man and a disgrace. I dwelled on these thoughts for a long time, but returned finally to the book and read to the end of my lineage. Then I found a tide that said: “The book of the Holy Grail begins here.” Wegee,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “ wy enter”). 18This is the joy of the soul” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 19*Remembered,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “maintained”). The History of the Holy Grail When I had read until past noon and it was probably the hour of nones, I found another that said: “This is the beginning of the fears.” [14] I began to read what came after this, seeing things that were terribly fearsome and frightful, and God knows I saw them with great fear, nor would I ever have dared to continue if He by whose commandment all living things are moved had not directed me to do so. After having seen a number of marvelous things, I found the fourth title, which said: “This is the beginning of the marvels.” And then I began to think very hard. As I was thinking, a ray like burning fire descended from the sky and came before my eyes, as loud as thunder. It seemed very much like a flash of lightning, except that the light lasted longer and was brighter and more fearsome. And it descended before me so suddenly that my eyes flashed in my head, and it seemed to me that my brain was stunned, so that I fell to the ground in a dead faint. But the daze did not last very long; as it pleased Our Lord, it passed, and then I lifted my head, opened my eyes, and saw that all the [15] firmament was turning dark29 and that the sun was losing all its brightness, so that it was as dark as a deep winter night. And when this darkness had lasted long enough for someone to go one hundred steps, it pleased God to end it. Then it began to grow bright, little by little, so that the sun returned in its former brightness. And now in the place where I was, there descended a scent so sweet and pleasing that if all the spices in the world were compared with it, I do not think they would render the thousandth part of its sweetness or pleasing perfume. Then I heard around me such a sweet song of praise that all the instruments and all the melodies one could hear on earth would be nothing compared with it, for there were so many voices that I do not think anything [16] mortal could ever count the number. And it seemed to be so near that if these were visible things, I could have touched them with my hand; but no matter how much I looked, I could not see even one of all those who were singing. I was able to hear that their song praised Our Lord and that it always ended with: “May honor, glory, power, and force forever be with the destroyers of death and the restorers?! of eternal life.” I understood this refrain of praise, but I could not understand the rest of the song. But above all, it was sweet and pleasing to hear. After they had thus sung, there rang out on high a great marvel of I know not what instruments resembling small bells, and when they ceased ringing the voices started again. They sang this way seven times, and when it came to the eighth time they broke off their song so suddenly that it appeared that they [17] had fallen into an abyss. Then it seemed to me that the wings of all the birds in the air flew past me. Once the song had stopped, so did the wonderful fragrance I had smelled for a long time, which had pleased me so much that I would never have sought to be otherwise than I was, as long as it pleased Our Lord. 20-Tuming dark,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “vercissoit,” “turning green”?). 21Restorers,” as in Hucher variants, Sommer, and Ponceau (Hucher has “destroyers”). 2) Thus it ceased. I began to think intently about the marvel I had heard for so long. And then came a voice from on high that said to me, “Stop thinking, get up, and go return to God what you owe Him, for it is certainly time.” At these words I got up, looked around me, and saw that it was already past the hour of nones. Seeing this, I marveled at how quickly the day had gone by, for I thought it was still matins, so much had the reading of the little book pleased me. Upon arising, I put it in such a place that it was always before my eyes. After that I sang my hours, the way they are to be said on that day. And when I had said them, [18] I began the sweet and pious service of the death of Jesus Christ, for on this day did He truly die. Because of this, His body is not symbolically sacrificed on this day, for when the truth comes forward, its figuration must be set aside. On all the other days, the Sacrament is celebrated as a sign that He was sacrificed for us, but on the day that He was truly crucified—this day, Good Friday—it is not, for there is no sign, since the day has come when He was truly crucified. When, with God's help, I had finished the service up to the point where the priest performs the three parts of the Sacrament, and I was about to receive my Savior,2* an angel came before me, took me by both hands, and said, “These three parts are forbidden to you, until I have shown you clearly why you have used only one substance and assured you about all these things.” At these words, I was raised on high, not in body but in spirit, and I was carried to one of the most delightful places that man has ever seen, to my knowledge, for no matter how much joy any heart could think of, or any tongue could speak of, or any ear could hear of, [19] one hundred thousand times as much would be found there. And if I said that this was in the third heaven, where Saint Paul was carried by the Holy Spirit, perhaps I would be telling the truth; but it would soon be considered boastfulness and lies. Yet I will say this much: there I was shown what Saint Paul says no tongue of mortal man should reveal. After I had looked at the marvels for a long time, which were more numerous than any mouth could say, the angel called me and said, “Have you ever seen such great marvels?”*? I replied that I never thought anything so great could exist, and the angel told me he would show me a greater thing yet. Then he took me and led me to another level, which was a hundred times clearer than glass and so preciously colored that no man could describe with certainty the color, so artful and astonishing it was. There he showed me the power of the Trinity, for [20] I saw the division of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit so that I could distinguish one person from another; and I saw clearly how these three persons belong to one substance and one deity and one power. Nevertheless, if I said that I saw the three persons divided one from the other, may neither the envious nor the traitorous reproach me, they who serve only to accuse and blame others. Nor may they say to me that I have spoken against the authority of Saint John the great Evangelist, for he said that no man ever saw the 22This seems to contradict the preceding paragraph. 23which were more numerous... marvels” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 6 Father or can see Him,“4 and I agree with him. All those who have heard this do not know that when he spoke, he meant mortal men, for as long as the soul is in the body, man is mortal.2° And it is only the flesh that dies, but once man has shed his body, then he is spiritual, and once he is spiritual, [21] he can certainly see spiritual things. Therefore, you can admit that Saint John meant that no mortal man can see the majesty of the Father. While I was intent on these great marvels and curious to see them, something rang out just like a crack of thunder, and it seemed to me that all the firmament shook. At once so many celestial beings came that the number was countless. As I looked, all of them fell backwards around the Majesty, as if they had all fallen in a faint. When I saw this, I was terribly afraid, and the angel took me and led me back whence he had taken me. But before he put my spirit in my body, he asked, “Have you seen great marvels?” I said they were so great that if anyone were permitted to recount them to people on earth, no man, no matter how saintly or close to God, would be believed. Above all, no mortal heart could have the courage or the strength to maintain it, nor tongue to tell it. And he said to me, “Are you certain yet about the things you questioned so much?” I answered that there was no man on earth so disbelieving that, if he wished to listen to me with good will, I could not make him understand the points of the Trinity, because I had seen and learned them. Then he said to me, “Now [22] I will put you whence I took you, and then you will receive your Savior more certainly than you did before, for you should not receive a guest you do not know. And if you have seen great marvels, you will find some in this little book that you will not hold to be any less marvelous; but you will not look at it again before you have celebrated the Resurrection of Jesus Christ your Savior.” Thereupon, he put my spirit back in my body, and I felt just like someone who has slept and who awakens; and I thought I would see the angel, but he had gone. I looked and saw my Savior—the Eucharist—before me as it was when the angel carried me away; I took it, received it, and took communion with good will and great devotion. When the service was over, I took the little book and placed it in a small chest where the box containing the host was kept. After that I locked the chest tightly with a key, as I wanted” to protect it, and I knew no better place to put it, for it was a very beautiful and pure spot. When I left the chapel, I saw that it was already so late [23] that it was getting dark; I entered my little house and ate such food as Our Lord had given me. Thus I spent this day and the next, until the day of the Resurrection of the Savior came. And when it pleased Him that I perform the service of the day, which is as holy as Our Savior, who sanctified the day, I entered with certainty and ran immediately to the book to see the holy words, for they were so sweet and pleasant to hear that they made me forget all the hunger of the body. But when I opened the chest where I had put the book, I did not find it. This made me so upset that I did not know 24See John I, 18. 25«For as long .. . mortal” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 26Negative omitted here, following Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail how to contain myself, and I fully believed that I would never be happy again. So I began to think how it could have been taken from this place, for I had found?’ it closed the way I had left it, and I had taken the key. [24] While I was thinking about this, I heard a voice say to me, “Why are you so astonished, and what do you fear? Do not marvel if the book has been removed without the chest having been opened. In such a way did Jesus Christ leave the sepulcher without moving the stone. But be comforted, and go eat, for before you see the book, you must undergo great difficulties.” When I heard this, I considered myself well rewarded. Then I went to eat; after that, I returned to the chapel and prayed to Our Lord, in His sweet pity, to guide me toward what I desired so much. At once a voice came again that said to me, “The Great Master sends you this message: after you have celebrated Mass in the morning, you will have breakfast, and then you will depart on a task, going where I tell you. When you have left here, you will enter a path leading to the main road; this will take you to the Stone of the Capture. There you will take a path2§ to the right leading to the Crossing of the Seven Roads, in [25] the plain of Post Valley. When you come to the Fountain of Tears, where the great killing happened long ago, you will find an animal such as you have never seen. Take care that you follow it where it leads you. And when you have lost it, you will enter the land of Norwegia.”® There you will finish your quest, and then you will learn for what task the Great Master sends you there, because before then you will not know.” Thereupon, the voice stopped speaking. The next morning I arose very early, and after singing Mass, I breakfasted. When I went outside, I made the sign of the cross on myself and my lodging. Then I traveled along the way just as the voice had described it; after passing the stone, I continued until I came to a valley called the Valley of the Dead. I know this valley well, for long ago I had seen a duel there between the two best knights in the world. After leaving the valley, I went a good half league, till I came upon the crossroads. I looked before me and saw a cross above the edge of a fountain; below this cross lay the animal the voice had spoken to me about. As soon as it saw me, it got up, began to look at me, and I at it. But the longer I looked at it, the less I knew what kind of animal it was. I would have you know that it was variegated in every way: it had the head and neck of a sheep, and these were as white as new snow; and it had the feet, legs, and thighs of a dog, and all this was as black as coal; and it had the breast and body [26] and rump of a fox and the tail of a lion. Thus it resembled various animals. After I had looked at it for a long time, and it at me, I raised my hand and signaled that it should go before me; and it went straight to the crossroads. There it set out directly on the first road it saw on the right; and I followed as quickly as I could, but I moved slowly, for age and 27Found” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 284 path leading... path” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 2°Norwegia was the territory in Scotland occupied by the Vikings; that is, the western part of the country north of the Clyde and the islands. The History of the Holy Grail feebleness kept me back. When we had gone along until the hour of vespers, the animal left the road and entered a very thick hazel-wood and advanced, with me following, until it began to get dark. And then we left the wood and entered a very deep valley, filled by a very tall, thick forest. Once I was at the bottom of the valley, I saw before me a lodge. In front of the door was a very old man of religion, dressed in religious robes. And when I saw him, I was very happy and thanked Our Lord for giving me company. As soon as he saw me, he took off his hood and fell at my feet. He requested my blessing, and I beseeched him to arise, for I was a sinful man and thus could not give it. Why go on any longer? Despite my plea, he would not get up until I had blessed him, which [27] troubled me, for God knows I was not worthy of doing it. When he stood up, he led me by the hand into his dwelling. After we had sung all our hours, we ate such food as God had given the holy man.29 Once we had supped, the good man asked me about my way of life. I answered the best I could, in such a way that, as God knows, he believed there was more good in me than there was, for good men usually do not know how to believe anything but good of the people they see. He received me joyfully and companionably that night. Never in my life have I seen a man who seemed so worthy while showing it as little as possible. In the morning the good man asked me to celebrate Mass; afterwards, I took my leave, and he said he would accompany me. When we were [28] outside the gate, I saw the animal that was guiding me. I had not seen it since the night before, when I met the good man. Thus the good man accompanied me to the road, and then we parted. He urged me to remember him in my prayers and in my good deeds and prayed that God grant he remain in this religion*! until the end. We bestowed this favor on one another. Then we embraced and commended each other to God. The animal and I wandered all morning long in the forest, without ever encountering man or woman until it was certainly noon, and then we entered a very beautiful heath. In the middle of this heath there was a pine tree called the Pine of Adventures; under it was a spring, the most beautiful any man might ever see, so I believe. It was unlike any other spring I had ever heard of, for the gravel was red like blood and hot like fire, while the water was as cold as ice; and three times a day it turned as green as an emerald and as bitter as the sea, the bitterness lasting as long as the green. When the animal came to the pine, it lay down under it and made as if to rest. As I started to sit down, I saw a young man on a horse coming across the heath at a trot, [29] straight toward me. When he arrived at the spring, he dismounted and pulled a napkin from inside his shirt, knelt before me, and said, “My lord, my lady greets you, she who was rescued by the Knight of the Golden Circle on the day that the person you know saw the great marvel; and she sends you such food as she has to eat.” Then he opened the napkin and pulled out eggs and a very white cake, still hot. 30“ fter we had sung... holy man” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 31 Religion,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “region”). 7 He also set out a cask full of barley beer and a little lidded goblet. I ate very willingly, for I was very hungry because the journey had tired me out. After having eaten and drunk, I gathered up the remains and told the young man that he should thank his lady and that God would reward her. Thereupon the young man left, and the animal and I set out again. We went along all day, never leaving the wood until it began to get on toward vespers, when we arrived at the crossroads where a wooden cross stood. There the animal stopped, and I began to listen. I heard horses coming at a great pace, then I saw a knight approaching on a palfrey, accompanied by two*? others. As soon as he saw me in my religious robes, he jumped down from his horse, as did the others,?° and said [30] that I was very welcome. After I had returned the knight’s greetings, he took me by the hand and said he would take me to his house, where he offered hospitality; I wished that God would reward him. He immediately called his squire, and ordered him to lead away their horses and prepare the dwelling as beautifully as possible. The squire departed, while the other one, who was a knight and the son of a lord,*4 remained with us.°> Thus all three of us rode along. I have never seen anyone more greatly honored than I was by him and his fine retinue. But one thing went wrong for me: he recognized me because of a mark I had, and said he had seen me in the past and named the place. Nevertheless, no matter how much he questioned me, I never admitted anything, and when he saw that it displeased me to be asked, he let things be. But that night he honored me and made me welcome in every possible way. In the morning, I departed, bidding them all farewell. And when I came out the door, I found the animal waiting. After the lord had accompanied me a bit, I asked him [31] to return home. He then bade me Godspeed and I, him. We traveled through the forest, the beast and I, until it was nearly the hour of tierce. Then we found a road leading out of the forest; we continued along on that road until I saw a very beautiful church and a splendid lodging in a large plain on a lake called the Queen’s Lake. At the church, I discovered a convent of nuns, very good ladies, who were singing the hour of tierce very well and very nobly. When they found out that I was a priest, they asked me to celebrate Mass, which I did. After the service, the ladies gave me breakfast; then they pressed me to stay until the next day. Saying that this was not possible, I took my leave and departed. Thus I went along with the animal until we re-entered the forest. Once we had done so, we wandered the entire day without ever encountering any earthly being. When it began to get on toward vespers, I looked beyond the road; on a stone I saw a folded letter. After taking it and unfolding it, I found this written at the beginning: “The Great Master sends you this message: tonight you will finish 32"Two,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “many”). 33"The others,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “one of the others”). 34*The other one,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “the others”); “who was a knight... lord” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. Sout J” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “me”). 8 your quest.” I looked to see what the animal was doing, but I did not see it, for it had left. When I saw [32] this, I looked at the letter and saw that it told me everything I had to do. Then I continued along the road; after going a long way, I found a well-beaten path that led to the right, amidst the most beautiful forest I think I had ever seen. I turned this way, and after I had traveled a long way by this path, the forest began to thin out. I looked and saw on a knoll, on a rock, a very beautiful little chapel, a good half league away. As I began to approach, I heard a cry from there. It was so horrible that one could not ask for anything more hideous or frightening. But I never became afraid, for the letter had prepared me well. When I came up to the chapel, I found the door open; at the threshold a man lay in a faint, just as if he were dead. Upon seeing him, I ran toward him with great faith in God, who had taught me what to do. His eyes were turned in his head; thus I knew he had the devil in his body. I made the sign of the cross over his face. He sat up, [33] then began to speak marvels. I adjured the devil to leave, in Jesus Christ’s name. He replied that® it was through Jesus Christ that he had entered, and only through Him would he leave, and J said He had sent me to throw him out. He responded that he did not yet see the opening through which he could leave. I knew very well he was telling the truth, so I entered the chapel. On the altar J found the little book I was seeking. I knelt, took the book, and when I came out, I never heard anything cry out as the enemy did, saying, “Do not come closer, for you can see very well that I must come forth, nor is there anything on earth except this that could force me out.” But when he wished to issue forth by the mouth, he could not because of the sign of the cross I had made. And he began to speak again, crying out, “If you want me to come out, open up the way.”37 I asked him how, and he said that he would not come out as long as the book was so close. I replied that he would not leave through the mouth; rather he would have to go through the bottom. When he heard that, he began to cry out so loudly that it seemed to me he must be heard throughout the land. Immediately there arrived such a large company of devils that I did not believe there were so many in all the world. When they saw [34] the words of the little book I was holding open, you never saw a whirlwind move away so quickly or hideously as they did. I approached the senseless man and put the little book before his mouth, and right away the devil came out from below and departed, making such a great storm that it seemed to me he uprooted the entire wood where he passed. The man remained as if dead, and I took him in my arms and carried him, with God’s help, before the altar. There I watched over him*® all night long, until daybreak. When it was light, I went to him and asked if he would like to eat. He asked who I was, and I replied that he should not 36“To leave.... that” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. S7way,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “mouth”). 38There all day and” omitted, as in Hucher variants and Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail be afraid, that I had come to help him. He said he would eat such food as he was accustomed to. I asked him what that was, and he swore that he had been a hermit for thirtyfour years and a half, and that nine years and three months and a half had passed since he had eaten anything but grass and fruit and roots; nor would he ever eat any other food as long as he lived, unless God sent it to him. [35] Thereupon I left him lying®® as weak as someone who had eaten no food since the enemy first began to work on him. I said my hours and then put on my robes and sang Mass. After it was sung, and IJ had returned to the good man, I found him sound asleep. Since I had neither eaten nor slept but little all night long, I sat down next to him on a stool and began to doze. Then a vision came to me in which I was at the foot of a knoll above a spring; an old man passed carrying in the pouch of his tunic apples and pears in abundance and poured them into my lap. At that moment I arose, went up the knoll, and found just what I had seen in the vision. After putting the fruit in my lap, the worthy man said to me, “Each day you will find your food here, set out by the Great Master.” When I returned, I found the brother awake. I gave him some of the fruit, which he ate very willingly, like someone who had fasted so long that he could not stand up for anything in the world. I remained in his company until he was completely [36] cured. Each day, we found our food set out at the spring, the way the Holy Spirit gave it to us. And on the ninth day, which was the Thursday after Easter week,*° I departed. When I took leave of the good man, he began to cry, saying he was very afraid now that J was leaving. Then he recounted how it happened that the devil had worked on him and governed him in this way. It was because of a sin that mortal flesh cannot resist committing; since donning the religious habit, he had sinned only this one time. After he had confessed, he beseeched me to pray to Our Lord, in His pity, to keep him from committing a sin that might cause His anger. And I said I would willingly pray to Jesus Christ. Thereupon we embraced each other and took leave, weeping and in great distress. If one can truly judge a man, I do not believe there could be more goodness in any man than I saw in him. Now consider how God is a cruel judge and a generous [37] rewarder. For if someone who has always served Him ends his life with a misdeed, all his service will be forfeited, and he will be judged for this misdeed. And if someone who has always done wrong toward Him ends his life in His service, all the misdeeds will be wiped out, and his services will be rewarded a hundred times. Thus he who served his Lord most of his life lost His love because of a misdeed done while serving Him, while he who had always fled the Lord gained His love because of one good work. It is certainly good to serve Him and bad to anger Him. At that moment I took my leave. When the good man escorted me to the gate, we saw the animal that had led me, and he asked me what this could be. I told him I had no 397 ying,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “living”). 40after Easter week” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail other guide, and that it was sent by God. He said it was good to serve such a Lord, who knew so well how to guide people in His work. [38] During my entire journey I never met anyone else who could see the animal. I took leave of the worthy man and returned the way I had come, arriving on Saturday evening at my dwelling. I did not leave the lite book behind but brought it with me, for I yearned too much for the company of the holy words therein. After placing it in the spot where I had first put it, I celebrated vespers and complin. Afterwards, I ate what pleased Our Lord, and then I went to bed, for I was extremely tired. That night a vision came to me: the Great Master came before me dressed in the same clothes as the first time and said, “On the first workday of the week that begins tomorrow, you are to begin copying the book I gave you elsewhere, in order to finish it before Ascension, for it will no longer be seen on earth once the time comes that marks My ascent to heaven. You will find all the things you need to write in the cupboard behind your altar. Do not be afraid of the fact that you have never done such work, for no work can be badly done that is undertaken for Me.” [39] Then He left. In the morning, after arising, I went to the cupboard to see if my vision was true, and found all the things a writer needs. Once Sunday had passed, and I had sung Mass on Monday, I took the little book and the parchment and began to write straightaway. It was the second Monday after Easter, and the writing began with the story of the Crucifixion of Jesus Christ, as you will hear, and I will begin in this way. 2. Joseph of Arimathea Lays Christ’s Body in a Sepulcher and Is Imprisoned.! On the day that the Savior of the world suffered death— which confounded our death and restored? eternal life to us—[46] there were still very few people who believed in Him: only the glorious Virgin, His sweet mother, and His disciples, who at this time were called His brothers. And though there were others who believed in Him, they were few, so that when the Scripture says He prayed,? “Dear Father, if it can be, let Me not undergo this Passion, He was distressed not so much about the body’s anguish as about the fact that He saw His death had not yet redeemed anyone, and that He had not won anyone over by His death other than the thief who asked for mercy on the cross. Because of this, the Scripture says, “I am just like the one 1Corresponds to Hucher II: 45-77; Sommer I: 12-15; Ponceau §16-19. (Hucher II: 39-45 contains an addition from the prose Joseph d’Arimathie describing the Redemption, which appears in only three manuscripts.) Robert de Boron’s version in verse, Le Roman de l'Estoire dou Graal, ed. by William A. Nitze (Paris, Champion, 1927), also begins with these events. 2“Death and restored” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 3«wWhen” and “He prayed” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 4See Matthew XXVI, 39 and 42; Mark XIV, 36; and Luke XXII, 42. 2 who sought the stubble remaining in the field after harvest,”° that is to say, by His death He had redeemed [47] only the thief, who was nothing compared to the other people, as the stubble is nothing compared to the other grain. Nevertheless, there were already many who had begun to believe, but they did not dare do it openly because they were afraid of the Jews.® Of all the secret believers,’ the holy writing of the Grail speaks of a noble knight who lived at that time, whose name was Joseph of Arimathea. Arimathea was a city in the land of Ramathaim, beyond the river Jordan, and the text says it belonged to Elcan® [48] Samuel’s father. In this city Joseph was born, but he had come to Jerusalem seven full years before Jesus Christ was crucified. He was very pious, gentle, and devout and had converted to Jesus Christ’s faith, but he did not dare show it, for the Jews would have killed him. Joseph possessed all the good qualities that mortal man can, for he loved and feared God and was pious and gracious toward his fellow men. He honored and revered those above him and was peaceable and amicable toward his relatives. He neither wronged nor harmed those beneath him and was full of compassion for those who suffer. Such were his good qualities. The first psalm of the Psalter speaks of him when it says, “Happy is the man who does not agree with or follow the advice of the wicked and who does not wish to follow the road sinners take.” This man Joseph was in Jerusalem with his wife and a son named Josephus, not the one!® the [49] Scripture relies upon so often as a witness, but another one who was no less lettered. This Josephus brought his father’s lineage across the sea to fair Britain, which is now called England, crossing without oars or a tiller, and with no other sail than the length of material in his under-tunic, as the story attests farther along.!! When the day came that Jesus was put on the cross, Joseph, who had placed all his love in Him, was very sorrowful. And he thought he would willingly glorify and honor all the things that had belonged to Him, for the text!2 says that “no adversity can divide loyal love.”!> When Joseph saw on the cross the One whom he believed to be the Son of God and the Savior of the world, he was neither 5Ponceau suggests that this may refer to the words of a prophet, as in Micah VI, 1 (note to §16, 14). 6 “Because they were afraid of the Jews” supplied from Ponceau. - 7*Secret believers,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “infidels”). 8«Ptcan,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “el ” “in the time of”). 9See Psalm I, 1 10Not the one” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. Nsee Chapter 30. Here another section from the prose Joseph is inserted in Hucher’s text; the section relates the events of the Crucifixion in a much longer version than that found in most manuscripts. We therefore follow Ponceau’s version until the end of the interpolation (§17-18, 34), which is found in Hucher II: 49-68. 12] iterally, the “letters.” 13Perhaps a reference to Proverbs XVII, 17 (see Ponceau, note to §17, 8). tans, 10 frightened nor led to lose his faith because of seeing Him die, but waited for His holy Resurrection, believing in it with certainty. And because he could not see Him alive, he thought he would do what he could to obtain some of the things He had touched while He was alive. So he went to the house where Jesus had held the Last Supper, where He ate the Paschal lamb with His disciples. Upon arriving, Joseph asked to see the place where He had eaten. He was shown a room set up for dining, on the top floor of the house. There Joseph found the dish!4 from which the Son of God and two others had eaten, before He gave the twelve disciples His flesh and blood to take in communion. Very pleased, Joseph took the dish to his house and put it in an honored and beautiful place. When Joseph learned that the Savior of the world was dead and that those who had found Him dead intended to break His thighs just as they did to other thieves, he did not want to wait until the cruel and traitorous men who did not believe in Him took Him down from the cross with their vile and filthy hands. So he went to Pilate, whose liege knight he was, for he had been in his service for seven whole years. When he came before Pilate, he beseeched him, as a reward for all the services he had done, to grant him a gift that would cost him very little. And Pilate, who liked him and his service very much, agreed, for he owed him much greater riches than he had requested. Joseph asked for Jesus’s body, and Pilate gave it to him, not knowing what he was giving him, for he thought he was giving the body of a poor fisherman, while he was actually giving him the Giver of all great gifts and the Resurrection of all flesh created in human form. This was the richest gift any mortal man ever gave. But because Pilate was not aware of what he was giving, it should be called a humiliation rather than a gift, for if he had believed in the great glory and power of the One whose body he was giving, he would not have taken all the riches and power in the world in exchange. Once it was granted to him, Joseph, who knew very well the great glory of the gift, was very joyful, and he considered himself to be well rewarded, much more so than Pilate considered himself to have rewarded him. Upon reaching the cross where He still hung, Joseph began to weep very tenderly because of the great pain He had suffered. After he had taken Him down, sighing and weeping bitterly, he laid Him in a sepulcher he had had cut out of the rock, where he himself was to be put at his death. Then he went to his house to seek the bowl. Returning to the body, he used it to gather as much of the blood that dripped out as he could. Then he brought the dish back to his house. Since then, through this dish God has performed many miracles in the Promised Land and many other lands. After putting the bowl in the purest place he knew of, Joseph took the richest cloth and returned to the sepulcher, where he wrapped the body of his Lord as richly and honorably as he could. Once he had done this, he laid it in the sepulcher and put a very big and heavy rock at the entrance, because he did not want anyone to enter the 14The dish was in fact a bowl (“escuele”); both words will be used henceforth. Medieval people usually ate from a bowl, which two people shared. The History of the Holy Grail place where so noble a thing lay as the body of the Son of God. But when the Jews saw that Joseph had taken down from the cross the One whom they had sentenced to death and damned, and that he had buried Him so nobly, they were very angry and said that it was right that Joseph pay for what he had done against God and their faith. So they decided to seize him at night as soon as he had fallen asleep and take him to a place where he would never be heard of again. All of them agreed upon this plan. That night, once people were asleep, they set out, and one of them knocked on the door. When it was opened, they all entered at once and seized Joseph, who was sound asleep, and led him!> a good seven leagues away from Jerusalem to [69] a stronghold belonging to the bishop Caiaphas. This house was in a big marsh, and it had a hollow pillar! which seemed to be solid.!” Inside this pillar was the most hideous and filthy prison ever seen. Nor would any man ever have realized it was there, had he not been told about it beforehand, so subtly crafted was it. After they had led Joseph out of Jerusalem, he was turned over to two of them who had sworn that no one would ever hear news of him from them. They took him to the prison and forbade the jailer to give him anything to eat other than a piece of bread and a cup of water. They immediately returned to Jerusalem, arriving before daybreak, where they heard a great tumult and lamentation for Joseph, who was gone. When Pilate found out about it, he was very sorrowful. He did not know what to do, for he strongly suspected that the Jews had done this at the prompting [70] of the Master of their faith. Thus he did not know what to do. And when the Sunday came when Jesus was risen, and the guards had told the Jews how they had lost Him, they said they would make Joseph pay dearly!® for their loss. Thus Caiaphas sent a message to the jailer,!9 to give him nothing to eat and to let him die of hunger. But the Lord, for whom the Jews sought his death, did not intend to abandon him in his affliction; rather He rewarded him one hundred times over for his service. For once His body had left the sepulcher, He came to Joseph in prison, bringing the holy dish Joseph had hidden in his house, with the blood in it that he had gathered, to provide him comfort and company.”° Seeing this made Joseph very joyful, and then he truly knew this was God. Thus he did not regret [71] his service but was so joyful that he did not care that he was in prison, since he had the comfort, life, and company of his Lord. Thus the Savior of the world appeared to Joseph before anyone else and comforted him greatly. And He said He was certain that Joseph would not die in prison but would leave safe and sound; nor would he suffer pain or lThe interpolation ends here; we return to Hucher II: 68. 16Corrected to singular following context and Ponceau. Meg olid,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “marchiés,” which seems to be a lapsus). 18Dearly” supplied from Ponceau. 19«Caiaphas sent a message to the jailer,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “they sent a message to Caiaphas, the jailer”). UT provide him comfort and company” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail chagrin, for he would always be in His company. And when he left, all who saw him would consider it a miracle. After that he and his descendants would carry His name to foreign places. But it was not yet the time for him to leave; rather, Joseph would remain there until everyone believed him to be dead. And after his departure His name would be glorified and praised, and many people would believe in Him.?! Thus Joseph remained in prison so long that he was completely forgotten, and no one spoke of him anymore. His wife, who was still a young woman, remained behind, distraught, with her son Josephus, who was not yet a year and a half old on the day his father was imprisoned. The lady was often urged to remarry, but she said she would never have a carnal relationship with a man before [72] she knew for certain the truth about her lord, whom she loved more than any other living thing. When the child came of age to marry, his relatives exhorted him to do so, but he was so in love with Jesus Christ because of his mother’s guidance that he said he would never marty any other but Holy Church, for he believed in God and had been baptized by the hand of Saint James the Minor, who was bishop of Jerusalem for a long time after Jesus Christ’s death. Joseph remained in prison, as you have heard, until forty-two years had passed. And then Vespasian, the emperor of Rome, freed him, and you will hear how this came about. Joseph was in prison for forty-two years without ever leaving, nor was he ever given anything other to eat than bread and water, and very little of that, about every three days. On the day that Jesus Christ was crucified, [73] Tiberius Caesar was emperor of Rome, and he remained in power for ten more years. Afterwards reigned his nephew Gaius, who lived [74] only one year. And then Claudius ruled the Roman empire for fourteen years; then Nero [75] who held the empire fourteen®* years. Following Nero came Titus and his son,2° Vespasian, who was ill. In the [76] third year of Titus’s reign,24 Joseph was freed from prison. This is indeed forty-two years, counting from the [77] Crucifixion of Our Lord Jesus Christ up to Joseph’s liberation, and you will hear how he was freed. [78] 2lewould believe in Him,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “would inquire in that place”). 22Fourteen,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “four,” which fails to add up). 23«son,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “father”). 24Vespasian inherited the empire and held it thirteen years” omitted, as in Hucher variants and Ponceau. Il 3. Vespasian Is Healed; Joseph of Arimathea Is Liberated. The first year Titus was emperor, it happened that his son Vespasian became so ill with leprosy that no one could go near him. This distressed Titus so much that he could not be comforted. And so he caused it to be known throughout all the lands that the one who could cure his son of leprosy would have whatever gift he might request. Though the emperor had made this known everywhere, he found no one who could cure his son until it happened that a knight who came to Rome from Capernaum heard about it. When he came before the emperor, he said he would willingly speak to his son for his benefit. The emperor had him taken to a window of a room where Vespasian was all alone. It was through this window that they spoke to him, for otherwise they could not bear the stench coming from him. After Vespasian had put his head out the window, the knight looked at him and saw that he was sicker than anyone could imagine. Vespasian asked at once if he knew of anything that could help him. And the knight answered, “My lord, certainly, I came to see you because I once had leprosy in my childhood.” “Oh, dear sir,” said Vespasian, “how were you cured of it?” “Indeed,” said he, “by a Prophet who was in Judea, whom the Jews wrongly killed.” “How did he cure you of it?” asked Vespasian. “Truly,” he replied, “all He did was touch me, and at once I was completely cured.” “What!” said he. “Was he so powerful that he cured leprosy?” “Indeed, my lord,” said the knight, “He did even more, for He raised the dead.” And he asked why he had been killed. “Certainly, my lord,” said the knight, “because He preached the truth and reproached the Jews for their wickedness. And I believe that if you had something He had touched, you would be immediately cured.” When the young man heard this, he was overjoyed. He sent for his father and had this told to him, for he could barely speak. And Titus said he would send a messenger to see if something could be found that He had touched. “My lord,” said Vespasian, “ask this knight to go, since he is from the land, and give him whatever riches he needs to take this message, for my heart tells me I will be cured. And if I can be healed, I promise the Prophet to take vengeance for the shameful thing the Jews did to Him.” Titus implored the knight until he said he would take his message. And he gave him splendid equipment and his seal, so that all those the letter reached would do what he commanded. 1Corresponds to Hucher II: 78-123; Sommer I: 15-20; Ponceau §20-26. The text in Hucher II: 78-111 contains the last of three additions from the prose Joseph; it recounts the healing of Vespasian in a longer and slightly different version than most manuscripts. We therefore follow the shorter redaction, which Ponceau presents (Ponceau §20-22, 23). qZ Then the knight went to Judea. In Jerusalem he found a Roman whose name was Felix, and who was at that time in charge of Judea and Syria, for the Romans placed guards over the lands they had conquered. The knight gave him the emperor’s seal. After reading the letter, the Roman told him to speak his pleasure, and it would be done. And the knight told him to have it announced throughout the land that anyone who had anything Jesus had touched should bring it forward, and that anyone who hid anything would not escape death for it, if it were discovered. What he commanded was announced, in Jerusalem first of all. But no one came forward except a very old woman whose name was Veronica She came to Felix, bringing a piece of cloth she had venerated since Jesus’s crucifixion. And she said to him, “My lord, on the day that the Holy Prophet was led away to be crucified, I passed before Him carrying a piece of cloth to sell. He called me and beseeched me to lend Him this cloth to wipe His face, which was dripping with sweat. After He had done so, I folded the cloth and took it home. And when I unfolded it, I found Jesus’s face as clear as if it had been painted on a wall. Since then I have kept it, and no matter how sick I have been, once I looked at it, I was completely healed.” She opened the cloth, which seemed to be newly woven, and the figure appeared as clearly as if it had been imprinted on it. The knight brought this cloth to Rome. The night before his arrival, Vespasian dreamed that a man came from the heavens and scratched him all over with his nails. After that, he looked in a mirror to see if he recognized himself. And everyone on earth ran after him, saying, “Come see the dead man who lives again!” In the morning after arising, his father came to him, for he loved him more than anything. When Vespasian saw him, he said, “My lord, be happy, for I know truly that I will be healed.” And then he told him his dream. At these words, the knight arrived. When Vespasian, who was still at the window, saw him, he felt all his limbs lighten. Upon seeing him in the distance, he began to shout, “You are welcome, for you bring my health!” The knight immediately unfolded the cloth without saying a word. As soon as Vespasian saw the imprint of the face, he was more handsome and healthy than he had ever been before. And when his father and the other people saw him, the rejoicing was so great that anyone who had not seen it would not believe it. And then Vespasian took the imprinted face and put it away as honorably as he could, saying that he would not be satisfied until he had avenged the shame of the Lord who had restored his health. He prepared his baggage at once and set out to go to Judea, taking the knight with him. And he made him lord of all his household. Upon arriving in Jerusalem, he sent for Veronica.3 And she named all those who were still living by whose power and advice Jesus had been put to death. Vespasian had them all seized and had a great fire made, saying that he would burn them all. 2 “Veronica,” as in Sommer and the longer version in Hucher (Ponceau has “Mary the Venetian”). 3Corrected to “Veronica” for logic (Ponceau has “Mary the Venetian”). The History of the Holy Grail When Joseph’s wife heard this news, she and her son came before him. She asked for justice for her lord, whom they had taken from her, and whom she had had no sign of since. He asked her why they had done this. The lady said, “Because he removed Jesus from the cross and put Him in his sepulcher.” Upon hearing this, he swore that he would burn them all if they did not tell him where Joseph was. They replied that he could burn them, for they could not return him, nor did they know what had become of him. And they were telling the truth, for they did not know what had really happened. Of the two who had put him in prison, only one was alive, for the other one had been beheaded within a week after imprisoning Joseph. And the jailer had fallen from the windows of the tower to the ground the day after they stopped giving Joseph food. Therefore, only one person was still alive; this was Caiaphas, who was the bishop of the Jews the year that Jesus Christ died.4 When they saw that all of them were to die, they said he could do as he wished with them, for it was true that they had seized Joseph, but they had handed him over to two of their number because they did not want everyone to know where he was imprisoned. Caiaphas was one of these two;° if he knew nothing, no one could ever give Vespasian any news. So Vespasian asked to see Caiaphas; once he had come before him, he had him well guarded while all the others were burned. After they were [112] burned, he told Caiaphas he would punish him more severely than any man had ever been if he did not return Joseph. Caiaphas answered that he could punish him in whatever way he pleased, for even if all the men in the world had sworn to return Joseph alive, they® could not, unless God Himself were to do so. But he would show him where Joseph had been imprisoned, for he did not know whether he was still alive. Vespasian said that he asked for nothing better. And Caiaphas said that he would do so, provided that he not be slain or burned. Vespasian assured him of this, promising that he would not have him killed by fire or sword. Then Caiaphas took him to the tower where the pillar was and said, “My lord, he was put in this pillar right after Jesus was crucified, and I was not yet thirty-three’ years old, who now am aged, as you can see.” Vespasian said to him, “Do not be afraid; the One for whom he was imprisoned there is powerful enough to keep him safe and sound, and even more, for He healed me, who had never served Him, from the most vile disease that ever was.” Vespasian then ordered Caiaphas to enter the jail, and if he did not find Joseph alive, to bring out the bones. Caiaphas said he would not go in, even if he were threatened with dismemberment. And Vespasian replied that he was right, for such a vile and perfidious a sinner [113] as he should not enter a place where such a worthy man as Joseph was; nor did reason advise it, for he had 4The interpolated material ends here; we follow Hucher from here on (Hucher IE: 111). 5“Two,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “three”). Corrected to plural, as in Ponceau. ? Thirty-three,” as in Hucher variants, Sommer, and Ponceau (Hucher has “thirty-two”). The History of the Holy Grail taken the Savior of the world down from the cross. Then he said that he himself would go in. Thus he had himself lowered into the cell by those he trusted the most. Once he reached the bottom, he saw such a great light around him that even if one hundred candles were lit, it would not be so great. He remained on one side, silent and astonished at the brilliant light. After he had been there for some time, he called Joseph. And Joseph answered, “Good Lord God, who is calling me?” “I am Vespasian,” he said, “the son of the emperor of Rome, who have come to deliver you from prison.” Joseph wondered who this Vespasian could be, who was the son of the emperor, for he thought he had remained in prison only from Friday until the Sunday when Our Lord Jesus Christ appeared before him. Therefore he did not realize that so much time had passed, nor did he think the emperor would have changed in such a short time, for the light Jesus Christ brought him when He appeared had never failed; so he thought nightfall had never come. Then he asked Vespasian what he wanted to do with him, and Vespasian answered that he had come to deliver him and to avenge his Lord for the great shame [114] that had been done to Him. And when Joseph heard this, he was overjoyed. Then Vespasian had himself pulled up first of all, to recount the wondrous marvels of the great joy in the cell below.® Meanwhile, a voice came to Joseph saying, “Fear not, but be assured, for earthly vengeance has come. This man will avenge you physically against your enemies; spiritual vengeance will be more grievous. After you have seen what vengeance has been taken, I will show you what great difficulties you must undergo to carry My name into strange lands.” And Joseph replied, “My lord, Your servant? is ready to undergo everything that Your mouth wishes to command. But, Lord, what will I do with Your holy dish, for I would very much like it to be hidden so that no one might ever see it.” The voice responded, “Fear not about the dish, for when you arrive in your house, you will find it. Now go with certainty, for I am watching over you.” [115] With that the voice was silent, and Vespasian, who was already above ground, had Joseph pulled up. When Caiaphas saw him, it seemed to him that he had not aged at all. Rather, he said he had never seen him so handsome as he was now. And when Joseph saw Caiaphas, he did not recognize him, so aged and frail was he. Nor did he recognize his own son, when he came to kiss him, but asked who he was. Those who were around him told him this was his son, and he did not believe it. After that, his wife ran to embrace and kiss him. He began to look at her, and it seemed to him that her face resembled that of his wife, but he could not believe it was she, so changed was she. And she said, “My lord, don’t you recognize me? I am Elyab, your wife, and this is Josephus, your son.” And he 8“Which was so black and dark and full of vermine” omitted here, following Hucher variants, Ponceau, Sommer. 9The Old French is “sergans,” which could also be translated as “soldier.” 13 said he would not believe it unless she gave him some true private sign. Vespasian asked, “Joseph, how long do you think you remained in this prison?” Joseph replied, “My lord, I think I remained here from Friday until today, and I believe it is Sunday today. Friday, I took the true Prophet down from the cross, and for that I was put in prison.” After he had said this, everyone who was around began to laugh, for they thought he had come out dazed. But Caiaphas marveled most at the fact that he had [116] lived so long without eating or drinking. And Vespasian said to Joseph, “By my faith, they lead me to understand that forty-two years have passed since the Prophet was put on the cross, and that you have been in prison forty-two years. When you were imprisoned, Tiberius Caesar was emperor of Rome; since then there have been three emperors, and my father is the fourth.” When Joseph heard this, he was amazed. Vespasian brought Caiaphas before him and asked him whether he recognized him. He did not, so he asked who he was. And he said he was! Caiaphas and that he and another man had imprisoned him. To prove it, he told him that when he and the other man had led him to the foot of the tower, they dropped him on the ground so hard that he had a wound on the eyebrow. Joseph acknowledged this and showed them his injury. When they came to Jerusalem, his relatives and all his friends came to meet him, as well as many other people, all together. But he recognized very few, either among his family or among the others. And Vespasian had his men seize all those who Joseph said had helped or supported the crucifixion of Jesus Christ, and had them burned right away without taking ransom. After he had burned everyone who was alive that Joseph was able to recognize, then Caiaphas’s trial was held. Vespasian called Joseph and the members of his household and asked what he should do about Caiaphas, without breaking his promise [117] neither to slay nor to burn him. There were those who judged that he should be put in the prison where Joseph had been, so that he would die of hunger there. Others said that he could very well cause his death without breaking his promise, for he was not obliged to protect him except against being burned or slain. If he had him drowned, he would be killed neither by sword or fire. Joseph said, “My lord, you have the power and the authority to do this, but for God’s sake do not act in this way, for perhaps he will yet change his ways and believe in the One who kept me safe and sound for so long and delivered me from his hands and those of my other enemies. Perchance Our Lord will be served so well that He would not want him to die at this time.” Vespasian replied, “Since this is what you wish, I will take your advice, and I will not bring about his death; but I must take vengeance in some way for the death of the Lord, whom he wrongly caused to die. And if it pleases the Lord that he live, he will live; but when I came to this land, I promised the Lord that I would not retum before having avenged Him as well as I could for the wrong and shame 10“He said he was” supplied from Ponceau. 14 done to Him in this city. I must avenge Him, for He healed me of the worst leprosy a man’s body ever suffered, to my knowledge. [118] Those who hold to Him, I will save, to the best of my ability; and those who go against Him, I will destroy, to the best of my ability. “When I came to this city and had the first Jews burned, through Veronica’s!! advice, I learned about the complaint lodged against the Jews who had imprisoned you, and Caiaphas told me he would show me the place where you had been imprisoned, on condition that I promise that he would be neither burned!? nor slain. And I, who wished to see you more than anyone else, agreed to it, for I hoped that the Lord, for whom you had been imprisoned, had not rewarded you so ill that He would have let you die in the filth of this prison. Because I agreed, I must keep my promise, so I will not cause him to die. But because I must avenge the noble Lord somehow, I will tell you what I will do. I will have him put out to sea in a boat, and after I have had him taken far from land in another ship, he will be left to drift, as God pleases. If God wants him to live, he will live, and if it pleases Him that he die, he will not escape it. Thus I will be able [119] to keep my promise. And if it pleases Our Lord that he die by means of this torment that I will put him through, He will be avenged; if it pleases Him that he escape, it will not be because of me, but through His grace.” Thus the discussion ended. Vespasian had Caiaphas put in a rowboat, taken out to sea by sailors, and set adrift. Thus Vespasian avenged Jesus Christ physically against His enemies, but it was not he alone, but also! Jesus Christ who avenged Himself, through Vespasian. And this was to make an example of the Jews’ perfidy, for those whom He had called dogs!4—the pagans—showed Him more love than those whom He called His sons—the Jews. It was the Jews who crucified Him, and the pagans who avenged Him. After that, Vespasian was obliged to return to Rome. The night before he departed, as Joseph lay in his bed, a vision came to him: Jesus Christ appeared before him and said, “Joseph, the time has [120] come when you shall go preach in My name. You must leave earthly riches for Me. You will never return to this land; rather, your seed will be spread throughout such faraway lands that you could not believe or imagine it, for I must fill the foreign lands with your seed—not that which you have engendered here, but that which you will engender. For carnal fruit will never issue from your son Josephus, because he has promised Me everlasting chastity. Now take care to have yourself baptized tomorrow. And you will now leave Jerusalem, never to return. You will leave without gold, silver, or money, and without shoes. Nor will you take anything of value except My bowl—this much you will take with you. And you will receive into your household and company all those men and women who want to follow you and want to be MCorrected to “Veronica” for logic (Hucher has “Mary the Egyptian”). 12R ured,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “hanged”). 13«Physically ... also” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 14Dogs” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail baptized. But I do not want anyone in your company to bring money, for you and those with you who serve Me loyally will have all [121] the riches their hearts could conceive and desire. When you want to leave, send for your relatives and friends and your wife’s relatives, and proclaim My faith to them. Then you will see which ones want to believe you and follow you. When you leave Jerusalem, you will go along the road that goes to the Euphrates. !5 And I will teach you at that time what you should do and how you should go preach in the world and proclaim My name.” The next day Joseph arose early in the morning and was baptized by Saint Philip. When Vespasian heard about it, he sent for him and asked what this meant. Joseph answered that it symbolized Jesus Christ’s salvation, without which no man could be saved. Upon hearing this, Vespasian said he would convert to this faith, so he had himself baptized. And he had Joseph be his main sponsor; but he had all those in his household swear not to tell his father about this, for he did not want [122] his father to learn of it until he himself could ask him if he would like to receive this faith. Nevertheless, he had his entire household baptized with him, and it was not discovered that he had been baptized until he and his father came to lay Jerusalem waste in the great devastation that took place before Christianity was established in the land of Agrippa, Herod’s son. It was then that the great devastation took place. But the city was not as completely destroyed by Titus and Vespasian as it was another time, when no two stones stayed together. The story does not say any more except that!é Titus and his son Vespasian besieged Jerusalem during the year following Joseph’s liberation from prison. And it happened that Vespasian, who was very valiant, was attacking fiercely, when a clerk who had been baptized with him recognized him and began to shout, “Vespasian, perfidious Saracen and traitor who has abjured his faith, why are you warring against the One who cured you of leprosy and in whose name you were baptized?” At these words, Vespasian ceased his attack; his father became so angry [123] that he rebuked him for what the Christian had said to him and drove him away for a long time, but this is not recounted in the Chronicle of the Emperors. This will no longer be spoken of here, for now the story will retun to the point where Vespasian leaves Joseph in Jerusalem, where he was baptized. 4. Joseph and His Followers Depart; Joseph Preaches Before Evalach in Sarras.! At this point the story says nothing more about Vespasian and begins telling about Joseph, who sent for all his relatives and friends. He began to teach them the faith just 15«Ruphrates,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “France”). l6The city was not as completely destroyed. .. . supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. Corresponds to Hucher II: 123-155; Sommer I: 20-27; Ponceau §27-35, except that” The History of the Holy Grail as Our Lord had commanded, and he preached to them about Jesus Christ until he converted a good seventy-five? some of whom had already been baptized but whose faith had grown cold. And those who had not been baptized immediately received baptism. Then Joseph and his followers left the city, and it was already past the hour of nones. Once he was beyond the city, Joseph took the road leading to the Euphrates,> just as Our Lord had commanded. And when he arrived in Bethany, it began to grow dark. Then his people said to him, “Dear lord, where shall we spend the night? If we pass this city, we won’t find a place to lodge today.” And Joseph replied, “My lords, brothers and sisters, don’t be afraid; God the all-powerful, for whose love we have all left our land, [124] will help us so that neither lodging nor food will be lacking. But take care not to despair of His great mercy, for if you serve Him loyally, as a good Christian should, there is nothing your heart could conceive of in the morning that it would not receive before nightfall. Nor did He ever show so much love to our ancestors in the desert as He will show us, if we serve Him as the father should be served by his children. But if we serve Him like stepsons, as our fathers did in the desert, He will not act toward us as a father but as a stepfather, for He will not help us but will fail us when our need is greatest.” Thereupon Joseph left off speaking, and they traveled until they arrived at a wood called the Wood of the Ambush, half a league from Bethany.* It was called by that name because in this wood [125] Herod the Tetrarch® was ambushed when the Jews delivered him over to Areta, the king of Damascus, because Herod had abandoned Areta’s daughter when he took his brother Philip’s daughter as wife.© [126] When they reached this wood, Our Lord called Joseph: “Joseph, I am your God, your Savior, your Defender. I am He who delivered your ancestors from the hand of Pharaoh with signs and portents. I had them cross the Red Sea on dry ground and led them to the desert where their hearts had everything they desired. There they angered Me in various ways, at the Water of the Quarrel and by the calf they made to worship.’ Nevertheless, I helped them and defended them against everyone, so that I put their enemies under their feet Despite all this, they neither remembered nor acknowledged [127] that I had done good things for them, nor did they serve Me. Rather, in the end they rewarded Me cruelly by damning Me on the wooden cross. But even if the fathers served Me ill, I will not hate the sons, for I want them to repent of their sins, 2“Seventy-five,” as in Ponceau and text further on (Hucher has “sixty-five”). 3“Euphrates,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “France”). 4“Rethany,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “Britain”). 5“Tetrarch,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “des traitres,” which would give “Herod was ambushed by the traitors”). 6See Hucher II: 125-6, note, for the historical facts. 7See Exodus XVII and XXXII. 8See Psalms CX, ] and Matthew XXII, 44. ip) and I care not about death. Because I want you to confer My mercy on the sons of the evil fathers, I have chosen you to carry My name and My faith throughout foreign lands. And you will be the leader of a greater multitude than you think. Through you they will have My love and My help. And if they wish to consider Me as Father and Lord, they will profit and advance. Now go to your people, and have them take lodging in this wood, and they will have all the food and everything they want, each in his lodging. Before you leave this wood, you shall make an ark for My bowl, and you shall say your prayers in order to have the love of your Lord God. And when you wish to speak to Me, open the ark, wherever you may be, so that only you and your son Josephus see the bowl. Now go and prepare your people and do as I have commanded.” Thereupon Joseph left and came to his people. He had them [128] prepare lodgings in the wood with branches and leaves. After that, they went to pray. And when they returned from prayers, each one found in his hut what he desired to eat. They ate and drank as much as they pleased, and they were more comfortable that night, at their meal and sleeping on the grass, than they had ever been before. In the morning Joseph had the ark made, just as Our Lord had commanded; inside it he put the Savior’s dish. After all the people had prayed before the ark, they left the wood and set out on their way, traveling until they arrived at a city called Sarras, between Babylon? and Salamander. From this city came the first Saracens. Those who say that the Saracens are named after Abraham’s first wife are not to be believed, for this was falsely invented, nor does it seem reasonable. It is not unknown that Sarah was a Jew, and her son Isaac was a Jew, as were all those who were Isaac’s issue. Because the greatest part is considered to represent the whole, and since Jews descended from Sarah, it does not seem reasonable that the Saracens took their name from her. But they were called Saracens after this city named Sarras, because this was the first city where they became certain of what they worshiped. And in this city was founded and established the [129] sect that the Saracens maintained until the coming of Mohammed, who was sent to save them, though he damned himself first, and them afterwards, by his gluttony. Before the founding of the sect, the people of Sarras had no faith, but worshiped everything that pleased them, so that what they worshiped one day was not worshiped the next. But then they established the worship of the sun and the moon and the other planets. On the eleventh day after leaving Jerusalem, Joseph came to this city with his followers. Upon their arrival at the city’s entrance, Our Lord called him and said, “Joseph, you shall go into the city and preach My name, and baptize all those who receive the faith, in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.” Joseph then replied, “Lord, how will I know how to preach so well, I who have never undertaken such a thing?” And Our Lord said to him, “Fear not about this, for you have only to open your mouth, and IJ will put into it a great abundance of words. Nor will you ever find any man, no matter how valiant or learned, who can resist the words I *Babylon is the name by which Cairo was generally known during the Middle Ages. 16 will deliver from your mouth. And I will make you like My apostles, through [130] the miracles and prodigies that I will perform through your hands. But take care that your faith does not become cold, for as long as you are a true believer, anything you dare to ask for will be granted in your need. Now go and think about doing my work, so that you may be paid as a loyal servant. And whatever menace you may receive, be not afraid, for I will watch over you and defend you, wherever you may go.” Joseph left at once and entered the city with his followers. When the inhabitants of the city saw so many people together—for they numbered at least seventy-five— and saw that they were barefoot, they began to wonder who these people were. Joseph and his disciples did not stop until they came before the Temple of the Sun, the most beautiful temple in the city. The Saracens honored and revered it more than all the others, because it was a temple to the sun, the noblest of all the planets. At the entrance to this temple there was a very high, beautiful chamber that had been built and established for the peers of the city to hold their courts of justice and business assemblies. This room was called the Seat of Judgment. Joseph and the seventy-five I told you about who were in his group entered this room. They were followed by a large number of the Saracens, [131] who marveled at their strangeness, having never seen such unusual people. Upon entering the room, Joseph found a large number of Saracens, including the lord of the city himself, who was called Evalach the Unknown. He was called the Unknown because no man knew in what country he was born, nor where he came from, nor had they ever had news from anyone who had seen or heard of him in the land. But he was so valiant that through his feats of chivalry he had conquered all the land up to the border of Egypt. And he was still very valiant and courageous, but he was so old that he could not endure the effort of bearing arms. Thus he was no longer as feared or dreaded as he had been in his youth. Rather, the Egyptians were warring against him and had already won a good part of his land that bordered on theirs. No more than three days earlier, they had defeated him in battle, routing him from the battlefield. Because of this, he had sent for all the wise men in his domain, for he wanted to ask their advice about how he might avenge the shame the Egyptians had done to him. At this point, Joseph arrived and heard them discussing the king’s defeat and misfortune. After hearing the truth of the matter, he rejoiced, for he [132] thought that the time had come for his words to be heard and put to work, because of the great need King Evalach had of Our Lord’s help. So he began to thank Our Lord, his Creator, for bringing him there at such a favorable moment. The king had spoken to all his noblemen, and was unable to find help. Rather, they had all failed him, saying they would never again combat the Egyptians, for the latter were far more numerous, and thus only misfortune could befall them. And this was clear, they said, for things had already gone so badly that they did not think it was possible to recoup. As you can hear, they all failed him, urging him to The History of the Holy Grail seek peace!® with the Egyptians, if he could, for they themselves dared not undertake war. This frightened the king so much that he did not know what to say. Then Joseph came before him; seeing him so sad, pale, and pensive, he said, “Evalach, do not be so afraid, for if you believe my advice, you will have joy and victory over your enemies, and glory that will never end.” When Evalach heard this, he looked at him haughtily and said, “Who are you who can give me victory over my enemies and eternal joy?”!! To these words Joseph responded, “By my faith, King [133] Evalach, I did not promise that I would give you victory or eternal joy. But I tell you that if you believe me, you will have victory and joy without end, through the gift and the grace of the One who is powerful over all things.” Evalach answered, “I will gladly listen to your advice. But if you give advice that cannot be believed, the harm will be turned against you.” Joseph replied, “King, this will be advice that will bring honor to the body and profit to the soul, for you will be honored throughout your life, and your soul will be saved after your death.” “Indeed,” said the king, “this advice is not to be refused. Now you can tell me what it is, for if it is as you have said, there is no man in my house I would prefer to listen to. Rather, all the advice you want to give me will be heard.” “King,” said Joseph, “listen then to what I advise. First, you must destroy and break the idols you worship, for you say they are your gods, and you ask them for counsel and help, but they have no power to help you or to injure others. Indeed, you can be sure that they deceived and tricked all your ancestors, for all those who believe these images can help are lost forever if they are still fooled by them on the day of their death. No man should believe that a piece of wood or stone worked by man’s hand could protect him against death or harm; [134] but he should worship the One who suffered the anguish of death on the cross by His own will in order to save and deliver the world from the eternal pain of hell.” “What!” said the king. “Are you telling me that He who suffered the anguish of death, just as you yourself have borne witness, is powerful enough to save me after death, and grant worldly honor? It doesn’t seem to me that He is a true God if He is subject to the anguish of death and even led to die; this can’t be right or true. I cannot see how He, who cannot protect Himself, can protect me from death, for he who cannot help himself can hardly save another.” Then Joseph replied, “King, the Savior of the world suffered death so readily that when the Jews’ false witnesses accused Him before Pilate, and Pilate himself asked if what they said were true, He did not say a word.” To this the king replied, “Now tell me, good friend, do you really mean that He is God because He suffered death in this way?” 10“Beace,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “c’el plaist,” “an agreement”?). 1“when Evalach heard this... joy” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail And Joseph answered, “Not at all. That is not why I say He is God, nor did He win His divine nature in that way. Rather, He was God before all ages and will always be God, and His reign will never end.” And the king said to him, “How can you prove that the [135] world was saved by His death?” “This I will surely tell you,” said Joseph, for he knew it well. “And you can be sure that I won’t tell you anything I don’t know about.!2 Now listen, and you will hear how it happened. “In the time of Augustus Caesar, the good emperor [136] of Rome, who ruled the empire forty-two years, it happened that twenty-seven years after!3 his coronation God sent His angel to a city of Galilee called Nazareth, to a maiden whose name was Mary. And when the angel came before her, he said, ‘May God save you, Mary.’ Then he said that she was full of grace and added, ‘May God be with you. You are blessed above all other women, and the fruit of your womb is blessed.’ When the maiden heard these words, she was afraid and began to think about how this salvation could be. And the angel said to her, ‘Mary, do not be afraid, for the Lord of Heaven has looked at you and given you His grace; and be assured that you will give birth to a son who will be called Jesus. This [137] child will be very powerful, for He will be the Son of God.’ And the maiden asked, ‘Dear lord, how can this happen, for I have never known any man carnally?’ The angel replied, ‘Mary, the Holy Spirit will descend in you, and the power of God on high will be incarnated in your body.’ And the maiden said, ‘May God Our Lord do His will with me as His handmaiden, for I am ready to do His pleasure and His will.’ As soon as she had said this, the Holy Spirit descended within her, and she conceived. When she had carried the fruit to its proper term, she gave birth to a boy whose name was Jesus, just as the angel had told her. This child was of such great glory and power that three kings from the East came to worship Him on the third day after His birth, each one bringing the richest treasure he could find in all his land. And all they had to lead them was a star that appeared as soon as He was born, and that had never been seen before. “When Herod, who was King of Judea, learned that such a child had been born, who would be King and Lord of the Jews, he was afraid that He would disinherit him. So he had all the children in the land [138] of Bethlehem under two and a half years old killed, so that one hundred forty-four thousand were killed. In this way Herod thought he would avenge himself against the child. But the Lord on high, who is all-powerful, was well aware of Herod's evil thoughts, and He kept Himself out of the hands of His cruel enemies, who were unable to seize Him. Rather, the Virgin maiden, His mother, took Him to Egypt, where He remained until after Herod’s death, through the counsel of an angel. And when He was brought to Egypt, He gave proof of His arrival in the land, for there was not a temple 124. 1 know the way of and faith in Jesus Christ’s high and holy work and that of the glorious Virgin maiden His mother, for I would be wrong if I undertook something I could not finish” omitted, as in Hucher and Ponceau variants. 13«Twenty-seven years after” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 17 throughout the land of Egypt whose idols did not fall to the ground, and all were broken. “Such were the signs the true God gave in His childhood. After He was brought back from Egypt and grew up, [139] reaching the age of thirty, He was baptized. And then He began to perform miracles openly: He gave sight to the blind; He healed the sick of all infirmities; He made the paralyzed stand up and walk in health; He made the deaf hear clearly; He brought the dead back to life. Such miracles were performed openly by the true God, before the eyes of all the people. After He had done all this in many places, many times over, the Jews became envious and persuaded one of the disciples to take thirty deniers and sell Him. And they seized Him and crucified Him on the wooden cross. Once His soul left His precious body, it descended to Hell and delivered those who had served Him on earth, since the beginning!‘ of the world. “The third day after He had been put in a sepulcher, where I myself put Him after taking Him down from the cross, He was resurrected and left the sepulcher in body and in spirit; and the guards who had been set to keep watch were unable to keep Him from leaving. The sepulcher remained closed just as the Jews had left it when they had it guarded, [140] for they had put a large stone on it, which was found in place. After He was resurrected, He appeared several times to His friends, who were very sorrowful and fearful because of His death. And He performed several miracles before them that convinced them that He was the true God. Having been on earth following His Resurrection, on the fortieth!5 day He ascended to Heaven in the sight of His disciples. And the eleventh day after His ascension, He was sent by the Holy Spirit to be seated on His Father’s right, next to Him, where He will remain forever.” To this Evalach responded, “What! You thus maintain that this God whom you hold to be so powerful that you call Him Lord of all things had a father and a mother?”!® “Truly,” said Joseph, “I say it and bear witness that it is true He had both parents.” “Since He had both father and mother,” said Evalach, “He was not born without the union of man and woman, for a child cannot be born of a woman if he is not engendered in her through [141] relations with a man. And if a child were conceived otherwise than through carnal relations, it would be against nature and custom.” “King,” said Joseph, “I will show you clearly and teach you how He was conceived without carnal relations and how He was born to the maiden without harming her maidenhead.” “This proof,” said the king, “will I hear willingly.” “It happened,” said Joseph of Arimathea, “that the Savior of the world saw the ills that were multiplying on earth. And He saw that the bad and the good had the same 14Reginning,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “ordering”. 15«Portieth,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “fifteenth”). 16“and a mother” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 18 reward, !? for those who had always done good went to hell in the same way as those who had committed every evil. And the sweet Lord thought that it was not right that the bad be equal to the good, nor that worthy men pay for the folly of the bad. Thus He said that He would redeem man from the pain of hell. So He sent His Son to earth to experience everything that belongs to human nature, except sin. And though He was clothed in carnal and mortal flesh, He remained [142] God, just as He had always been, but He took on what He had never had: mortality. Because the Father saw that He could not redeem everyone except!8 through a man who seemed like other men, He sent His Son, who was pure and free of sin, with which all others were defiled and sullied, for it was not reasonable or right that a sinner redeem the other sinners; once they were defiled, how could they protect or deliver another? But because the Son of God was pure and clean of all sin and all baseness, He had the power to redeem man’s everlasting death by the death of!9 His glorious body.” “My word,” said Evalach, “I think you are drunk, because you admit one thing and then deny it afterwards. For you still affirm that your God had a father, and yet you say that He was not engendered through carnal relations. This cannot happen, and it does not seem either right or true.” “King,” said Joseph, “you have agreed to listen to me prove how He could be born of a woman’s body without uniting with a man, and without [143] harming the maidenhead of His mother, who remained a maiden both before and afterwards; and how He could have a father without having been engendered carnally.” ‘T must listen to all this without fail,” declared the king, “and I will gladly listen to it if you can explain it, but you do not seem to be learned enough to be able to prove something of such great importance, for it is against nature and custom, and it has never been heard of before.” “King,” said Joseph, “listen now, and I will show you how He was born of the maiden without carnal relations with a man. I will show you this, but first you will hear how He had a father and whose son He was without carnal procreation. It is true that there is only one God, who made everything out of nothing. He was always God and will always be God, for He never had a beginning, nor can He ever have an end. Those who are true believers and believe with all their hearts call Him the Father. But even if they call Him Father, they are not true believers if they do not believe it in their heart just as the mouth says it; because no matter how the mouth may speak, it is in the heart that good and bad faith arise. This God is called Father because the One I am telling you about is [144] His Son, for He engendered Him before the beginning of all time. He did not engender Him carnally, but spiritually. The Father was never made or created or engendered, nor was He ever Wettad the same reward,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “were shamed”). 18 xcept” supplied to clarify the sense. 19«py the death of” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail born. Nor was the Son ever made or created,2° but He was engendered, as you have heard and I have told you, by spiritual means. And then He was born to the Virgin, but this birth was not as a god but as a human. By this you can and should understand that the birth through His mother was carnal, but the birth through His Father was spiritual. Through His mother He was mortal, for the part that was taken from the mother died. But through the Father He was eternal, for the part He had from His Father never suffered death; this is the divinity that will never fail Him but will endure without end. “Now you have heard how the Son was engendered and born to the Father spiritually, and how He was born carnally to the mother. Next, you will hear how the maidenhead of the glorious Virgin maiden who was His mother remained as intact afterwards as before, without being harmed or broken. But first I will tell you about a person who comes from those two and who was the same as and equal to the two other people. This is the Holy Spirit?! [145] “The Holy Spirit was never made or created or engendered by the Father or the Son or any other, but came from both of them. The Holy Spirit is a comfort, a counselor, and a purifier of the heart and of the mind. The Holy Spirit made the prophets speak what they said about God. They did not know what they were saying, any more than an insane man can control all the words that fly out of his mouth; and the Holy Spirit worked all these things in them. He who is a true believer believes in and worships the Holy Spirit, just as he does the Father and the Son. “The Father is a perfect God in and of Himself and has perfect, complete, and eternal divinity, without end and without beginning. The Son is also a perfect and eternal God and is the same as the Father in all things through His divinity, but through His humanity He is lower than the Father. For the Father is eternal, through and through, but through His humanity the Son is mortal. The Holy Spirit is a perfect God complete in itself, and through its divinity it is equal to the Father and the Son. Thus the Father is God, and the Son is God, and the Holy Spirit is God. Nevertheless, they [146] are not three Gods, for though they are three things as persons, they are still not three Gods, but one. Though the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit are three persons, nevertheless they are only one thing in nature and divinity and power. The Father is as powerful as” the Son and the Holy Spirit; and the Son is as great in divinity as the Father and the Holy Spirit; and the Holy Spirit is of equal greatness to the Father and the Son.?3 Thus these three persons come from one God, and they go back to one God. The one can do as the three, and the three are naturally none other than one. True believers call the three persons the Trinity, and God alone the Unity. 20-Nor... Ponceau. created” supplied from Hucher variants and 21This is the Holy Spirit,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “But now listen, and I will tell you”). 22Powerful as” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 23“and the Holy Spirit is of equal greatness . . . Son” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail In one they worship the three persons as one God alone and the one God as three persons. “These three were kept in mind at the beginning of the world, when the Father created all things, saying, ‘Let us make man in Our semblance and image.’ The Father said these words to His dear Son, for He knew very well, as the One who has all things before His eyes, that the Son would undergo the anguish [147] of death in order to redeem man from the great sorrows into which he would fall by his misdeed. Because of this, the Father called on the person of the Son to become the noble thing that man should be—man, whom He wished to create only in order to replace the tenth legion of angels, who had been exiled from Heaven because of their pride. “When man broke His Creator’s commandment by eating the fruit on the advice and counsel of the woman, whom the devil deceived, he was immediately exiled from paradise. And his Lord, who had made him in His semblance, rebuked him with cruel words for the great happiness that he had possessed and had now lost through his misdeed. He announced the great harm he would suffer, saying to him, ‘Because you obeyed your wife, whom I gave to you, more than Me, who made you, you and your descendants will always suffer pain, for henceforth you will eat your bread in travail and in sweat.24 And you,’ he said to the woman, ‘will give birth to your children in sorrow and in pain.’* Since then He has kept this promise to every man and woman, as well as to all those [148] who descended from the man, for no one will ever enter this world, no matter how powerful, who will be free from travail and pain from the very hour of his entry, until the hour he leaves. And woman will always give birth with more pain than her heart could imagine or her tongue express. “The sin of the first man was paid for so severely by his descendants that no matter how much good anyone did in his life, his soul went to hell as soon as it left the body, until] the Son of God no longer wished to allow this great sorrow. Considering that man had paid enough for his offense and that henceforth it was high time to call him back in pity and mercy, He descended to earth in order to free man from the terrible fate he suffered because of his misdeed. When He descended to earth, He did not want to seek man in hell immediately or take him out by force without explanation. Rather, for his sake, He entered a prison that was very small and narrow” to lodge a man as noble and important as He who was Lord of all things; this was the womb of the Virgin maiden. “After He had been in this prison for nine months, [149] He left at the right time to be born, just as human nature required. Nevertheless He was neither conceived nor born as human nature required. Human nature requires, without fail, that man be conceived and born. By being conceived and born, He fulfilled human nature. But human nature requires more. It requires that man be born in pain and sorrow and that he be conceived by man and woman. In this way He did not fulfill human nature, for He 244and in pain, because of the commandment you trespassed” omitted, as in Hucher variants and Ponceau. 25See Genesis III, 16-17. 26Narrow,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “estoit, 66, was” 12 was not conceived by union between a man and a woman,2’ but by the incarnation of the Holy Spirit, who descended through the maiden’s ear into the glorious vessel of her blessed womb. In this vesse] that the Holy Spirit came to purify, the Son of God was lodged, and thus He was born in so holy a way that the maidenhead of the glorious mother was never harmed, either at entry or departure. Just as the sunbeam shines through clear water so that it is seen down to the bottom, without either dividing or parting the nap of the water, which remains as clear as it was before, likewise the Son of God entered the maiden’s womb without breaking or damaging her maidenhead.*8 In His conception there were three things that had never been heard of before in any conception by man and woman.”? [150] The first is that He was conceived without sin. The second is that He was conceived without carnal relations. The third is that His mother, who was a maiden, never lost her maidenhead, either at conception or at birth. Rather, He who chose her to be His mother left it as healthy and as whole as He had found it. At His birth was broken the malediction put on the first woman, when it was said, ‘You will give birth to your children in pain,’ for when He was born, there was never any pain or anguish. The Son of God was conceived and born in this marvelous way. “However, when He was born, He had not yet redeemed man, as He had come to do; rather, He lived on earth for thirty-three years in the form of man among other men. After thirty years,°° He was the first to receive our salvation, that is, baptism, for He had Himself baptized by a man He considered to be the closest to God of all those born of deflowered woman; this was Saint John the Baptist. The third year after His baptism He underwent the anguish of death, for He wished to experience everything belonging to human nature, with the sole exception of sin. After [151] undergoing the great anguish of death, for the love of man, He Himself descended to hell and delivered all those men and women who had done His works during their lives. Such great love did God show man, for He did not wish to redeem him from the sorrows he suffered by anyone’s death but His own. Now you have heard how He had a father without being engendered carnally, and how He was born of the maiden without damaging or ruining her maidenhead.” Then Evalach spoke and said to him, “You tel] me things that neither you nor anyone else can prove. Nor do they seem in any way reasonable, for you say that He was not engendered in the woman who gave birth to Him and that she was a maiden and that her maidenhead was never harmed. Next you say that the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit are only one God, and yet each of the three is God by Himself.” 27-T this way .. . woman” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 28and without relations between a man and a woman” omitted here following Hucher variants and Ponceau. 29In His conception... woman” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 30“In the form of man.... years” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 20 “King,” said Joseph, “you have remembered it well, just as I told it to you, and I still maintain it.” “Indeed,” said the king, “you maintain what you want, but you tell me nothing that, it would seem, can be true.” Thereupon, the king sent for all the learned men in the city. Once they had come, Joseph began to speak to them, setting forth all the forceful articles of faith from Scripture, so [152] that everyone was astounded. Finally they said they would not respond to him further until®! the next day. Thus the meeting ended. The king called Joseph and asked his name. And he said he was called Joseph of Arimathea. The king looked at his bare feet; seeing that they were very handsome, it struck him that this was a man who had lived in great comfort. He thought to himself that he was of noble birth; so at once he took great pity on him. Then he addressed him, saying, “Joseph, from tonight on I will give you lodgings and everything you ask for to make you comfortable. And tomorrow you will speak to me. I have very willingly listened to you tonight, and I will listen to you more willingly tomorrow, for I will have more time than I have had today.” “My lord,” said Joseph, “I am not alone in this city. I have seventy-five men and women with me, and you can be sure that there is not one who, for the love of Jesus Christ, has not left worldly riches behind. Thus, as you can see, they follow me [153] without gold or silver, in poverty. Nevertheless, though they travel in poverty, they will not die of hunger, for the richness of the glorious Lord in whom they believe satisfies them so that they have their fill of any worldly food their hearts desire.”32 Therefore, the king said that he wanted to see them. Joseph called to them where they had stopped and gathered outside and had them come before the king. When they king saw them all barefoot and so poorly dressed, he took great pity on them, in the terms of his faith. He addressed them, asking why they endured such great suffering as to go barefoot and be so poorly and so basely dressed. Then Joseph’s son, who was called Josephus, responded, saying, “King, we endure this suffering for love of the glorious Son of God, who suffered such great anguish for us that His body and its members were pierced basely and shamefully, and who was spat upon and mistreated and crucified between two thieves. He suffered all this for us, of His own free will and [154] volition. What service could we give Him in return??3 If we underwent crucifixion as He did, we would not have repaid Him enough, because He initiated goodness. Surely it is right that the One who initiates goodness, passing it from the highest to the lowest, that is, from God to man, be rewarded doubly. Thus, we would have to die twice for Him, if we wished to reward His goodness.*4 Certainly, he 3ltntil” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer, 32The text is confused here. A literal translation would give “they will not die of hunger, but are so satisfied by the richness. ...” 33 “In return” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 34 “Doubly. ... goodness” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail who could die one hundred times over, with the understanding that his death would be at the pleasure and will of the glorious Lord, so that He considered His goodness well rewarded, would be fortunate.” When the king heard the young man speak so well, he asked Joseph who he was and what his name was. And Joseph told him, “My lord, he is my son, and his [155] name is Josephus.” The king then asked if he knew how to read and write.*> Joseph replied that no clerk of his age knew more than he did and that he spoke eloquently, as he had heard. Then the king called one of his officers and ordered him to have Joseph and his group lodged at the most comfortable hostel in town and to see to it that neither he nor his followers lacked anything. Thus they separated that day, and Joseph and his group were taken to* a splendid inn. That night they had very good food in great plenty, and very good beds, which they had greatly desired, for they had not slept in beds since leaving their homes. 5. Evalach’s Vision.! Here I will leave off speaking to you of Joseph and his companions, and we will tell you about King Evalach, who lay in his room, pensive and troubled by two thoughts. The first was the defense of his land against the Egyptians, who had ravaged it terribly and who had defeated and routed him. He was so worried about this that he did not know what to do. He was very much afraid of losing his land and all his worldly honor, because his nobles had all failed him. The other thing that troubled him was what Joseph had told him—that he [156] would cause him to overcome all his enemies and win great and everlasting joy, if he trusted his advice. But nothing, no matter how much he thought about it, could make him understand how the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit were three persons and yet only one. Nor could he believe that the Virgin had conceived and given birth without harming her maidenhead. He could not understand either of these two things. While he was thinking about these two things* —first one and then the other—a vision came to him. In the middle of his house he saw the trunk of a tall tree, but he could not perceive what kind of tree it was, nor of what nature. From it grew three very large, high, straight limbs, all three of the same size, height, and type, the only difference being that the middle one was covered with an ugly, dark bark, while that of the other two was as clear as crystal. Under the first limb, on the right, there were people of all sorts. Two left this group, went up to the ugliest and blackest pit anyone could imagine, and jumped in. [157] 35The king then asked... write” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 36The most comfortable hostel... . taken to” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. Corresponds to Hucher II: 155-162; Sommer I: 27-29; Ponceau §36—40. 2“How the Father. ... two things” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail Once these two were in it, all the others had to follow, despite themselves; they all went and jumped in and disappeared, one after another. After more than half of them had jumped in, some of those who remained ran to the tree® with the ugly bark and began to cut it all around. Once they had done this, they did not stop, but cut into its four branches with augers. After they had thus mutilated it with the wounds cut all around and the holes made with the augers, a stream of blood came forth so great that everyone who was there could bathe in it, until the tree broke apart. Once it had fallen, nothing was left of it except the outer bark, which remained in a pile. But the wood inside, which was more beautiful, noble, and clear than I could tell or imagine, fell with such force that it flung itself inside the pit where the people had jumped. As the king watched, he saw the tree flung back out of the pit, pulling with it many of the people from the pit, who were holding onto the branches all around. After this, the tree returned to its place and put back on the bark it had had before. But it [158] became completely transformed, turning so clear and resplendent that no man who had looked at it before could believe it was the same bark. Next, the king saw that some of the people who had not jumped into the pit were taking the blood that had flowed onto the ground and were washing their bodies. Once they had done so, their appearance and their faces completely changed. Meanwhile, others were taking the branches and leaves of the tree and breaking up some and burning some. This marvel captured the king’s attention for a long time. It was so wonderful that he was awestruck and believed he was truly asleep and that everything he saw was a dream. Finally he turned over again and again, and realized that in reality he was awake and not dreaming. Then he was even more overwhelmed than he had been before and wondered even more what this marvel could be. After pondering it for a long time, he woke up one of his chamberlains who was sleeping before him and whom he trusted, thinking that he would show this to him alone and that no one else would ever learn about it if he could help it. Once he had awakened him very quietly, so that the others who were lying nearby might not hear, he took him aside and led him to the trees.4 When he saw them, he was [159] so overwhelmed that he could not speak for a long time. Seeing the man’s fear, King Evalach took him by the hand and began to comfort him, telling him that he should not be afraid, for no evil could come to him from this. Then he moved toward the trunk, took two candles that were burning before his bed and carried them to the three trees to examine them. At that moment he realized® that there were three of them and that the middle one with the ugly bark grew out of the first tree, while the third one issued from both of the other two. 3The text purposely shifts from singular to plural the word used to designate the tree(s). 4“Trees,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “room’). 5 Corrected to singular, as in Sommer and Ponceau. 21 Looking up, the king saw that each of the trees® had letters written on it, some in gold and others in azure. The letters on the first tree said, THIS ONE CREATES. Those on the second one said, THIS ONE SAVES, and those on the third tree said, THIS ONE PURIFIES. When the king looked, he saw that all three trees came from a single stem, so artfully that no one could distinguish the beginning, no matter how thoroughly he examined it. And the stem was so tall that no man could see the top, no matter how good his eyesight or how hard he tried. And the interlacing of the three trees was So artful that just when the king thought [160] he had distinguished each of the three from the others, it seemed to him that he saw only one kind of leaves and wood and fruit and that the three trees he had taken to be three separate things were in fact only one thing. Thus he denied what he had decided earlier and was so frightened and puzzled that he did not know what to hold as truth: that it was all one tree or that the entire tree was actually three. While he was thinking about this thing that he was thoroughly unable to understand, he looked toward a wall in one of his rooms, where a marble door was set into the wall so artfully that it was barely possible to perceive there was a door or an entrance,’ no matter how attentively one looked. He did not think that anyone in his household knew about it other than himself. As he looked at the door, he saw a small child, who was very handsome and blond, entering, without opening® the door, which remained closed, just as it was before he entered. After a short time he went back out quickly, just as he had entered, without opening the door. Nor was there any evidence [161] that he had either entered or departed. The king was more astonished by this marvel than he had been by all the others, for he believed that neither God nor anyone else could enter through such a strong door or such strong walls without it being apparent in some way. Then the king began to think very intently. The chamberlain who was with him was so frightened that he did not dare utter a word, but lay overwhelmed on the floor, as if he were dead. The king went to him, lifted him up with his right hand, and asked him if he had seen all these marvels and what he thought of them. The man looked at the king as best he could, and when he was able to speak, he said, “Have mercy, my lord! Don’t speak to me about anything, but take me someplace where I won’t see any other marvels like these, for I could not go on living if I saw them.” Thereupon the king took him and led him into a room to go to bed. And all the while he kept thinking about the marvel he had seen—the child who had entered and left the room through the wall. As he went along thinking about this and marveling in his heart about how this could have happened, he heard a voice say to him, “Evalach, what are you marveling at? Just as the child entered the room before your eyes, and just as he left without opening or breaking down the door, thus did the Savior of the world enter the womb of the Virgin Mary without damaging her maidenhead, and thus did He leave.” 6«Trees,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “branches”). 7 Entrance,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “window’”). Bor closing” omitted, as in Ponceau. ZZ Upon hearing the voice speak, the chamberlain became so frightened that he could not stand up. [162] He fell to the floor in a faint, thinking that the entire palace had certainly fallen on him, so great a noise did the voice make when it spoke. The king himself was so frightened that it is impossible to describe. Nor was there anyone in all the palace—whether man, knight, or servant—who did not wake up,” so much noise and din was there throughout the palace. And when they had asked the king, whom they found up and around, what this could be, the king answered that it had been a thunderbolt. He said this because he did not want any of them to know about his vision other than the man to whom he had showed it. With that the king went back to bed, as did all the others. But he did not close his eyes; he was eager for the day to come, for he wished to speak to Joseph about the vision that had appeared to him. 6. Joseph Prays for Evalach’s Conversion.! Now let us leave the king, and we will tell about Joseph, who was lying in his bed very pensive and anxious about how he might convert King Evalach to Jesus Christ’s faith. He thought that if the king was not now on the verge of believing, he never would be, for he desperately needed Jesus Christ’s help and wise men’s advice, because he was about to [163] lose the best part or all of his land, most of his noblemen having failed him in his great need. Joseph was thinking so intently about this that he could not sleep; all he did was think. After lying there a long time, neither sleeping or resting, he jumped out of bed. He dropped to the ground on his bare knees; sighing deeply from the heart and weeping, he began a prayer, as you will hear. “Good Lord God, all-powerful Father, source of comfort and abundant mercy, who, through the mouth of Moses, Your holy minister, spoke this phrase to the people of Israel: ‘Israel, if you wish to do what I ask of you, you will neither establish a new God nor worship a foreign God, for I am your God, whom you must worship, who delivered you from the authority of Pharaoh, who held you in slavery’; good Lord God, just as it is true that there is no other God than You, and that one should worship no other, [164] truly demonstrate Your great power and Your great mercy here to this sinner king and to the others of this city, who have gone astray from the truth so that they do not know their Creator, but worship images of stone and wood that cannot help them. They have put their faith in them, believing that they will defend them from evil, while in fact they lead them to everlasting death in hell, which will be eternal if they do not return to the right way and the right faith and come back to Your mercy. “Good Lord, glorious King of all things, who, in order to save the world that was perishing, deigned to undergo the anguish of death on the cross where I saw You nailed; Lord, who by Your great power, delivered me safe and *Did not wake up,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “was not astonished”), Corresponds to Hucher II: 162-168; Sommer I: 29-30; Ponceau §41—43. The History of the Holy Grail sound from the prison where I remained for forty-two years without ever tasting any earthly food; glorious Lord, full of pity, who saved King David, Your servant, from Goliath the giant, who had done so much harm to Your people; Lord God everlasting, without beginning and without end, who protected Daniel Your prophet in the pit where he was put among the lions; who pardoned glorious Mary Magdalene for her sins in the house of Simon the leper; who kept Susannah, Joachim’s wife,* safe against the false witness that the two elders® bore against her; Lord, glorious spiritual Father, who delivered the sons of Israel from Pharaoh’s slavery [165] and led them across the Red Sea on dry land and into the desert, where You did more for them than they deserved, for You filled them with everything their hearts desired, while they did not keep from committing every act of perfidy before You,* but angered You several times, and nevertheless, You delivered them from all their tribulations and put their enemies under their feet; Lord, full of mercy, just as we believe truly that You did these things and that there is no other God than you alone, verily send counsel quickly to King Evalach, who is a sinner so lost that he cannot be brought back to the way of truth if You in Your great power do not send him the desire and the will, by filling him with Your Holy Spirit, who counsels and comforts the lost. “Lord, who told me, I who am Your servant, when I left my native land by Your command, that You would refuse nothing that I asked of You in good faith, as long as I wished to do Your will loyally, now hear therefore the prayer that Your servant requests of You here, and answer it according to Your mercy and Your great power. Do it not for me, good Lord God, but to glorify and raise Your name and to show the people that You alone are the very Holy [166] God who has power and authority over all creatures. Glorious Lord God, now it is right that You return to Holy Church what You promised her, for You must glorify her and make her grow throughout the world. It is now the time and the place for her to be glorified and increased; and may Your holy name be exalted in this beautiful lost city that sorely needs counsel and help.” Thus Joseph was in tears and prayers during much of the night, on his knees, completely nude. After finishing his prayer, he heard a voice say, “Joseph, get up, for your words have been heard and received by your Creator. You may be sure that King Evalach will soon receive My faith, for tonight he has seen some of My proofs—marvelous ones— and he will send for you in the morning so that you can explain what he saw and heard during the night. In the morning, as soon as dawn appears, you and your followers are each to come to pray to Me, and you will see a new rule that I have not yet given to you, for I will consecrate your son Josephus and make him a high minister—a priest. I will give him My flesh and My blood to watch over, and thus I will give as much [167] to him as to you when you took Me 2“Joachim’s wife,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “and Joachim”). 3“Eiders,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “young men”). 4“For You filled them... You” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail down from the cross and carried Me to the sepulcher in your arms, after removing Me from the humiliation where they had put Me. This authority will I give to your son Josephus. And all those who receive such orders from now on will receive them from him throughout all the lands where I lead you and your seed.” Thereupon the voice left off speaking and became silent, and Joseph remained very happy and joyful about what he had heard. After a while he went back to bed with his wife Elyab. However, they did not lie together in the way of lustful people, but as people full of religion, for they had never lain together since leaving their country by Jesus Christ’s order. Such frailty, from which the entire human lineage was conceived, never inflamed them, so that they were never led to suffer the misery of the body and have a carnal relationship together as nature requires. This way was not theirs; rather, they were both so alight with the supreme love of the Savior that no desire could come from this quarter. Nor did they have this desire when they engendered? Galahad, their last child, by the commandment [168] of Our Lord God, who ordered them to prepare with their seed a new fruit with which He would fill the land where He wished to lead them. By this commandment Galahad was engendered. When this came about, they did not unite through lustful desire, but to accomplish the commandment of Our Lord, who had ordered Joseph to sow his seed. From Galahad issued the holy lineage, many of whom were holy and religious men during their lives, and who glorified the name of our Lord Jesus Christ as best they could and honored the land of fair Britain, which is now called® England, and the other countries around, with their precious bodies that repose there, just as this chronicle will recount in the words that come after this.” Now we will speak of Joseph; therefore, we will leave his descendants until the time and place comes when one should tell about them. 7. Josephus’s Investiture.! The story says that in the morning, as soon as Joseph saw dawn appear, he and his people arose and came to worship before the ark. When they were all kneeling? before it, they heard a loud noise from above; at the same time they felt the earth tremble forcefully beneath them. The place where they were lodged and were worshiping was a [169] palace, called the Spiritual Palace. Daniel the prophet had given it this name, when he returned from battle with King Nebuchadnezzar, who had captured him along with other Jews and taken him to Babylon. As he returned, Daniel went through this city; when he came to the palace, he saw 5That no desire. ... engendered” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 6«Britain and” omitted, as in Ponceau. 7See Chapter 38. 1 Corresponds to Hucher II: 168-197; Sommer I: 30-42; Ponceau §44-57. 2“All kneeling,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “venut,” “had come”). 23 Hebrew letters written on the door in charcoal that said this palace was spiritual. It was the custom to use this name; it never changed, and as long as the palace stands it will be called spiritual. But before Joseph stayed there the people of the city had never known or heard why it was called this, and then they learned how and for what reason. Immediately after the ground had trembled beneath the Christians who were praying in the palace, just as you have heard, the Holy Spirit descended before each one of them, in the semblance of a flash of fire. They looked at one another, marveling, and saw the flash of fire enter one other’s mouth. None of them said a word; rather, [170] they thought they were all bewitched because of the fire they saw entering their bodies. Thus they remained awhile without saying a word, so afraid were they, until something came‘ through there just like a soft and gentle breeze, giving off such a wonderful fragrance that it seemed to them they were amidst all the good spices in the world. After the arrival of this good wind, they heard a voice speak aloud to them, just as you will be able to hear, saying, “Listen to Me, My new sons, I am God, your Lord® and your heavenly Father, who have fought for you and won you against all the world through My flesh, which I suffered to be broken in order to redeem you, and through My blood, which I was willing to shed. Because I have shown you such great love as to redeem you with My flesh and blood, which no earthly father would ever have done for his son, you owe Me, it would seem, greater love than any earthly son has ever given his father. Now listen therefore to what God your Lord and Father will say to you. “Listen to this, Christians, you who are the new people of the True Crucified One. I have loved you so much and held you so dear that I have put in you My Holy Spirit, which for love of you I sent to earth, from on high where it was in the glory of My dear Father, who will never die. I [171] have granted you higher honor and nobility than your ancestors in the desert, where for forty years I gave them everything their hearts desired. But I have satisfied you more than them, for I have given you My Holy Spirit, which I never gave them. Take care therefore not to fall into their wickedness, for I did only good to them and they did only evil. Though they honored Me with their mouths, they never loved Me with their hearts. And in the end they made this clear, for when I came to summon them to My great feast and to the great joy of the wedding I wanted to celebrate between Holy Church and Me, they did not deign to come, nor did they ever wish to acknowledge Me, who had done only good to them. Because I came among them humbly, they said that I was not their God. And they had such great contempt for the fact that I dared to tell them I was their God that they seized Me then like a thief in hiding and broke My flesh and pierced My limbs and My body. In return for the great honors I had done them they rewarded Me with spite and disdain, and for the sweet drinks I had given them in the desert they gave Me on the cross the vilest and most agonizing drink they could find. [172] After S«spirit” omitted, as in Hucher variants and Ponceau. 4“Something came,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “they saw”). 5 “God, your Lord” supplied from Ponceau. aa all this, they gave Me death, though I had given them earthly life and promised them eternal life. Thus I found them, to whom I had always been a gentle Father, to be through and through cruel and terrible stepsons. “Take care not to resemble that cruel lineage, for it is your duty to change your ways from those of your former life.® If you act toward Me as My loyal sons, I will act toward you’ as your loyal and gracious Father, and I will do more for you than I did for My prophets who served Me in the past with good hearts and minds. If they had My Holy Spirit with them, you too will have it. And you will have yet another thing, for you will have My body in your company every day, just as I was bodily on earth® with My apostles who loved Me greatly. Now hold firmly to your faith, for I will watch over you and guide you wherever you may go, [173] with the difference that I was seen on earth, but now you will no longer see Me in such a semblance. “Now come forward, Josephus, My servant, for you are worthy of being a minister, and of having such a high thing in your keeping as the flesh and blood of your Savior. I have tested you and found you to be purer and cleaner of? all natural sins than any mortal flesh could conceive. Because I know you and what you are better than you do yourself—for I know you to be untouched by greed, free of pride, and pure of all wickedness, without any share in lust and filled with chastity—because of this I wish you to receive from My hand the greatest dignity any mortal man can have. None other will receive it from My hand; rather, henceforth those who have it will receive it from you.” Thereupon Josephus stepped forward, trembling and fearful. He began to shake and weep very hard and thank his Creator, who called him to receive such a great honor, which in his opinion no mortal man could be worthy of or deserve through anything he had ever done, unless God alone granted it through His grace. When he came [174] up to the ark, Our Lord said to him, “Open the door, and be not afraid of what you will see.” In dread and fear Josephus opened the door of the ark. Upon doing so, he saw a man dressed in a robe a hundred times redder and more hideous than fiery lightning, and whose feet, hands, and face were exactly the same. Around this man were five angels all dressed in the same kind of robe and with the same appearance. Each of them had six wings that seemed to be made of burning fire, and each held in his left hand a bloody sword. The first held in his right hand a large bloody cross, but it was impossible to tell of what wood it was made. And the second held in! his right hand three bloody nails, from which red blood still seemed to be dripping. The third angel held in his right hand a lance whose iron tip and wooden shaft were likewise covered with blood up to the ®The text is unclear here; a literal reading would be: “it is your duty to change the ways of those whose lives you change.” TAs My loyal sons... you” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 8Tust as... earth” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 9“Of,” as in Sommer and Ponceau (Hucher has “than”). 10Held in his left hand a bloody sword... .. And the second held in” supplied from Hucher variants. The History of the Holy Grail point where the angel grasped it. The fourth angel held right before the face of the red man a sponge that was also thoroughly tinted with blood. [175] And the fifth angel held in his hand a kind of whip, which was all bloody and seemed to be made of twisted wands tied together. Each one of these angels held a scroll with writing that said, THESE ARE THE ARMS BY WHICH THE JUDGE WHO IS HERE VANQUISHED AND OVERCAME DEATH. And the man around whom the angels were standing had white letters in Hebrew written in the middle of his forehead that said, IN THIS SEMBLANCE I WILL COME TO JUDGE ALL THINGS ON THE CRUEL AND TERRIBLE DAY. This is what the writing said. And it seemed that red bloody dew flowed from his feet and hands all the way down to the ground. It seemed to Josephus that the ark was four times wider than it had been before,!! for the man he saw was inside as well as the five angels. He was so astonished at the marvel he saw that he did not know what to say, so he bent his head toward the ground and began to think very intently. As he pondered with bowed head, the voice called him. He looked up and saw the man crucified on the cross that the angel held; the nails he had seen held by the other angel were on the man’s feet [176] and hands, while the sponge was pressed against His chin, and he seemed to be a man who was surely in the anguish of death. After that Josephus saw that the lance he had seen in the hand of the third angel was embedded in the side of the crucified man; down the handle dripped a stream composed neither completely of blood nor of water, and yet it seemed to be of blood. Under the feet of the crucified man he saw the bowl that his father Joseph! had placed in the ark; it seemed to him that the blood from the feet of the crucified man was dripping into this bowl, and that it was already nearly full. It appeared to Josephus that it was about to run over and that the blood would spill. Then it seemed to him that the man was about to fall to the ground; that the two arms had already slipped from the nails, so that the body was falling, with the head down. Seeing this, he tried to run forward to lift Him up. But when he was about to step inside the ark, he saw the five angels with their swords at the entrance of the door. Three of them held the points of the swords out against his coming, while the other two lifted theirs on high and made as if to strike him. Despite this, he still tried to go past, so much did he desire to raise up Him who he believed was his God and his Savior. But when he tried to put the other foot inside, he could not, but was obliged [177] to stop, for he was held so strongly from behind by his arms that he could not go forward. He looked and saw that two angels were holding him, each with one hand, while with the other hand one held an ampulla, and the other,!* a censer and a box. When his father Joseph saw him look back, he was astonished that he had been so long at the door of the ark without saying or doing more and wondered what he could Had been before,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “seemed”). 127 oseph,” as in Sommer and Ponceau (Hucher has “Josephus”). 13«One held an ampulla, and the other,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “each held an ampulla, and in the other [hand] .. .”). The History of the Holy Grail have been looking at so long. And then Joseph rose from where he was in prayer and went toward his son. When Josephus saw him nearby, he put out his hand and began to cry, “Ah, good father Joseph, do not touch me, lest you take me away from the great glory where I am, for I am so illumined with spiritual revelations that I am no longer on earth.” Hearing these words, Joseph was so full of anguish and so eager to see this marvel that he paid no attention to any warning, but fell on his knees before the door of the ark and looked. Inside the ark he saw a small altar covered with white cloths; on top of all of them was a splendid red cloth, which was as beautiful as satin. On! this red cloth, at one end of the altar, Joseph saw three nails dripping with blood and a bloody lance-tip.!4 At the other end was the dish he had brought and in the middle of the altar, there was a splendid gold vessel, in the form of a chalice with a gold cover on top. He could not see the cover very well, nor what was on it, 15 for it was covered with a white cloth so that only [178] the front was visible. Beyond the altar he saw a very beautiful hand holding a completely red cross, but he did not see the person to whom the hand belonged. And before the altar he saw two hands holding two candles, but he did not see the body to which the hands belonged. While he was looking inside, he listened and heard the door of a room fly open. He turned his eyes toward the room and saw two angels come forth, one of whom held a stoup full of water, and the other an aspergillum in his right hand. After these two came two others carrying in their hands two large gold vessels just like basins. Around their necks they had two beautiful!® stoles like none any mortal man had ever possessed. Once the two had come out of the room, three others came after them, carrying three gold censers shining with rich precious stones so that they seemed to be on fire. And with the other hand each one held a box full of incense and myrrh and many other precious spices, which gave off such a sweet scent that the house seemed to be filled with the sweetest fragrance any man had ever smelled. Next, he saw another one come forth with writing on his [179] forehead, saying, I AM CALLED THE POWER OF THE SUPREME LORD. This one carried over his hands a cloth as green as emeralds. And under this cloth was the holy dish. To the right of this angel there was another one carrying!” a book of Gospels. Such a rich and beautiful book would never have been seen by the eyes of any earthly man, if this one did not exist. And on the left there was an angel carrying a sword whose pommel was gold and whose hilt was!8 silver, while the entire blade was as red as a flame of burning fire. Once these three had come forth, behind 13a“On ,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “under”). 1449 ance-tip,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “iron lance”). 15«Op it,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “under it”). 16“Reautiful,” as in Sommer and Ponceau (Hucher has “good”). “One carrying” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 18Whose hilt was” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 3) them came three others carrying three burning candles, which were of all the colors that mortal tongue could name. After that Joseph looked and saw Jesus Christ come forth in the same form as He had appeared to him in the jail where he had been imprisoned, when He left the sepulcher in body and in spirit on the day of the Resurrection. In this semblance Joseph saw Him come forth, except that now He had put on the vestments that a priest must wear when he intends to celebrate the Sacrament of Our Lord. And the first angel, who was carrying the aspergillum, dipped into the water and [180] went along sprinkling it on the Christians who were there. None of them saw the one who was sprinkling the water, except Joseph and his son Josephus. These two saw him clearly. Then Joseph took his son by the hand and said to him, “Dear son, do you know yet who this man is who leads such a beautiful retinue with him and who walks in such honor?” And Josephus replied, “Dear father, I know truly that this is the One about whom David said in a verse in the Psalter, that God ordered His angels to watch over Him wherever He might go; no man could be served and honored by angels as He is.”!9 At that moment the entire group passed before them. It went all around the interior of the palace, and everywhere it went, the angel sprinkled water from the aspergillum. When it came to the ark, all of them knelt before Jesus Christ, and then before the ark.?° After going around the entire interior of the house, the group returned to the ark. Then Our Lord called Josephus. And Josephus responded, “Lord, here is Your servant ready to do Your will.” And Our Lord said to him, “Do you know what the water that you have seen sprinkled here symbolizes? It is the purification of the places the evil spirit has frequented, for this house has always been the devil’s lodging. It must therefore [181] be purified and cleansed before My service can be performed here. And yet it was cleansed and purified as soon as the Holy Spirit, which I sent to you, descended. But I have sprinkled it with this water because I want you to do likewise in all the places where My name is to be called and My service performed.” And Josephus said to Him, “Lord, how can the water purify if it is not purified beforehand?” “You will bless the water of purification and the water of baptism in the same way,” said Our Lord, “by making over it the sign of the great redemption, that is, the sign of the true cross, and you will say that this shall be in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. And for him who believes in the power of this benediction, no evil spirit will ever reside in a place where this water is sprinkled, because all the devil fears is hearing the conjuration of the Holy Trinity and seeing the sign of the cross. That is how his power was destroyed, and that is why I am teaching it to you and telling you to act in this way. “Henceforth,” said Our Lord to Josephus, “I want you to receive the honor I promised you, which is the 19¢¢e Psalm LXXXXI, 11. 20-Before the ark,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “the other”). 26 sacrament of My flesh and blood. And all My people will see it openly, for I want them to bear witness before kings and [182] counts that they have seen the holy unction®! I have placed on you in order to establish you as sovereign pastor, after Me, to watch over My new sheep, that is, the sovereign bishop to keep My New Law, Christianity. Just as Moses, My new servant, was@* minister and leader of the sons of Israel, through the power I gave him, in the same way you will be the guardian of this people, for they will learn from your mouth how they should serve Me, and how to maintain the New Law and keep to My faith.” Then Our Lord took Josephus by the right hand and pulled him close to Him, so that all the Christians there saw clearly His appearance and the angels who were around Him. Then a white-haired man came before the ark, wearing on his shoulders the richest vestments any earthly man had ever worn. After him came forth another who was marvelously handsome and young, carrying a crosier in one hand and in the other a pure white miter. The crosier was also white, while the handle was red. After these two had come forth, they dressed [183] Josephus in all these vestments: first the sandals, and then the other things a bishop should have. Once he was dressed, they sat him on a throne that was ready there through the will of Our Lord, who wanted to make him comfortable”? in every way. This throne was so noble that no man who saw it could say for sure of what it could be made. All those who made splendid things, many of whom later came to see it, said that in all the world there were no rich stones like those in the throne. And those who see it now say the same thing, for it has never left the city, but has been kept as a relic since Josephus left. Nor has any man ever sat in it since then without dying upon standing up, or without being wounded before standing up. And later a wonderful miracle occurred, when the city was taken by a Saracen king who was making war on the land. After finding the throne and seeing it to be so splendid, he said that he prized it more than the entire city and that he would take it to Egypt, the land where he was king. There [184] he would sit on it every day that he wore his crown. But when he tried to carry it away, he was not able to, for neither he nor any man could move it from the place where it was. And he said that he would sit on it anyway, even if he could not carry it away. As soon as he was seated, Our Lord took such great vengeance that both of his eyes flew out of his head. Thus Our Lord showed that this was not a throne or chair for any mortal man except for the one for whom He had prepared it. And He performed many other miracles there that the story does not speak about here, but will when the time and place come, farther along.*4 When Josephus was seated on the throne, all the angels came before him. And Our Lord anointed and consecrated him in the way a bishop should be, so that all the people 21“And the service” omitted, as in Ponceau and Sommer. 22wWas” supplied from Ponceau. 23Make him comfortable,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “esfalchier,” perhaps a lapsus for “essalchier,” “to honor”?). 24Despite this announcement, the throne is mentioned only once more, briefly (see Chapter 13). The History of the Holy Grail saw it clearly. The unction with which he was anointed was taken from the ampulla® the angel was carrying—the angel who had taken him and held him by the shoulders when he tried to enter the ark, as you heard about earlier. And with this same unction were anointed all the kings from the time Christianity came to England until the time of Pendragon, who was King Arthur’s father. Nor do those who recount the adventures [185] know very well why he was called Pendragon, for it is well known that he was given the name Uther in baptism, but the chronicle of this book will tell farther on very clearly why he was called this, and how this unction was lost when he was about to be crowned.”® Once Josephus was anointed and consecrated, just as you have heard, Our Lord put the crosier in his hand and the miter on his head. And on his finger He put a ring no mortal man could imitate, nor could he describe the power of the stone. Once He had prepared all these things, as you have heard, He called him and said, “Josephus, I have consecrated and anointed you as a bishop, in such dignity as you and My other people who are here have seen. Now I will tell you what these vestments you have put on mean, for no one should wear them if he does not do what the meaning requires. This shoe you have put on means that you must take no step in vain; you should keep your feet from taking the way of wrongdoing, but should go praying, preaching, and helping the helpless—this is the way you must make your feet work, for I want you to keep to the Scripture, which says, ‘Blessed is the man who does not follow the advice of the wicked and who does not [186] take his feet where the traitorous and the sinful go and who does not sit on the throne of destruction, but puts his will and strength into accomplishing the commandments of the law of Our Lord, keeping all his thoughts on this night and day.’2” Your feet should walk in this way, for they should not take any step in vain. “Next I will tell you about the other vestments. The one you have put on over your tunic symbolizes chastity, for this is a virtue through which the soul, when it leaves the body, departs white and clean and pure, thus harmonizing with all the good things of the soul, that is, with all the qualities it contains. Thus, you must first have chastity inside you, in order to make of it the foundation on which to establish all the other virtues. The other vestment on top of it, which is just as white, symbolizes virginity. Just as virginity cannot be in any place unless chastity be in its company, likewise no priest should put this one on top before putting on the one underneath. This other vestment, which covers the head, symbolizes humility, which is contrary to pride, for pride always goes proudly, with its head raised, but humility goes gently and softly, with head bent. The priest should go this way, in great humility, with head bent@&—not like the Pharisee in the temple when he said in prayer, ‘Good Lord God, I thank you for not making me as treacherous as my neighbors,’ but 25“A mpulla,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “lamp”). *6The origin of Uther Pendragon’s name is explained in the Merkin, see Chapter 3. 27See Psalm I, 1-2. 28The priest . .. with head bent” supplied from Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail like [187] the Publican who did not even dare look up, so afraid was he that God might become angry because he was so full of sin; and he was far away from the altar, beating his chest with his fist, saying, ‘God, Lord, have mercy on this sinner.’*9 He who would accomplish the works of humility should take care to act in this way. “Now I will tell you what this next thing, which is green, symbolizes. Neither this one nor the one on top should be put on by a priest unless he is a bishop. The green object symbolizes patience, which will never be vanquished but is always verdant and has the same power at all times. It always wins victory and honor if anyone besets it, for no one can vanquish his enemy as well as through patience. “This other vestment on top of the one that is so white symbolizes justice, for all those who wish to protect Holy Church faithfully uphold justice. Justice is a virtue of such nobility that through it all things are maintained as they should be. Nor will it ever change. And to each one will be rendered what he has deserved; justice favors no one out of love, nor does it disfavor anyone out of hate. Whoever wishes to uphold justice must behave this way. “This band hanging on your left arm signifies abstinence, for the body should be tied to abstinence® just as [188] the arm is tied with this band. One of the great virtues is to be abstinent in the midst of great abundance. This virtue is thus one of the limbs of justice. And if you want to know why this band is on the left arm rather than on the right, I will tell you. It is because the right arm should serve only to dispense, and the left to hold back.3! “Now I have told you about the armband. Next I will tell you about the one around the neck. The one around the neck signifies obedience, for just as the ox bears the plowman’s yoke, you must bear Our Lord God’s yoke, and you must obey His commands just as the ox obeys the plowman.32 This last vestment on top of all the others symbolizes charity, for it is completely red. He who is charitable is warm and red, just like a burning coal, and is desirous and concerned to hold dear what he must, that is, to love God his Lord with all his heart and all his mind, and next, to love his neighbor as himself.33 Charity places the same value on all things and loves all things equally. [189] It considers nothing foreign and likes the neighbor’s things as its own. He who wishes to hold to charity lives in this way. “This crosier you are holding in your hand symbolizes two*4 things, vengeance and mercy: vengeance, because it is pointed at the bottom; mercy, because it is curved on top. For the top part—that is, the bishop?> —must first of all call 295ce Luke XVIII, 9-14. 30“For the body... variants and Ponceau. 3l«Aand the left to hold back” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. abstinence” supplied from Hucher 32"You must bear... plowman” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 33«A5 himself,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “a estroit conseil,” “secretly”?). 34eT Wo,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “three”). 35«That is, the bishop” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 7 the sinner and urge him to confess and lead him by words so that he causes him to confess his sins, to God’s honor and the devil’s shame. Once he has anointed him with his words, so that he has led him to mercy, then he must prick him with the bottom of the staff, that is to say that when the priest has softened the sinner enough to make him acknowledge his Creator and deny the devil, then he must prick him, for he must impose the burden of great penitence. It is pointed and sharp in order to make him expiate in sorrow what was done in joy. Thus the top serves to call to mercy, and the bottom to take vengeance. “Now I will tell you what the ring on your finger symbolizes. It symbolizes marriage, for when the bishop is consecrated, he is joined to Holy Church in marriage, and henceforth he must keep it in health and in sickness as his loyal spouse. [190] And once he has accepted marriage, he must not abandon it, either in prosperity or in adversity, that is to say, either in good times or in bad times. If Holy Church suffers tribulations or misfortunes, he must share in them, for the Gospel says, ‘Blessed are they who bear troubles and difficulties in order to uphold justice.’°° He who wishes to be a loyal spouse to Holy Church must act in this way. And he who acts otherwise is not a loyal spouse but adulterous, for he belies his marriage, which he should watch over faithfully. “Next you should know what this horned hat on your head signifies. It symbolizes confession; that is why it is completely white, for confession is the whitest thing that exists, since it is the purest. No man is ever so filthy or so poisoned with sin that true confession will not make him completely white and pure. And do you know why it has two horns? Because there are two parts in a confession. The first is repentance, and the second is satisfaction. Repentance is when a man comes to the priest and confesses his sin, completely abandoning it, so that he no longer returns to it. This man comes to repentance, but he is not truly [191] confessed until he makes satisfaction. Satisfaction is when a sinner recognizes his sin, does the penance the priest charges him with, and undergoes the suffering sincerely and with good will. This means that no one can be confessed if he does not have the head and the two limbs of confession: the head is to confess his sin; one of the limbs is to keep from sinning, while the other is to complete the penance imposed. Nor can any man be truly confessed if he fails in any one of these three things. Because confession is the highest thing that exists—the one that repairs®’ in one stroke all the injuries and losses—it is symbolized by this hat, which crowns all the vestments. “Now you are anointed and consecrated, and I have given you the order and rank of bishop to teach My people and honor My New Law. I want you to watch over their souls. I will ask you about any I lose through your failings and lay the blame on you, on the great and terrible day when I take vengeance and do justice for every misdeed, when everything hidden in the [192] heart is revealed. And if I find you to be a loyal servant of this small new people, whose souls I entrust to you, I will give you a domain a 36See Matthew V, 10. 37“Repairs,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “receives”). 28 hundred times better, just as the Gospel promises those who leave their property®® for My love.3? Because I commend these souls to you and make you their shepherd, I want you to be their spiritual guard. And I am confiding to Joseph® the care of the body, for I want him to provide and dispense those things the body needs. Now come forward, and you will celebrate the sacrament of My flesh and My blood, so that all My people will see it clearly.” Thereupon Our Lord led Josephus up to the ark so that all the people saw him enter it. And they all saw it grow and become larger so that all were comfortably inside. And they saw the angels come and go before the door. There Josephus celebrated the first sacrament ever done for this people, but it was completed very quickly, for he said only these words, which Jesus Christ said to his disciples at the Last Supper: “Take4! this and eat it; this is My flesh, which for you and many other people will be delivered over to agony and torment.” Likewise, he said about the wine, “Take this and drink it all, for this is the blood of My New Law, My very own, [193] which will be shed for you, in remission of your sins.”42 These words were said by Josephus over the bread he found prepared on** the paten covering the chalice; and the bread immediately became flesh, and the wine, blood. Then Josephus saw clearly that he was holding between his two hands a body just like that of a child, and it seerned to him that the blood he saw in the chalice had fallen from the child’s body.“4 Seeing this frightened him so much that he did not know what to do. So he remained silent and began to sigh and weep in great anguish because of his great fear. Then Our Lord said to him, “You must break apart what you are holding so that there are three pieces.” Josephus replied, “Oh, Lord, have mercy on your servant, for my heart could not bear to break apart such a beautiful figure.” And Our Lord said to him, “If you do not obey My commandment, you will have no part in My heritage.” Then Josephus took the body and, putting the head to one side, broke it off from the trunk as easily as if the flesh of the child were cooked like meat when it has been forgotten on [194] the fire; next, fearfully, he broke the rest into two parts. As he began to separate the parts, all the angels before the altar fell to their knees on the ground. They remained there until Our Lord spoke and said to Josephus, “What are you waiting for? Take what is before you and eat it, for this is your salvation.” When Josephus heard Him, he knelt and beat his chest and cried for mercy, weeping about all his sins. 38Those... property” supplied from Hucher variants, Sommer, and Ponceau. 39See Matthew XIX, 29, and Mark XX, 30. 40“Toseph,” as in Sommer and Ponceau (Hucher has “Josephus”). 41 Take,” asin Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “come”). 42See Matthew XXVI, 26; Mark XIV, 22; Luke XXII, 19; First Corinthians XI, 23. 43«On,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “under”). 44“And it seemed ... body” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail When he stood up again, all he saw before him on the paten was a piece in the semblance of bread. He took it, raised it on high, and after giving thanks to his Creator, opened his mouth to put it inside. He looked and saw that it was still an entire body. When he started to pull it back,*® he could not, for he felt that it was being put inside his mouth before he could close it. After he had eaten it, it seemed to him. that all the sweet and delectable things one’s tongue could name had entered his body. Next he received part of the holy consecrated drink that was in the chalice. Once he had done this, he saw an angel take the paten and the chalice and put them both on the holy dish, one on top of the other. On the paten he saw several pieces that looked like bread. After the angel had taken the dish, another one came and raised the paten on high along with what was on top of it, and carried it with both hands outside of the ark. And the third angel took the chalice and carried it away in the same way after him, while the one carrying the holy dish was last of all. [195] When all three of them had left the ark, so that all the people saw them, a voice spoke and said, “My small people, newly reborn in spiritual birth, I send you your salvation, that is, My body that suffered physical birth and death for you.*® Now take care therefore that you have true faith to receive and eat such a lofty thing, for if you believe perfectly that this is your Savior, you will receive it to the everlasting salvation of the soul. And if you do not believe it completely, you will receive it to the everlasting damnation of the soul and the body. He who eats of My body and drinks of My blood and is not worthy of it, will eat and drink his destruction. Nor can anyone be worthy of it if he is not a true believer. Now take care therefore that you believe it.” Then the angel who was carrying the paten came before Joseph, who knelt and received with joined hands his Savior in visible form, as did each of the others, for it seemed to each one that when the piece in the semblance of bread was put in his mouth, he saw a completely formed child enter his mouth. After they had all received the sacrament,’ the three4§ angels went back inside the ark and put the vessels they were carrying on the altar. Then Our Lord called Josephus and said, “Josephus, [196] you shall serve Me in this way every day from now on, you and all those whom you invest with the order of priest and bishop. And if you ordain a priest, you will put your hand on his head and make the sign of the cross in the name of the Trinity. But to consecrate a bishop, you must do everything I did to you, for a bishop should be above a priest. And all those who are invested with this honor will have the same power to condemn and absolve as My apostles had on earth. Henceforth you shall establish a bishop in each city where My name is received through 45when he started to pull it back” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 46-1 send you... for you” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 47g acrament,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “faith”). 48-Three,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “two”). The History of the Holy Grail your word, and he shall be anointed with this holy unction, as shall all the kings who come to My faith through you. Now the time is approaching when King Evalach will turn from the wrong road of the idols to faith in the glorious Trinity, for the knights are nearby who are coming to seek Joseph to explain to him a great marvel that I showed him last night in a vision. Take off your vestments, and you and Joseph shall go together, and you shall make him certain of all the things he will ask you. Be not afraid if you see all the good clerks of their faith come against you, for you shall vanquish all of them, so that they will not be able to contest your words. And I will give you such good grace in the eyes of King Evalach*? that you will tell him part of what is to come, through the power of My Spirit. And all those who have received or who will receive My Spirit will have the power to chase forth the bad spirits wherever they appear.” Thereupon Josephus went to take off his vestments, leaving them all [197] in the ark on the altar. Then he called one of his first cousins who was in the group, whose name was Lucan. Josephus assigned him to guard the ark, day and night. In our time this custom is still maintained in the high churches, for the one who guards all the treasure of the church is called the treasurer. At that time it had never been done, but then Josephus invested Lucan, just as you have heard; nor was Lucan chosen because he was his cousin, but because he knew him to be more religious than any of the others. 8. Josephus Preaches Before Evalach; Evalach Battles Tholomer.} At that point the king’s messenger came and told Joseph that the king was sending for him. Joseph and his son went before him; upon leaving the palace, they crossed themselves and commanded the others to pray that God, who is the guide of those who have lost their way, might lead King Evalach to the way of truth. When they came before the king, he ordered them to be seated. And he told Joseph? to prove to him what he had said about the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit—how they could be three persons and only one God; and how the maiden had given birth without damaging her maidenhead; and how the Son could be conceived without carnal relations between a man and a woman. [198] When the king had said this, Joseph stood up and said the same words he had said earlier, and in this very way proved it. After he had spoken, a clerk stood up, who was held to be the wisest and the most instructed in their faith. He spoke against Joseph, saying he said nothing, “for if the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit were only one God, none of the three was a complete, perfect God, or else the persons of the Son and of the Holy Spirit had no part in God. And if they were both completely divine, there would 49tn the eyes of King Evalach” supplied from Ponceau. lCorresponds to Hucher II: 197-222; Sommer I: 42-51, Ponceau §58-72. 2“Joseph,” as in Sommer and Ponceau (Hucher has ‘Josephus”). 29 therefore be three deities. No one could reasonably dispute this, for any man who did could not reasonably prove or establish as truth that one of the three persons was a complete deity in itself, once either of the others was mentioned. If it were said that the Holy Spirit was a perfect, complete God, and that the three were only one deity, it would be clear that one was worth as much as the three. Thus it is true that the two are nothing when the third is [199] honored; because the two persons lose their power through the third, everyone can clearly see and recognize that none of the three is a perfect and complete deity.” After the man had spoken so harshly* against the Trinity, Joseph was very fearful about defending and proving it. He did not know how to answer right away to show that what the other had said was wrong, for it did not please Our Lord. At once Josephus stood up and, speaking loudly enough for everyone to hear him clearly, said to the king, “King, listen to what I will tell you. This is sent to you by the God of Israel, the Creator of all things. He says to you, ‘Because you have brought your false advocates against My faith, I have decided to take such great vengeance on you that before the third day has passed, you shall fall into such great misfortune that you will not believe any living creature could keep you from losing all earthly honor first and then your life.’ God will punish you this way because you do not want to accept the faith in His glorious name; rather you have scorned and spurned the demonstration He made last night of His secrets and miracles, which He revealed to you in a vision. Because of this, the God of the Christians sends you this message through the mouth of His‘ servant who is speaking to you: He will give [200] your mortal enemy glory and honor and victory over you for three days and three nights. Your power will be unable to sustain against him, nor will you dare await the man who has always been unable to confront you in force until now, when he will defeat you through the betrayal of your counselors, who have gone over to him because of his great gifts. “Thus the God of the Christians will show you that no creature can survive who is not prepared to follow His commandment, nor will you ever recover the great honor you are beginning to lose, unless you recover it through His help. If you consider me to be a liar about this thing, you will soon hear news by which you will know that Our Lord has shown me something about your adventures. You can be sure that Tholomer® the Fugitive, who is king of Babylonia, has prepared his entire army and is moving against you very rapidly. The God of the Christians also says, ‘I will deliver the Unknown King into the hands of the terrible Egyptians, because he fled from Me and did not recognize Me. He who has always fled will pursue the one who has always pursued him and will lead him to the fear of death, for I want to make him recognize that I alone am the King of Kings and the Fortress of all peoples.’” [201] 3 “Against the deity and” omitted here, as in Ponceau and Sommer. 4¥1is,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “your”). 5“Tholomer” may be a variation of “Ptolemy.” 30 Then Josephus turned to the man who had spoken so harshly against the Trinity and said, “Listen, you who have been against and spoken against the Trinity and the holy belief in the Christian God; now hear what He tells you through His® servant who is speaking to you. ‘You,’ He says, ‘who are My creature, and who should obey My commandments everywhere, have condemned My faith and dishonored My name. Because I want you to know’ that you have spoken against the One who has power over you and all things, I will make you feel My earthly justice strike, so that you will suffer from it. And the others will take warning from what happens to you, for you have always had earthly knowledge, but you have never wished to know the spiritual, nor could you ever see it. And if you ever wished to speak of it, you would not be able to speak the truth. Because you have been mute and blind in spiritual knowledge, to which you should address all your words and clear sight, I will show you that earthly knowledge is powerless against the spiritual. In the sight of everyone here, I will take away from you [202] earthly speech and sight, for My Spirit is of such power that it will cause good speakers to become mute and the clear-sighted to go blind; and it will cause the mute to speak well and the blind to see clearly.’” As soon as Josephus had said this, his interlocutor lost the power of speech. When he wished to speak, he felt in his mouth a hand holding his tongue, but he could not see it. He stood up in order to make a better attempt to speak, but as soon as he had risen, he could see nothing. Feeling this, he began to bellow so loudly that he could be heard clearly as far away as one could shoot an arrow. And it seemed to everyone who heard him that it was a bull. When the others saw this marvel, they were very wrathful. They all rushed upon Josephus and would have torn him to pieces® as best they could, but King Evalach jumped to his feet and, taking a naked sword, swore by the power of Jove? that he would have all those who put their hands on him massacred and put to death. [203] For they would have betrayed him if they had murdered Josephus under his safe-conduct, had he not protected him against them. Thus a tumult was raised throughout the entire hall. The king called Josephus and asked him who he was. Josephus came forward and told him he was the son of Joseph. The king said to him that he spoke well and truthfully about many things. Then he asked how he had taken away the power of speech and sight from the man who had spoken against him. And Josephus replied that it was not he who had taken away his power of speech, but the Christian God, against whom he had spoken. It was He who had taken away his power of speech and his sight, “for this is the God whose word can never be changed by anyone. As He commands,!® so it must be.” 6 His,” as in Sommer and Ponceau (Hucher has “your”). Twant you to know,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “T see”). 8“And would have torn him to pieces” supplied from Hucher variants, Sommer, and Ponceau. “Tove,” as in Hucher variants (Hucher has “Juise,” “the Last Judgment”). 10“Commands” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail “What!” said Evalach, “Is it true then that Tholomer the Fugitive will lead me up to the fear of death and have power over me for three days and three nights?” “Certainly,” said Josephus, “it is true, and there is no living man who can change this.” The king asked him how he could know this. “Then you have not heard,” said Josephus, “how the Spirit of the Christian God is so powerful that it causes the mute to speak and the blind to see clearly? That is, all those who have had no instruction will know all the power of the Scripture through the grace of the Holy Spirit.” [204] “By my faith,” said the king, “if it comes about as you have related, I would rather be dead than alive, but I cannot believe any of it. Nevertheless, if I saw one of your predictions come true, I would believe you better.” “King,” said Josephus, “when you see this happen to you, you will believe me.” “Can I avoid it?” asked the king. “Yes, certainly,” said Josephus, “but in only one way.” “And what is that?” said the king. “T will tell you,” said Josephus. “If you receive Jesus Christ’s faith, and if you believe in it perfectly from the ime you receive it, you will have help and deliverance. But you can be sure that whatever the mouth may say, if the heart is not in it, you will not be delivered, for God is not someone who can be tricked or deceived by appearances. Rather, He is of such deep wisdom that He knows everyone’s thoughts and sees everything hidden in the heart.” Then the king asked his name, and he said he was called Josephus. And the king said, “Josephus, tell me whether the man who lost his speech and sight will ever recover them.” “King,” said Josephus,!! “have him taken before the gods in whom you believe, and you will hear what they reply about the healing and the battle.” The king had him taken to the temple, and he himself went as well, with Josephus and his father. The pagan priests made an offering at the altar of Apollo, whom they called [205] the god of wisdom, and asked the image above the altar how the man could be cured of his infirmity, or whether he would ever be cured. But no matter what they asked the idol, they could never get a word out of it. The king came forward and asked it what would be the outcome of the war, but he could not get an answer, any more than the others. And the devil, who was in the statue of Mars, whom they called the god of war, began to cry out, “Foolish people, what are you trying to do? There is a Christian among you, who has so bound Apollo through the commandment of Jesus Christ his God that he has no power to respond, nor will any god, wherever he may be, dare or be able to give a response once he has exorcised him.” As soon as the devil had said this, he began to cry out so loudly that it seemed to everyone in the temple!? that he was in a burning fire. And he said to Josephus, “Bishop of Jesus Christ, leave off what you are saying, for you are causing me to burn, and I will flee from here and go where 1“Josephus,” as in Sommer and Ponceau (Hucher has “Joseph”). 12th the temple” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail you command.” Thus the devil who was in Mars’s image cried out, because of the exorcism Josephus had performed, for the latter so constrained and punished him that he left the image, in the sight of everyone in the [206] temple. He knocked the statue to the ground and broke it!8 into small pieces. Once he had done that, he took a very large golden eagle from the altar to the Sun and hit the image of Apollo with it in the face so forcefully that he broke the nose and the right arm. Then he went past all the idols of the temple, striking each one with the eagle until he had broken a limb. The people were very frightened by this, for they saw the marvels the eagle was doing, but they could not see who was holding it, and this was the thing that scared them the most. Then the king called Josephus and asked him what this could be that was breaking the images in this way. Josephus replied that he should!4 go ask at Mars’s altar. The king went there and wished to sacrifice, but Josephus would not let him. Rather, he told him that if he made such a sacrifice, he would die a sudden death. When the king asked for a response at the altar, the devil said he dared not speak to him because of Josephus. The king asked him if he had such great power over the gods, and the devil said that none of them [207] could speak in front of him if he did not give them leave. The king beseeched Josephus to give him leave to speak, which Josephus did. The devil said to the king, “King, do you want to know why he has such great power? He has two angels with him who guide him and protect him everywhere he goes; one of them holds a naked sword, and the other a cross. These two held me so tightly, by his command, that they made me break these images, just as you see. Nor will any of them ever be able to give an answer wherever this man may be, because of the power that has been given to him by Jesus Christ, his God.” Next the king asked him if the man who had lost his eyesight and speech would ever regain his health. And the devil replied, “King, if he recovers, it will not be through our power, for we have none. He must be healed by the One whose commandment brought him the trouble. If not, he will never be cured.” Then the king asked again what would happen to him if he fought the Egyptians, and the devil told him he had no power to tell it as long as God’s man was there. Josephus quickly stepped forward and said to him, “I adjure you by the power of the Holy Trinity to tell the truth about it.” And the devil replied that he knew nothing about what was to happen. At these words, a messenger arrived in great haste. He knelt before the king and said, [208] “King Evalach, I bring you very bad, disagreeable, and dangerous news. Tholomer the Fugitive has entered your land with all of his troops and has already taken your rich city, Onage, by force, and all the land around up to the castle of Evalachin, which he has besieged with thirty thousand cavalrymen and seventy thousand foot soldiers. If he can conquer it, no castle or 13«Statue” and “it” corrected to singular, as in Hucher variants and Ponceau. 14corrected to singular, as in Hucher variants, Sommer, and Ponceau. 31 city will remain in all the land that can withstand him, for that is the strongest fortress you have. And he has made a vow before all his people and his nobles that he will never return to his land until he has worn a crown in the city of Sarras.” When the king heard this message, he was very frightened, and even more so because Josephus had told him his enemy would have the upper hand for three days and three nights and that he would reach the point of fearing death. But he had been so valiant that he dared not appear to be afraid; thus he swore that if he could find him at the siege, he would rather die in battle than be forced to flee in a base manner. The king immediately had all his forces summoned and sent a message to all his vassals that, as they cherished his honor and their lives, they were to be on the sixth day [209] completely armed at Tarrabel, a castle nine leagues from Sarras and six leagues from Evalachin, where Tholomer lay at siege. And he made known by his seal that anyone who had the power to defend himself and who did not, would never hold land from him if he were a knight; and if he were a peasant, he would have him dragged by horses before all his nobles. The next day when the king wished to set forth, Josephus came to him and said, “King, you are leaving, and you know not how, for you are not sure whether you will ever return or whether you will die there. Now I will tell you what to do. This is what the God of the Christians tells you: you are to remember who you are and how you came to such great dignity as you have had until today. And you believe that no one knows who you are, or of what lineage. But I know it well, by the grace and power of the great Lord from whom no secret can be kept. “You were born, as the Holy Spirit showed me, in a very old city of France called Meaux. [210] You were the son of a poor man, who mended old shoes, just as you yourself truly know. After Augustus Caesar had ruled the Roman empire for twenty-seven years, word spread that a man would be born who would conquer the whole world. And it was true, for Jesus Christ, the God of gods and the King of kings, was born in that year. When Augustus Caesar heard the word, as the wise clerks had spread it, though they did not know who this would be, he feared that the lands under the domination of Rome would rise up and overthrow the empire. Because of the certainty of this news, he sent word through all the lands under Roman domination!® that every man and woman should pay a denier!® in recognition that they were subject to Rome. And since France had prouder people than the other lands, [211] he said that from that land they had to send as tribute one hundred knights; one hundred maidens, all daughters of knights; and one hundred male children, five years old or younger. “When the order arrived in France, each city chose according to its status. And this selection was done by lot. Thus it happened that the city of Meaux sent two maidens who were the daughters of Count Sevain. Sevain was count of Meaux and of the surrounding lands. Once the lot fell to 15“Recause ... domination” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. l6The denier was a small coin current in France in the Middle Ages. a2 them, it was absolutely necessary that it be honored. And the lot fell to you, who were nearly five years old. These two maidens took you with them and held you dear. And when you were in Rome, you were looked upon with wonder by many and all, for they thought you were of nobler lineage than all the other children, so very handsome were you. Me “When you reached the age of twenty, the two maidens had died, for the one lived only two months after the other’s death, and then you were retained by Tiberius Caesar, who was emperor of Rome after Augustus Caesar. He put you into the service of Count Felix, whom he made count of Syria. Felix went to protect Syria, taking you with him. And he held you dear and loved you until one day there was a quarrel between you and one of his sons, [212] whom you killed. Thus you fled to Tholomer Ceraster,!® who was at that time king of Babylonia. And this Tholomer was at war against Holofernes, who at that time was king of this realm that you hold. When you came to him, you said that you were a knight; and he loved you well and increased your wealth. You found such great favor with him that he put his trust completely in you in regard to his war, because of the great prowess he saw in you. And you did well, for you conquered all the land, and you turned his enemy over to him as a prisoner. You killed him, and Tholomer gave you all the land, and you became his liegeman. “Now you can see whether I know anything about you. Because you know very well that you rose from such poverty to such high rank and from such a lowly condition to such great honor, the God of the Christians sends you this message through me: may you remember yourself, may you always have in mind that you came from nothing to something. Because of this, even if you see that you have such a large number of lands and people in your power, you should not take great pride in it, for it is not inalienably yours; you are only the guardian of it all. One of these days you must leave it, for you are only a man, and perhaps you will soon die as the poorest man in your kingdom. Because of this, you should be humble and compassionate and acknowledge your Creator, without whose commandment you [213] cannot live. And you should not consider yourself a king,!9 for you will not hold your kingdom forever, but will abandon it sooner than you think. He who will always reign without end should be called King, for His reign will never end at any time, but He will be King forever and ever. This is Jesus Christ, the Son of the Virgin Mary. He sends you this message through me because He*® wants you to know that He knows all the thoughts and secrets of the heart: He will put you in the hands of your mortal enemy, and you will acknowledge Him and know that one should believe in and worship no other God but Him. And He will torment you in this way because you have refused His faith and scorned the vision He showed you.” M7 Corrected to singular following Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 18This may be Ptolemy Soter, a ruler of Egypt and founder of the Ptolemaic dynasty. 19And you should not... king” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 20«Cees you and” omitted here, as in Hucher variants and Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail After the king had listened to him very graciously, he said, “Master, now tell me what the vision was and what it means.” “No,” said Josephus, “you will not find out about it until you have broken the images you worship and have come to the faith in the High Lord by whose commandment every living thing is established.” “I must say,” said the king, “I dread this battle. You and your father are promising to give me advice that, if I trust it, will give me victory [214] over my enemies and the great joy?! that will never end.” “Indeed,” said Josephus, “I will give you this advice, if you wish to trust it and put it to work. But if you do not intend to receive it as a true believer and a loyal worker, take care not to promise, for you would be destroyed, in body and in soul, by the One who will be the judge of all.” “By my faith,” said the king, “I swear to you that if you advise me so that I see I will gain victory, I will no longer hold to my present faith but will immediately receive yours.” “King,” said Josephus, “listen then to what you shall do. Have your shield brought to me.” And he did so. Once it was brought, Josephus asked for a piece of rich red silk. The king had this brought; Josephus** then took the cloth, cut it, and made a cross that was a good foot long and a half-foot wide. He pulled it over the straps of the shield and attached it securely with small nails. After [215] that, he said, “King Evalach, do you see this sign?” “Yes,” said the king. “Surely,” said Josephus, “for anyone who fully believes in this sign, there is no earthly peril from which he will not escape, as long as he calls on it sincerely. And do you know what you shall do? You shall cover it with white canvas, and when you are in great need, when you fear death, uncover it and® call upon Him for whom we hold it dear and honor it sincerely. Every time you uncover the sign of God, you shall say, ‘God, who with this visible sign killed death, lead me safely and honorably to receive Your faith.’ You may be sure that if you call on Him sincerely you will not die, but will receive victory and honor. And I will tell you how to know whether this sign has protected you from death and imprisonment and if it has given you victory. “It is a proven inevitable fact that your enemy Tholomer the Fugitive will have power over you for three days and three nights, for He who sends you this message through me has never lied and never will lie. Now take care not to look at the sign until you fear so much for your life [216] that you think you will never escape. If you uncover it at that time, you will escape. Then you can be sure that it is because of the sign. Remember too that if your faith is firm, you will conquer anything you desire through the sign, for it is the salvation of believers and the ruin of the devil and all unbelievers.” Then the king said to Josephus, “Pray to your God that He remember me, for if He does what you have promised, I 21Joy,” as in Hucher variants, Sommer, and Ponceau (Hucher has “glory”). 22"The king .. . Josephus” supplied from Ponceau. 23“And do you know... and” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail swear to you loyally that I will receive your faith from your hand as soon as I return.” Then he called one of his officers, the one he trusted the most among his bailiffs, and ordered that the Christians be honored and have anything Josephus ordered. Then the king left with a large company of knights and men-at-arms. They traveled until they reached Tarrabel, where the king waited until his army arrived on the seventh** day. There were more men than had ever been seen together before, and yet none of his leading noblemen came, for they had failed him, as the book recounted earlier.25 On the eighth day the king set out from Tarrabel very early in the morning with his entire army. They rode at a rapid pace straight to Evalachin, where Tholomer lay at siege. This castle [217] called Evalachin had been built by Evalach, and it sat on the most easily defended piece of land any man had ever seen, for it could not be taken by any kind of force other than starvation. It had a gate that no attacking army could control and thereby prevent those on the inside from entering or leaving, for it was*® above the level of dry ground, and underneath it flowed a rapid and torrential river as wide as a bow could shoot an arrow. This gate could not be destroyed by those outside unless they blockaded the city with ships first. But the city could not be blockaded because no fleet hostile to the city’s inhabitants could hold out at close distance for long. The castle was situated in such a way that the foundation was entirely of stone as high as one could throw a rock, with only one gate. At this gate there was enough flat ground so that two carts could enter at once. The flat part was no more than thirty feet long. Thus no man or [218] siege could hold out there, for it was too near the gate, and there was too little room. And the castle above was neither weak nor open, but was completely surrounded by a splendid wall, made entirely of green, beige, and white marble. The tower was four times as high as the walls, and the rock it sat on was the best placed and most unassailable ever seen. On top of this outcrop sat the marble tower, so high that from it one could see the walls of Baghdad gleaming and the river Nile flowing in Egypt. Of such strength and beauty was the castle. And no matter how hot it got in the summertime, the castle’s inhabitants had sweet and cold water from a beautiful and delightful spring that emerged at the foot of the tower. From this spring the?’ stream flowed through a beautiful flat area between the walls of the castle and the tower. It flowed into this area through a copper pipe connected to a marble basin, from which the castle’s residents took the water they needed. This area into which the water flowed through the pipe was the drinking place for the castle’s horses, and it was completely paved with marble and was enclosed by a wall about fifteen feet high. Thus was the castle richly appointed and [219] 24«Seventh,” as in Ponceau, Sommer, and context (Hucher has “fifteenth”). See Chapter 4. 26-was” supplied from Ponceau. 27Beautiful and delightful spring. ... spring the” supplied from Ponceau. 33 fortified, so that it did not fear attack by any man alive. Because he had never seen such a defendable piece of land, King Evalach had had it constructed. And he had given it the name Evalachin because he wanted all those who would use its name to remember his name and what he had done. When the king was one league away from the castle, he entered a beautiful forest he possessed there and ordered his men to arm themselves. While they were doing this, along came a spy who had been sent to the enemy camp in the morning. He recounted that the enemy was seated at dinner; and it was very close to the hour of nones. As soon as the king’s men were armed, they moved out. Leaving the forest, they entered a deep valley. And after they had climbed the next knoll, they had a clear view of the enemy and the castle. Upon seeing them, the enemy began to cry out, “We are betrayed! Betrayed!” and those who were not armed ran to arm themselves. But there were few who were not fitted out in their armor, for they thought Evalach would not allow for long the siege around the castle. Thus they kept their arms near them, for they thought there might be a surprise attack. Evalach’s men rushed upon them, giving the horses their head and going as fast as the horses could carry them—so fast that never before had anyone come more precipitously. And the enemy received them as fiercely as they could, those on foot killing a great number of their horses as they arrived [220] with such haste. Evalach’s men charged them fiercely, killing a great number of those on foot, many of whom were unarmed. Great losses of men and horses occurred there, so that there were certainly fifteen thousand dead on both sides. King Evalach lost so many of his men there that he could not continue the battle, but turning his back, fled toward a castle of his called La Choine, which was less than two leagues away. When Tholomer saw him flee, he was delighted, and he pursued him hotly. But night, which fell rapidly, separated them.?8 Tholomer lost many of his knights in the pursuit, for those who were fleeing knew the gorges and defiles of the region very well, so they fled where they knew it was safe, while the others pursued in wild disorder. So Tholomer gave up because”? it was night and returned to the shelters where he had left his equipment when the pursuit began. Meanwhile, those inside Evalachin had come out and fought with the men guarding the equipment and had defeated them and seized it all. When Tholomer returned to his position before the castle, he found his tent torn to shreds and the pavilions ripped and knocked down. [221] This grieved him so much that he nearly went out of his mind. Then he swore he would never leave the castle, unless half of his men stayed behind, until he had starved the inhabitants out. Thus he remained that night. After a while a spy came to him and said, “My lord, things have never gone so well for any man, if you do not lose your advantage by sinning.” “How is that?” said Tholomer. «which fell rapidly... them,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “Tholomer charged them”). 2%Recause,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “par,” “at [night]”). a7 “My word,” said the spy, “King Evalach has withdrawn into La Choine with as many men as he could gather from the battle, and you can capture him there with a very small force. Then you will have concluded your war successfully.” “How do you know this for sure?” said Tholomer. “I know it,” said the spy, “because I saw him enter the castle. And if you had pursued him that far, you would have captured him, for he remained at the gate as long as it takes to travel a good league, before those inside would let him enter.” “As you hold your life dear,” said Tholomer, “take care to tell me the truth.” “My lord,” said he, “if it is not as I have told you, hang me. At once Tholomer called his knights and revealed everything*? the messenger had told him. And he said he wanted to go besiege the castle with half of his men, leaving the other half at Evalachin so that the equipment he had lost could not be turned against him. [222] All the knights approved this, and he called his seneschal, whose name was Nabur, and ordered him to remain before the castle with half of his knights and menat-arms, on horseback and on foot. The seneschal did what Tholomer ordered and retained half of all his men. And Tholomer set out with the other half well before daybreak, because he wanted to reach La Choine Castle at dawn. Now we will leave off speaking of Tholomer and tell you about King Evalach. 9. Evalach and Tholomer Join in Battle Again.! Now the story says that after Evalach had entered La Choine to protect himself, he called one of his men-at-arms and ordered him to leave the castle and find out whether Tholomer was nearby or whether he had returned to Evalachin. The man followed the enemy long enough to see them dismount and returned to tell Evalach. He also told him about the great booty the men of Evalachin had won from those guarding Tholomer’s equipment. When Evalach heard this news, he was very pleased and swore that even if he were to be cut to pieces in battle, he would fight Tholomer; as soon as he reassembled his men, he would go to lay siege more fiercely than anyone before. He left the castle at once, taking with him four thousand seven hundred knights and men-at-arms and nineteen hundred foot soldiers. [223] Before daybreak they had gone five leagues from the castle. When day came, as the company followed its way, along came a messenger on a big draft horse, riding as quickly as the horse could carry him. Upon seeing the king, he greeted him, saying, “My lord, my lady the queen greets you and sends you this letter.” 30“Fverything,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “aiant,” which seems to be a lapsus). 1Corresponds to Hucher II: 222-244, Sommer I: 51-58; Ponceau §73-87. The History of the Holy Grail He took it right away and read it, for he knew how to read; and he saw that the queen, his wife, greeted him and asked him, by the faith he owed her, to leave La Choine immediately, for Tholomer was going to besiege it. This letter astounded him; he called the messenger and said, “Say there, how did my lady know I was at La Choine?” “My lord,” said the youth, “she had news of it last night.” “Do you know,” asked Evalach, “who told her the news?” “By my faith,” he said, “I don’t know for certain, but I saw her speaking privately with a man who is called the master of the Christians. After they had talked for a while, I saw? her crying very softly. Then she called me and ordered me to carry her letter as fast as this horse could go.” Then the king called his knights and recounted the marvel of Josephus, who had told the queen about the rout as soon as it had happened, as well as how he had fled to La Choine, and that Tholomer was coming to besiege it. As he was saying this, along came a man-at-arms riding after the company,? carrying a bow in [224] his hand, and riding as fast as the horse could go. When he reached the king, he said to him, “My lord, your castellan of La Choine greets you and asks that you think about what action to take in order to avenge yourself, for Tholomer has come to besiege La Choine, believing he will capture you inside. He has brought only half of his men; the others have remained before Evalachin.” When the king heard this, he called his knights and said to them, “Lord knights, have you heard how the Christian told the truth in everything, so that I have not yet found him in a single lie? Now you can hear that Tholomer is lying at siege just as Josephus told my lady the queen.” Thereupon the king turned and headed straight for Sarras. After the company had traveled about two short leagues, those at the tail end of the army looked and saw a large company of men on horseback and on foot, all of whom were armed, coming out of the thick forest. There could well have been four thousand men or more. They pointed them out to the king, who immediately ordered all his men to arm themselves. As they were doing so, one of the men from the other side rode out. He came toward the army riding at a rapid pace, with his helmet on his head, his shield hanging from his neck, and grasping his spear in the middle. When the king saw him [225] coming, being already armed (as he dared not ride without his arms), he went himself to meet him. And when they met, the other man came forward, removed his helmet, and told the king that he was welcome. The king looked and saw that it was his brother-in-law, one of the men in the world who he thought hated him the most. The man said, “My lord, I heard that you were defeated and that Tholomer had besieged you at La Choine. The queen, my sister, sent a message to me during the night, at midnight, telling me that if I ever loved her, and if I did not wish to see her delivered over to shame, that I should come to help you with all my forces. I was coming to help you 21 saw” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 3“Company,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “queen”). The History of the Holy Grail with all the forces I could gather in such haste, but it seems to me that things are much better than she told me.” The king thanked him warmly and said, “My dear brother-in-law, since you have thus undertaken the matter, you must help me to the end. One cannot know his friend very well until the need arises, for the distress of great necessity reveals great friendship and makes it known. Because my need is so great and so distressing, like that of someone who is losing his land and who has been twice routed from the battlefield, I pray and beseech you to help me defend your sister’s land and avenge my shame. And I promise you, as king, that I will [226] honorably compensate the hatred I had for you by setting things right, on my knees, within a week after I return to Sarras, provided I return in honor; and this will be in your house, in the sight of your nobles.” “My lord,” the other said, “many thanks. I'll tell you what we will do. We wili all go to your city, Orcaut, for it is the richest city in your land. There we will wait for your men, whom we will convoke, and we will hear news of King Tholomer more quickly than we would at Sarras.” The king followed this advice. Thus they headed directly for Orcaut, taking all their men. When they arrived, it was already past the hour of nones. The king sent his messengers throughout the region to announce that anyone who wished to hold land or honor from him should help him in this need. As a result, before the hour of prime the next day there were seventeen thousand men, some on foot and some on horseback, at Orcaut, in addition to {227] those that he and Seraphe, his brother-in-law, had brought. As soon as it turned dark, the king left the city and rode with his men straight toward La Choine. His knights told him that it would be foolish to attack Tholomer with so few men as he had; that he should wait for his men for three or four days more; “then, when you have all your forces, you will be able to combat him more easily.” Because of his noblemen’s advice and counsel, the king returned to the city. When daybreak came, his men began to cry out, “Betrayed, betrayed! To arms!” The king leapt up, and the knights climbed up on the walls of the tower. They saw Tholomer’s entire army coming precipitously across the fields, already attacking the city on all sides. When the king saw this, he was very angry, not so much because of the siege as because of his men, for he knew that no matter how many came to him, they would be captured by those outside. Then the king ordered all his men to arm themselves quickly; once they were armed, he ordered them to go forth more fiercely than any men ever did from a castle [228] or a city. And when they were ready, they did so. Next he sent word to the city watchman, ordering him that if he held his life dear, the city should be closed as soon as they were all outside, so that no man might then set foot therein unless he himself ordered it. With that they went forth, led by Seraphe, the king’s brother-in-law, who had the first battalion. Once they met in battle, no rein was held in; rather, the king and all the others charged together, holding their shields before their chests and their lances stiff under their arms. When Tholomer’s men saw them advance so boldly, they were frightened that so many had spurred forth, for they did not ED) believe there were one-fourth as many men in the city as they saw come out. Nevertheless, they received them well, for they were more confident, having defeated the king and pursued him twice. In this first melee Tholomer’s men lost a great deal, for they had ridden all night without resting and thus were exhausted. And Evalach’s men had rested and slept all night, so they were stronger and more alert. [229] Evalach’s men fought well, but he himself fought so well that no other man of his age could undertake what he did. And Seraphe, his brother-in-law, also fought so fiercely that for his feats he earned such a great reputation and such great honor that it was talked about ever after, all the days of his life and many a day after his death. Nevertheless, Tholomer’s men withstood a good deal, tll, overcome and no longer able to resist, they turned and fled. And King Evalach and his men pursued them hotly until they came to the defile of a very high cliff, the most perilous pass in the land. This rock was as high as one could throw a stone by hand, and it stretched on the right side up to a river called Cordaniste that flowed through Orcaut. And on the left side, it went all the way to the clearing* of Babel. In all of this outcrop there was only one pass, and it was so narrow that there was no way in the world that ten men could enter at once. Up to this pass came Evalach’s and Tholomer’s men. Such a great massacre occurred there, and so much blood was shed, that the color still appears in the rock and will show until the end of the world. At this pass Tholomer’s men defended themselves as well as they could; some of them kept up the fight [230] while the others traversed the pass until most of them had gone through. But there were many dead and killed on both sides. Since then the rock has been called the Rock of Blood because of the blood that was shed there. When they had all been pursued beyond the pass and had fled about a half league, with Evalach’s men close behind, they looked and saw their lord, Tholomer, who was coming at the back of the army, for he had not yet come to the siege. Rather, he had sent his men ahead, for he did not think King Evalach had as many people at Orcaut as he had. When he saw from a distance those who were fleeing, he ordered those in his retinue who were not armed to take up their arms. He himself came first of all to meet the fleeing men, asking what had happened to them. They replied that they had found King Evalach at Orcaut with all his forces and that he had killed so many of them at a difficult pass that they could not be counted. “What!” said Tholomer. “Did he then come out from the city?” “Indeed,” said they, “you'll be able to see him soon, for he is coming after us® as fast as the horses can go, bringing a great and handsome troop of knights.” When Tholomer heard this, he ordered his men [231] to stop and to lower his banner. Then he said to all his knights that, as they held their lives and their honor dear, 4«Clearing,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “bed”). buys” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has ‘you”). 36 as well as his, not one of them should mish forward until they saw him move out first. He himself was a very good knight, and he had a great deal of experience in war as the young bachelor that he was, for he was not yet more than twenty-seven years old. When Evalach saw the men stop, he reasoned, as one who had seen many similar situations, that the place where they had stopped was not lacking in armed strength. Then he called his knights and told them to go forward carefully,® for he realized that Tholomer was not far away. They closed ranks’ and immediately moved forward at a walk until they were less than two bowshots away from their enemy. Then Evalach divided his men into four battalions, giving the first to Seraphe, his brother-in-law, who fought very well in the battle, as you will hear farther on. The second battalion was put in the hands of his seneschal, who was very bold and valiant’ A nephew of his named Archimedes had the third battalion, while he himself, who was very capable of leading it, had the fourth. [232] After he had thus divided them, he called one of his knights, a valiant and loyal man called Jecoine of the Clearing. Evalach ordered him to return to guard the pass in the rock so that Tholomer’s men could not traverse it if they arrived there safely. And he ordered all those who had remained in the city to go with him, leaving no more than one hundred to defend the town, should an ambush occur by chance. Jecoine left at once and did as his lord had commanded. When Tholomer saw that Evalach had set up his battalions, he did the same. Dividing his men into eight battalions, he said? that the first two would join battle against Seraphe’s battalion and the next two would go against the seneschal’s battalion.!® And he ordered that the next two should join battle with that of Evalach’s nephew, whose name was Archimedes, for it was he who led the third battalion. He himself would meet Evalach in battle with the seventh battalion.!! The eighth would form the rearguard, which would attack when the battle had been going on for a long time, and would rush against the enemy so fiercely that they would leave defeated.!* [233] So he decided that all his battalions would join in battle, two by two, for he had half again as many men as did Evalach. Thus the battalions were organized on both sides. In each of Evalach’s battalions there were ten thousand three hundred men, some on foot and some on horseback. And in each of Tholomer’s, there were five thousand!> or more; 6 “Carefully,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “with confidence”). 7«Closed ranks,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “stopped”). 8“In the battle, as you will hear.... valiant” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 9Corrected to singular, as in Hucher variants and Ponceau. 10“A gainst Seraphe’s... against” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. M«with the seventh battalion” supplied from Ponceau. 121 iterally, “under cover.” 13The numbers seem to contradict the statement that Tholomer had half again as many men as Evalach. One of Hucher’s variants reads “twenty thousand or more,” while two of Ponceau’s variants read “ten thousand.” Numbers are one of the most unstable elements in the manuscript tradition. The History of the Holy Grail he had lost a good number of his men at the pass in the rock, which the story spoke about, just as you have heard. Then Evalach called his knights and said to them, “Lord knights, you see very well how important it is for you to be brave today, as they have two or three men for each one of us. But there is something that should give us comfort and courage: we are in our own territory, and they have attacked us wrongfully,!4 as you all know. You may be sure, truly, that if you are valorous and strong today, you will win honor and victory in the battle, and the [234] Egyptians will never again confront you! in battle or on a field. Do you know what you will do? I pray and beseech you to endure a great deal in the beginning. If you!® can resist two or three attacks, you can be sure that as soon as you charge them, you'll see them fight quite differently from the way they do at the beginning. If we can defeat them, let us now consider what great honor we will have, for we can see that they have twice as many men as we have. I don’t know what else to say, but we should all know very well what honor is and what shame is. Therefore, let us be sure that fear of death or imprisonment will not cause us to do anything that would dishonor us forever or be a source of reproach to our children after our death.” After saying this, he looked and saw two battalions coming from the other side, all ready to join battle. When Seraphe, his brother-in-law, who had the first battalion, saw them move out, he rode out to meet them just as if he expected to find them unarmed. Once the two had come within a bowshot of each other, they rushed headlong together as fast as the horses could carry them. And when [235] King Evalach, who had remained behind,!? saw Seraphe, whom he had often treated unjustly and hated without cause, attack his enemies so boldly, risking death or captivity for his sake,!8 he felt such great pity that he began to sigh from the depths of his heart and shed soft tears. Seeing him advance on the strong warhorse, his helmeted head bent forward, the thick shaft of his lance under his arm, and his shield pressed to his arm, quick and ready to fight well, he said, “Ah! Alas! Woe! He who has kept such a friend from me has killed and betrayed me!” And then he said, “My dear friend, Seraphe, I cannot die until you have been well rewarded, for you are doing more for me than you should, for, truly, I have not deserved it. It is certainly true that a noble heart never flags. Now, go in the keeping and protection of Him whose sign I carry, for if He is a true God, as [236] has been affirmed, may He keep you safe from shame and danger tonight, and may He send you the greatest honor you could have.” Now consider how gracious and compassionate is Our Lord, who deigns to listen to sinners so closely that He grants their prayers and requests when they are asked sincerely. As soon as Evalach had prayed to Our Lord as you have heard, his prayer was immediately granted, for 14«wrongfully,” as in Sommer and Ponceau (Hucher has “with all their strength”). eyou,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “us”). 16-yoy,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “we”). 1“Behind,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “with them”). 18For his sake,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “his enemies”). The History of the Holy Grail Seraphe never fell into the hands of his enemies, nor did he receive any mortal wound. Rather, he won so much earthly honor that all those who saw the battle said that if he alone had not been there, Evalach would certainly have lost his life and his land forever that day, without recourse. But now let us return to the straight road of the story, which says that when Seraphe was joined in battle with the two battalions, so great was the clash of lances on both sides that anyone who heard it without seeing!? it would have thought a great amount of wood was falling. Once the lances were broken, and the knives and fauchards®? and the big sharp steel battle-axes were drawn, there was such a great battle there, and the melee was so deadly on account of the swords, battle-axes, and other metal arms with which?! helmets, shields, and hauberks were struck that it seemed [237] to be a great marvel of blacksmiths. So many limbs were cut off there that no tongue on earth could tell the truth of it unless the One who knows everything revealed it through His Spirit. Now you will hear how this battle ended. Seraphe’s men fought very well at the beginning, but no feat of arms could be compared to his prowess, performed with his hands, for he held a marvelously strong and sharp battle-ax in both hands. And he was tall and big and strong-limbed, with broad shoulders. His arms were large and muscular, while his hands were thin and square. He could spread his legs wide, so he sat very well on horseback. Everywhere he turmed with his battle-ax, having thrown his shield into the press and with the reins over his arms, those he reached were struck so fiercely that they could not recover. That day he struck many a blow, none of which [238] failed to cut an arm, hand, head, or body, either a man’s or a horse’s; he did nothing but marvels. Not much had ever been said about his prowess, so that all those who were watching him marveled. He himself marveled no less than the others, but more, for it did not seem to him that such marvelous prowess could come from such a body as his. And he did not think it came from the One who gave it to him because of Evalach’s prayer, but from the strength of his gods, not realizing they could not help him. He and his men fought well, pushing back the two battalions to where Tholomer was, who was so grieved at seeing his men withdraw that he nearly went out of his mind.”* King Evalach, who was very happy, pointed out to his knights the wonders Seraphe was performing, saying he was the one knight in all the world whose prowess he most wanted to have. When Tholomer saw his men making way for Seraphe and losing more and more ground, he was full of sorrow and shame and sent in two more battalions. Seeing the enemy’s impetuous charge, Seraphe ordered his knights to remain in close ranks and [239] undergo the devastation 19tJeard it without seeing” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 204 sort of shafted weapon. Originally, it was nothing more than a scythe with a handle coming straight out of a shaft, used by peasants called to fight for their lords. 21FHips and” omitted, as in Ponceau. 22But from the strength of his gods.... out of his mind” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 37 for a while. The enemy came on precipitously, as fast as their horses could go, and they were so eager to fight that they were unable, and did not deign, to keep in order. Seraphe’s men did not move, but received them silently, letting them break their lances on them and slash their shields and helmets. And they remained motionless under their blows while the enemy became tired. But with the two battalions that had been defeated and the two that had attacked afterwards, their opponents were too numerous. So Seraphe’s men suffered a great many blows, and the enemy** began to push them back. When Seraphe saw that his men were beginning to lose ground and were departing so basely, he cried out and, firmly planted in his stirrups, charged, grasping his battle-ax, and began to cut and slice shields, helmets, and hauberks so fiercely that no armor the battle-ax struck well could withstand it. When Evalach’s seneschal, who had the second®4 battalion, saw him recover so thoroughly that it seemed he had arrived completely fresh and [240] new, he was astounded, for he was only waiting to see him tire before coming to his aid. In his great surprise he said, “Good Lord! This man will never tire, even if everyone were to attack him. If I waited until he fell from the fatigue of fighting, I would never strike a blow! May I be damned if I wait any longer!” Thereupon the seneschal and his companions rushed forward, straight to the two other battalions that had been formed to join®> battle with Evalach’s nephew. When the men saw them coming, they charged them with great ardor, just as the two battalions had done to Seraphe’s men. The seneschal called his knights and told them to keep close ranks, “for if we can break through them,” said he, “T will never stop until I have gone to strike Tholomer among his men, even if there were [241] yet again as many men as there are.” His men stayed together as he had ordered, and the enemy came on precipitously, assailing them fiercely, for they outnumbered his forces. But no matter how hard they attacked, the enemy could not push them back the length of the shaft of a lance. Rather, the seneschal broke through and plunged among them all and, with no more than three hundred knights, went to join battle with Tholomer’s battalion, where there could well have been five thousand men, on foot and on horseback. Upon reaching them, he and his companions rushed among them and were as lost as if they had fallen2® into the sea. The seneschal went into the middle of the entire battalion and struck Tholomer so fiercely that he and his horse fell to the ground all in a heap. And when the seneschal thought he could hold him by force, along came a knight who struck him from behind with a lance between the shoulders, just as he was leaning over Tholomer to strike him with his sword. The blow was so strong that he fell on top of Tholomer, flat on the ground. The seneschal’s men 23The enemy” supplied from Ponceau. 24Second,” as in Ponceau and context (Hucher has “third”). tad been formed to join” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 26-4 14d fallen,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “were”). 38 gathered around them, in an effort to hold or kill Tholomer, while his own men rushed forward to free him. When King Evalach saw the melee in three places— between Seraphe’s men and Tholomer’s first four battalions; between [242] the seneschal’s men and the two other battalions; and the seneschal against Tholomer’s battalion—he was very anxious and ordered his nephew to go to the aid of the seneschal’s men, while he went to rescue the seneschal. At these words, both battalions charged the enemy. As soon as Archimedes attacked the two battalions that were fighting the seneschal’s men, those on the other side could no longer resist, but turned and fled straight to Tholomer. King Evalach, who had joined combat with Tholomer, looked and saw his seneschal being led quickly away by men with great pointed iron maces. And he had three arrow wounds in his body that foot soldiers had given him. When the king saw him being led away so odiously, his companions cut to pieces and killed, he was so upset that he nearly went out of his mind. He charged as fast as the horse could carry him, with all the knights [243] after him, and caught up with them at the slope of a knoll. There he found that they had already thrown the seneschal to the ground and were unlacing his helmet, while Tholomer was holding a naked sword to cut off his head, for this was the knight he hated most in the world. When Tholomer saw Evalach approaching so rapidly, he thought he could not hold the seneschal for long, for he would be rescued, so he pulled out a fauchard and struck him in the body from below. Then he jumped on a horse?’ and charged Evalach, lance in hand. Evalach did likewise, and they met so furiously that the lances they held flew into pieces. The melee broke out all around, and when the lances broke, the swords were drawn. A great and fierce battle occurred there, and many men and horses were felled. King Evalach attempted to push the enemy back to where the seneschal lay, but they put up such a strong defense that it was impossible to break through or take any ground from them until the two battalions that Archimedes had met in battle were defeated, as you have heard, and came fleeing toward Tholomer’s battalion, which was fighting hard. Archimedes and his men gave hot pursuit until they ran into Tholomer’s battalion?® and Evalach’s, who were [244] engaged in fighting pell-mell. When Tholomer saw them come fleeing, followed by those pursuing, he called out his battlecry and charged Evalach’s men fiercely. And when those who were fleeing heard it, they turned their horses back against their enemy, while those on foot shot numerous poisoned arrows, killing a great number of Evalach’s men. The melee was great, and the fray was fierce, and many men were lost on both sides. But this time Evalach’s men took great losses. When Tholomer saw that he was winning, he sent a messenger to the leader of the eighth battalion, ordering him, if he valued his life, not to attack until he was 27On a horse” supplied from Sommer and Ponceau. 28«which was fighting hard. ... battalion” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail directed to, regardless of what he might see.2? But let us leave him now; we will no longer speak of him but will tell about Seraphe’s men, who are still on the battlefield. 10. The White Knight.! Here the story says that Seraphe’s men, who were engaged in combat with the four battalions, as you have heard, conducted themselves marvelously and defended themselves vigorously. No men ever held out more bravely against such a fierce attack. [245] Those on horseback and those on foot fought very well, but despite their feats and prowess,” they could not have resisted had it not been for Seraphe’s deeds. For he performed marvelous feats; everything he did was worthy of being remembered. He found no knight so bold who, seeing® Seraphe turn in his direction, would not willingly make way if he could. Battle-ax in hand, he cleared the ranks where he was able to advance; he cut strong shields, sliced thick hauberks, cleaved helmets? and visors; he slashed feet, legs, and arms; chests,? heads, ribs, and thighs; he bathed his battle-ax up to the shaft in the blood of men and horses. He alone sustained all his men and thwarted all the opposing forces, whose fear was focused on him. Not once did his strength diminish. All day he maintained such strength and vigor that he himself was amazed, and he thought he would never tire of bearing arms. Where he saw the greatest press and the largest mass of the battle, he rushed quickly and [246] willingly, desiring nothing else. And if he saw his companions pull back and lose ground, he took charge of them all alone and recovered as vigorously as if his limbs possessed all their strength and power. Had it not been for his deeds, his men could not possibly have resisted their marvelous foe, but would all have left, defeated and routed. Thus, his feats lasted all day long until past the hour of nones. And then a messenger came to Tholomer where he was fighting and said, “My lord, upon my word, there is a knight down there who is doing wonders, for all day he has withstood the melee and fray against four of our battalions. If it were not for him, his men would have been defeated a while ago, since for each one of their knights, we have two or more. He alone is holding out against them, so that all your men are fleeing before him.” When Tholomer heard this news, he wondered who the knight could be. “Now,” he said to the messenger, “go forward to Manatur, my brother, who is leading that 29«See,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “come”). Corresponds to Hucher II: 244-264; Sommer I: 58-66; Ponceau §88-99. 2“Prowess,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “poureté,” “ordeal”?). 3“Seeing,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “voloit,” which would give “wanting”). 4The order of “helmets” and “hauberks” is reversed, as in Ponceau. 5“Chests,” as in Ponceau (Hucher repeats “feet”). The History of the Holy Grail battalion, and tell him I order him to attack them so fiercely that no man will remain in the field.” The messenger did what Tholomer ordered, and Manatur was elated, for he was eager to fight. He and his men immediately charged [247] precipitously, assaulting Seraphe’s men so fiercely that they made them fall back the distance of a crossbow shot. This was a great and dangerous misfortune, for Seraphe had no more than twenty thousand men, while the others numbered more than thirty thousand, for there were at least fifteen thousand men in the last battalion. Unable to resist any longer, for no exploits could help, they were obliged to turn their backs. When Seraphe saw that defeat was imminent, he was so upset that he nearly went mad. He began to brood and then to weep, saying, “Alas! What sorrow when I leave safe and sound yet vanquished! Nothing kills me except death's long delay.” With these words, he grasped his battle-ax again and cried out his battlecry to rally his men; but they were so intent on fleeing that no admonition on his part could make them turn back. Defeated, they all fled straight toward the rock that Jecoine of the Clearing was guarding. When Seraphe saw them leaving thus, without rallying, he and eleven of his knights turned their horses and charged where they saw the greatest press. It happened that he came upon Manatur, who was leading the large battalion, and he struck him with the battle-ax with both hands so fiercely that he cleaved him down to the shoulders. The body fell to [248] the ground, and he went on so fiercely that anyone he met on his way was killed or struck down wounded. Manatur lay dead on the ground, and his knights, who saw him fall, began to lament so loudly that their shouts and cries were clearly heard in the midst of the battle, carrying to the field where Evalach was fighting; it was a wonder to hear them. But Seraphe, who did not recognize him, did not know whom he had killed. When he saw so much grieving over the body, he turned back and rushed upon the men so fiercely that they all took fright. With the few men he had, he drove them back. When they saw that their opponents numbered only twelve, they were greatly ashamed that they had fled because of them, and they angrily returned. Seraphe took heavy losses in this engagement, for they killed his horse and seven of his knights. Now Seraphe was on foot on the field with four knights, and the enemy, who numbered at least two thousand, charged.® Here Seraphe performed [249] marvelous exploits: he killed and felled horses, he slashed shields and helmets, he kept up the melee so long that his four companions were killed and cut down before his eyes. He had felled so many men and horses, making a deep pile around him, that no one could touch him except by throwing things. Seeing his companions dead, he put his feet together, jumped over the fallen around him, and charged with his battle-ax against a knight who had thrown a good many fauchards, axes, and knives at him. When the latter saw him coming, he tried to dodge; as he did so, Seraphe hit him so hard on the left shoulder that the arm flew to the ground, still S“Now Seraphe ... charged” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. Bg holding the shield. The blow descended on the side, slicing the ribs and side all the way down to the waist, [250] and he fell to the ground, dead. When the others saw this blow, they were so frightened that even the boldest retreated. Seraphe grabbed the dead knight's horse and jumped into the saddle as lightly as if he were unarmed and freshly arrived, then turned the horse toward them. Exposing his body to danger, he charged all alone, taking them on to the right and to the left so rapidly that no one saw him stay in any one place; rather, it seemed he was everywhere. At that point the others who had carried out the pursuit up to the pass returned, having captured and killed as many as they wished. When they saw the men who had tarried there, they thought the knight had a number of Evalach’s men, and they rushed forward so fiercely that they pushed the melee back more than a stone’s throw by the force of their arrival. Thus Seraphe was thrown to the ground, and his horse killed beneath him. Before he could get up, more than two [251] hundred horses trampled his body; he lay in a faint longer than it would take to go a half league. They believed him to be dead, which made the good knights who had seen him perform so many marvels very sad, for they would have preferred to take him alive if possible. Thus Seraphe lay in a faint for a long time. When he regained his senses, he jumped up and grabbed the battleax behind him where it had fallen. Meeting a knight, he struck him with the battle-ax he was holding with both hands, slicing through his left thigh and the saddlebow down to the saddle bands.’ The latter fell, and Seraphe grabbed the horse by the reins, put his foot in the stirrup, and immediately jumped on it. Then he charged them, trampled and beaten as he was. When the knights who had felt sorry for him® saw him mounted, they began to point him out to each other, for they had believed [252] he would never get up from where he lay. He addressed himself toward the main force and the thickest ranks he could see, his battle-ax in hand. As he did so, he was struck so hard by an arrow in the left shoulder that half of the point appeared on the other side. Feeling that he was wounded, he attacked as quickly as he had in the beginning, and the enemy began to shoot so many javelins and arrows that he and his horse were wounded in several places. Seeing that he could not withstand their shots, but feeling that he was not yet wounded to death, he plunged outside the press on his horse, which was strong and lightfooted, and headed straight for the melee where Evalach was, for he was more concerned about him than any other living creature. When his opponents saw him leave, they spurred after him. He did not stop until he pushed headlong into the press where he recognized Evalach’s banner. He saw Evalach’s men, who were very frightened and were being defeated because they did not see their lord. Crying out the royal battlecry again, he rallied and regrouped the men and charged Tholomer’s men. [253] 7Metal bands that linked the pommel to the cantle. 8«Who had felt sorry for him,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “who had seen him”). 40 He began to perform such wondrous feats of arms that all those on his side took heart and courage. Because of this, their rout was less serious, so that they were more numerous on the field than Tholomer’s men. But they had lost Evalach and had no sign or news of him. Tholomer held him in a melee a good bow’s shot away from his people. Seraphe, who heard the noise, spurred that way and found him on the ground, his sword in hand, for his horse had been killed. Seeing Evalach defending himself with no more than eleven knights against more than five hundred, Seraphe cried out to them and pushed headlong among them, with the entire battalion that was following him on one side and another. Seraphe rescued Evalach forcefully, snatching him and mounting him on a horse. When his pursuers arrived and saw Evalach mounted, they were grief-stricken. Enraged at his pursuers’ arrival, Seraphe left Evalach and, taking the battle-ax in both hands, he attacked them, slicing and killing everyone he encountered on his way. But when he thought he would return to Evalach, the enemy had surrounded him so that more than a thousand men separated them, and Seraphe was unable to learn anything about him. Realizing [254] he could not find Evalach, Seraphe swore that he preferred to die in the battle rather than lose him in that way. So he plunged into the press with all the men he had, thinking to break through by force, but this was impossible, for there were too many troops and too great a mass of men. There the fray was so great and the melee so cruel that it was a wonder to see. As Seraphe was trying to break through the press and the others were intent on stopping him, elsewhere Evalach was wounded by three lances in his body, and Tholomer had taken the reins of his horse and was leading him rapidly away, accompanied by one hundred knights. With him they were taking away fifteen of his knights, still mounted, who were so exhausted that they could no longer defend themselves. Thus they were leading Evalach away, and they had already beaten him so much that blood was flowing from his mouth and nose. And he had already lost so much blood from his wounds that he saw no hope for his life. They had already gone a good half league away from the battle, in order to disarm him and his followers, for they were still completely armed. Seeing himself far from the battle, [255] he thought that all hope was now lost and that he was dead if they could take him to the wood. Then he tore off the cloth covering the sign of the cross on his shield, looked, and saw the image of a man who was crucified inside the sign, and it seemed that bright blood dripped from the hands and feet. When he saw this, his heart softened, and he began to weep very tenderly, saying between his teeth, “Ah, good Lord God, the sign of whose death I carry, bring me back safe and sound to receive Your faith, to show the others, through me, that You are the true God, powerful in all things.” As soon as he had said these words, he looked before him and saw a fully-armed knight come out of the forest, with his helmet on his head and a white shield with a red cross hanging from his neck, riding a horse as white as a flower. This knight came at a very fast pace toward them. The History of the Holy Grail Once he was nearby, he grabbed Tholomer’s reins? and headed below the city. As they approached the battle, Tholomer heard the blows [256] clearly, closer than he thought. And Seraphe was fighting so fiercely that all his assailants marveled even more than before, for it seemed to them that he kept getting stronger.!° Then he cried out Evalach’s battlecry so loudly that Evalach heard it. Tholomer said then, “Now, let’s think about returning soon, for I think they have seen us and have begun the pursuit.” They all spurred on together, the White Knight leading by the reins Tholomer, who thought he still saw the forest before him. They went along until they came to the pass in the rock. No one saw the White Knight except King Evalach. When they reached the passage, it was opened for them as soon as the men guarding it saw Evalach. They went through without any of the men who were guarding the pass seeing the White Knight. Once through, the White Knight left Tholomer and, dashing into!! the middle of the field, began to cry out, “Strike! Strike!” When Tholomer and his men heard this, they were very frightened. The White Knight charged straight for Tholomer, his lance under his arm, and hit him so hard on the shield that he fell flat on the ground. Upon seeing this, Evalach drew his sword and charged. When the men [257] guarding the pass saw their lord charge the others, they rushed upon them, with lances lowered, bringing all but twelve to the ground on the first assault. When the enemy saw themselves thus taken by surprise, they did not know what to do; nevertheless, they defended themselves as well as they could, but it was useless, for it pleased Our Lord that they be taken prisoner. King Evalach had stopped over Tholomer where the White Knight had struck him down, and his men had already wounded him badly; upon seeing Evalach, he gave him his sword, and Evalach took it and then made him swear to be his prisoner. After Tholomer had sworn this, Evalach called Jecoine of the Clearing, who was guarding the rock, and ordered him to take him into the city and have him guarded honorably as a king. And then Jecoine took him and led him into the city along with ninety-nine other men. Evalach remained on the field until all the enemy were captured.!* As they took prisoners, they sent them into the city one after the other. Once Evalach had captured them all, he returned to the battle, straight to where Seraphe was, taking with him all but one hundred of those who had been guarding the pass. When he was beyond it, he!$ looked ahead and saw the White Knight carrying in his hand a banner with his insignia. Thereupon, Evalach spurred after him until he came to the battle where 9“Reins” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 10“s tronger,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “worse”). IM Dashing into,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “les laisse,” “left them,” which may be a misreading). 12«Ryalach remained ... captured” supplied from Sommer and Ponceau. 13“He” and “he” corrected to singular following Hucher variants and Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail Seraphe was performing the most marvelous feats [258] ever done by a knight. The White Knight plunged into the press and found Seraphe, who was being held by seven knights—two were holding him by the reins and two by the helmet, his head completely bent forward, while three!4 were striking his chest and arms with large iron maces, so that they had broken the flesh through the hauberk. Seeing this, the White Knight rushed upon them and struck the first so hard that his lance went through his body along with the banner. Next he quickly took his sword in hand and struck another, making his head fly into the field. Then he charged the two holding the reins, striking the first so hard that his hand flew into the field. The other one let go and turned in flight. When the two who were holding Seraphe by the helmet saw the wonders the White Knight was doing, they let go of their prisoner, and one of them drew a knife, thinking to strike him in the face through the opening in the helmet. But Seraphe was so dazed! from the blood he had lost and the blows his assailants had given him that he could not stand up; he had already fainted, and as soon as he was released, he fell to the ground, over the crupper of the horse. Thus the one who wished to strike him failed,!® and both of them then plunged into the press. When Evalach, who was [259] spurring after, saw the press and Seraphe’s fall, he thought he was dead and cried out, “Alas! All is lost!” and then he fainted. The White Knight ran to him and held him up so that he would not fall to the ground. Recovering from the faint, he saw Seraphe, who had already regained his feet, but was still so dazed that he did not know where he was. Rather, he truly believed that his enemies had captured him and made him their prisoner. When Evalach saw him standing, he rushed into the press and struck a knight under the throat, bringing him to the ground. He immediately took the horse in hand and led it directly to his brother-in-law, Seraphe, saying, “My friend, take this present; never was a gift so dearly paid for.” When Seraphe saw this, he was so happy that he forgot all his pains. He jumped onto the horse at once and said, “Certainly, if I had a battle-ax, any man I met could not resist me.” Then he saw the White Knight bringing him one, saying, “Here, Seraphe, this is sent to you by the True Crucified One.” Taking it, he felt that it was lighter than the one he had carried all day. Thus, he knew it was not his. Thereupon he plunged into the press, followed by all the others. Evalach was riding the horse that Tholomer had been on when the White Knight!” felled him. When Tholomer’s men!® saw him, they were frightened because 14«Three,” as in Sommer (Hucher has “two”). 15«F9m the helmet and” omitted, as in Ponceau. 16Failed,” as in Sommer and Ponceau (Hucher has ‘“sailli,” “jumped up,” which is probably a misreading). 17when the White Knight felled him,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “when he [Evalach?) felled the knight’). 18Tholomer’s men,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “Tholomer and his men”). 41 they had seen Tholomer leading Evalach away as a prisoner and now they!9 saw him riding [260] his horse. Nabur, Tholomer’s seneschal, took a horn and blew it to rally his men and regroup them. Seeing them closing ranks, Evalach cried out his battlecry very clearly and drew his men aside. Once they had reassembled, he divided them into two battalions. He issued orders to Seraphe to charge with the second battalion from behind, in order to surround the enemy,?° as soon as he himself was engaged with the first battalion. With that he spurred the horse and charged. Everywhere he went, the White Knight went before him, his banner in his hand and his sword drawn and at the ready. Evalach cried out, “Surely, you will all be captured! No one will escape, for you have lost Tholomer!” When they heard him speak in this way, they did not know what to do: it seemed to be true because Evalach was riding Tholomer’s horse, but they were not so much afraid that Tholomer had been taken prisoner as that he was dead. Evalach’s men attacked them fiercely. And they, in their dismay, reacted with fear. Once Seraphe saw them engaged in fierce combat, he attacked with the other battalion, surrounding them from behind, challenging and striking them energetically. [261] A savage battle ensued, and Tholomer’s people suffered greatly, for they were without their lord and in a foreign land where they did not know the roads or passes, should they have to flee. And even if they wanted to flee, they could not, for their enemies had surrounded them. It is clear indeed that when the head fails, the limbs fail, for never had people who had begun as well as they come to such a bad or ugly end. They had at least four times as many men as their opponents but were unable to defend themselves except as men who cannot flee. Here Seraphe performed wonders, and King Evalach fought so fiercely that no man of his age ever did better. And the White Knight did what no one could believe a single man could do: he struck shields down from their necks,”! he felled knights and horses, he sent heads flying with the helmets still on, he slashed chests and legs and arms. Why should I go on describing to you all the feats of arms and chivalry that he performed? Evalach and his men fought so well that they placed the enemy between themselves and the rock; [262] once they had done so, they rushed upon them fiercely. And the latter turned in flight straight toward the pass, thinking that if they could reach it, Evalach would never traverse it, but that they could thus take the city by force, since one hundred men could hold the rock against everyone, for the story says that only ten men could enter abreast. Believing that Evalach had not placed a guard there, they went to the rock with confidence. It was already getting very dark, which pleased them, for they were exhausted and they thought they would find repose and rest there. 191744 seen Tholomer.. . Ponceau and Sommer. and now they” supplied from 20To charge... the enemy” supplied from Ponceau. 2lnNecks,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “bodies”). 42 But it did not go as they thought, for as they came along rapidly, the one hundred men who were guarding the pass cried out to them so loudly that it seemed to them there were more than a thousand of them. Upon hearing them, they took such fright that they retreated headlong, and those pursuing them ran onto them, taking prisoners and killing as many as they wished. Meanwhile, the men who were guarding the pass shot a great many arrows, killing a large number of their horses and men, which created the greatest sorrow ever seen in such a short time. They killed so many that the only thing visible was blood, and [263] there was such a great massacre that it was impossible to recognize or describe the color of the shields or the arms, so covered with blood were they. Here Nabur, Tholomer’s seneschal, was felled. King Evalach stopped over him, and the man gave him his sword, saying that he was surrendering to him to save his life and limbs. When Evalach was about to take his sword, he remembered his seneschal, who had died in the battle, and he swore that his life would not be saved. Nabur fell at his feet, asking for mercy, and Evalach said he would take no other exchange but seneschal for seneschal. Then he took him by force and had him disarmed there, and was about to cut off his head himself when Seraphe dashed between them, saying,*? “Ah, my lord, what are you about to do? If you have lost your seneschal, Tholomer has lost his brother, whom he loved no less than you did* your seneschal.” Thus Seraphe calmed the king and protected the seneschal’s life. Great was the defeat at the passage of the rock, and there were many dead and many captured. But night came, which was disadvantageous to Evalach’s men, and yet they captured and killed so many that not two thousand escaped, between the wounded and unscathed, whereas they had numbered at least sixty thousand at the beginning of the battle. Thus the Egyptians were vanquished by the power of Jesus Christ. Evalach returned to Orcaut with his men, who had won so much booty that even the poorest and weakest expected it would make them rich and comfortable. And when he entered the [264] city, he found it so full of bound prisoners and the men guarding them that no one could take a step. He came back out and had tents and pavilions set up in the beautiful meadow outside the city. There he and his men camped. But now we will leave off speaking to you about King Evalach and his prisoners, and we will speak about the Christians who were in the city of Sarras. 11. The Story of Sarrasinte’s Conversion. ! The story says that Evalach’s wife was a very beautiful, wise, and honorable lady named Sarrasinte. When Evalach left with his army, the lady was very fearful for him, since he was the person she loved most in the world. So she sent for 224Saying” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 23 «yoy did,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “he did”). 1Corresponds to Hucher II: 264-284; Sommer I: 66-73; Ponceau §100-111. The History of the Holy Grail Josephus, because he had told Evalach that he would be in Tholomer’s power for three days and three nights; that he would not be able to hold out against him during that time; and that Tholomer would go so far as to make him fear death. That is why the lady sent for Josephus, and he came with his father Joseph. Once he was before her, she beseeched him to tell her the truth about how her lord would fare in the battle. Josephus replied,” “Sarrasinte, this is the message to you from the Christian God, the beginning and end of all things, the Judge and Savior of all: ‘Because earthly kings do not deign to recognize or receive Me, I will give their enemies power over their lives, and I will [265] distribute their lands among foreign peoples, for I want them to acknowledge that I am the sovereign King and the true God against whom no kingdom can be held. I kill the wicked and the proud with the breath from My mouth. Therefore, I shall remove the strong and powerful from high positions and great domains, and I shall lift the weak and scorned and raise them on high. The flesh of the kings will be given to birds of prey to be devoured, and the flesh of the weak and the humble will be buried honorably, because they know the straight ways and receive the commandments of the very high Lord with simple hearts and good faith.’” After saying this, Josephus sat down. The lady was very frightened, so she began to weep softly, and she said to Josephus that if he prayed to his God so much that Evalach returned in honor, she would believe in Him, and she would bring Evalach to the faith. Josephus asked her how he could be sure of this, and she said that she would swear to it and take a solemn oath. Josephus replied that he cared little about an oath made upon her idols, for they could neither harm nor help her; and that he cared little about her faith, for she had none, since she did not believe in the faith, that is, in Jesus Christ, [266] who is all faith and all belief. He then began to tell her the articles of faith and of the Trinity. She looked at him and asked him his name, and he said he was called Josephus by his baptismal name. “Josephus,” she said, “the fact is there isn’t any man who can teach me about this.” Then she ordered everyone to withdraw, and immediately began to ask Josephus if he wished to discuss it. He said, “Yes, willingly.” Right away, she began to set forth all the articles of faith and the Trinity, just as clearly as the wisest clerk of the world would do, until Josephus? began to wonder and asked her where she had learned this. She replied, “Indeed, Josephus, my mother was a believer in this faith for ten years. She was a Christian without the knowledge of my father, or of anyone in her lineage except me, and I will tell you how it happened. [267] “My mother was the duchess of Orberica, a very good and honorable lady, and my father was very proud and cruel. Twenty-seven years ago it happened that in our country, in a hermitage, there was a good man, very saintly and religious, for whom God performed many a wonderful miracle. This good man was named Salustes. And my 2“Tosephus replied” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. “Her companion” omitted, as in Hucher variants and Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail mother had an illness that no one but a woman suffers, an illness called blood loss. She had been so sick with this for nineteen months that she had lost all blood and color and strength in all her limbs. When she heard about the miracles that Our Lord was working through the hand of this saintly man, she thought she would go to speak to him, to find out whether she might find help for her illness, which was so grave that she thought she would more easily die than survive. “When she came before the worthy man, she fell at his feet crying; she beseeched him for mercy, and to take pity on the great anguish she was suffering. He looked at her and said, ‘Woman, woman, why are you asking me about your illness? Certainly, if you are a mortal and sinful woman and I am a mortal and sinful man, I have no power to give health to man or to woman. But Jesus Christ, the true God, gives it to those whom He wishes.’ And she replied, weeping, ‘My dear [268] lord, pray to your Lord to look at me in pity, and I know in truth that He will not deny you.’ “The good man said to her, ‘My lady, one should not come to the doctor with empty hands when one asks to be cured.’ And she said, ‘My lord, I have not come with empty hands, for I bring with me great riches, which I will leave for your God, if He heals me.’ He replied, ‘God has no need of your riches if the heart is not with them, for no sacrifice pleases Him as much as true repentance.’ And she said to him, ‘Lord God’s servant, there is nothing in this world I would not do at your command, if I can be healed of this great pain.’ He replied, ‘If you will believe in Jesus Christ, the true God, I promise that He will heal you before you leave here.’ She ran at once to his feet, kissed him, and said, ‘My lord, if He sends me health, I will believe in Him all the days that I live.’ And the good man said to her, ‘In faith, if you truly believe that He is the true God, you will be healed right away, for nothing is difficult for those who believe in Him.’ ‘My lord,’ said she, ‘I believe in Him as the true God, who has the power to free me from this illness.’ “The good man took a book and, as he told us later, read from the Gospel] at the place where Jesus Christ healed the woman who had had this very same illness for twentyeight years.4 {269] After that he said to her, ‘Arise, in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit.’ My lady now felt that she was as healthy as she had ever been, and she soon recovered strength in her body and in all her limbs. Feeling herself to be thus healed, she said to him, ‘Ah, my lord, now I see that one should believe in none but this God who healed me of my great anguish. Since this illness came upon me, I have given more than ten thousand bezants? to the doctors, none of whom could ever heal me. I believe in this One and will believe in Him all the days of my life.’ “Then the good man told her that she should be baptized, and she asked him what baptism was. He told her that it was the salvation of the Christian, and she replied that she would therefore be willingly baptized. The good man baptized her in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. After that, my mother came back to 4“At the place... years” supplied from Sommer and Ponceau. See Matthew IX, 20-22; V, 25-34; Luke VIII, 43-48. 5The bezant was a gold coin used in Byzantium. 43 get® me and those who had come with her, outside the little house where I was waiting for her. She’ took me by the hand and led me before the hermit. Then my lady said to me, ‘Dear sweet daughter, I am completely healed, and I want you to do what I shall order.’ I replied, trembling, that I would do her pleasure. And I wondered what she wanted me to do. She said, [270] ‘Dear daughter, I want you to believe in the One who healed me.’ Being silly and childish, I thought she was talking about the good man, so I told my lady that I would not dare. When she asked me why, I said because his beard was so long. The good man began to laugh at what I had said about him, and he said to me, ‘Dear child, it is not I, but another who is full of all beauty and joy.’ I asked where he was and that he show Him to me, and if He was more handsome than my brother, I would believe in Him. “This brother about whom I spoke was so handsome that I did not believe it was possible to make a face so beautiful. As soon as I had said this, the hermit answered, ‘Dear child, in time you will see the One I have told you about, who is so handsome, or else your brother. Whichever may be the one you see first, after that you will never see the other.’ Right after he said this, I saw a great light outside the chapel. It seemed that all the sweet odors one’s mouth could name were diffused there. Then out of the chapel came? the face of a very beautiful man, so bright that in this [271] world there are no eyes sharp enough to look at him perfectly. This man held in his right hand something the hermit called a cross, which was entirely red. His eyes gave off two rays as red as burning coal. After coming forth, He stopped, and I was so frightened by the great marvel that I could no longer look at Him. Rather, I dropped to the ground in a faint. After I had been that way awhile, the hermit took me by the chin and raised me up, and then I looked and saw nothing except him and my lady. The good man asked me, ‘Dear child, what is your impression?’ And I answered right away, by God’s will, that I would willingly receive this One’s faith, and he baptized me right away in the name of the holy Trinity. “Afterwards, he taught us the faith: how Jesus Christ had been conceived and born of the Virgin without harming her maidenhead, and how He had suffered death in order to redeem the world from everlasting sorrow; how on the third day He was resuscitated and delivered His friends from hell, and how He ascended to heaven forty days later, and how on the eleventh day after that, He sent His spirit to His disciples in Jerusalem, and how He taught them to consecrate His body when He ate with them the day before He was crucified. Once he had taught us all these things, he celebrated before us this holy Sacrament, giving it to my mother and then to [272] me. When he put itin my mouth, he told me that I should believe this was the body that had been lodged in the Virgin Mary. I was afraid and thus slow to answer. It seemed to me at once that it was SiGe supplied from Hucher variants, Sommer, and Ponceau. 7Corrected to singular following Ponceau. 8“1t seemed... . came” supplied from Hucher variants, Sommer, and Ponceau. 44 the figure I had seen come out of the chapel, so I told him right away that I believed it, having seen Him clearly. “Thereupon we parted, and he urged us not to return to the belief in our images, for in them lay only destruction. And he told us that we should be assured that God would not forget us, but would soon send us comfort, and He would send the high acclaim of His name throughout the far lands whose people He wished to win over to the holy faith. “Thus he taught us to keep Jesus Christ’s law. We took leave of him, and when we came to Orberica, we heard a great hue and cry about a wild beast that was in the country and that the people had begun to hunt. This beast was so bizarre that no matter how long any man looked at it he could not say what it was, but it was so redoubtable and cruel that it was ravaging the entire region. It was destroying the green wheat, killing men and horses, tearing down houses, taking small children from the cradle, and crushing good pregnant women when it found them alone. “The day we returned from seeing the good man it happened [273] that the people were attacking the beast. My brother, who was so handsome and bold, was in the forefront, on a big horse, completely armed, as he had just become a knight. Nor should any man who was not armed have attacked the beast, for on its forehead it had three horns so sharp and keen that no armor, no matter how well struck, could resist them. Thus my brother pursued it before all the others, and it had already killed three horses from beneath him, as it darted back and forth in flight. “It dodged and tumed so much, so I was told—for I did not see it—that it could no longer remain, nor did it dare, but it turned and fled straight for a nearby forest. And my brother spurred after, as fast as the horse could go, plunging into the forest after the beast. We never saw him after that, nor did we learn with certainty whether he was dead or alive. Thus my mother and I realized that the hermit was a holy man and a friend of Jesus Christ, since he had made us wise and certain about things which were to come, because he had told me that ifI first saw the One he had promised me, I would never again see my brother. And he told the truth, for I never saw my brother again after these words were spoken. [274] “My mother held to this faith as long as she lived, nor did she ever, by the grace of God, return to the infidel law. And the glorious Son of God gave her such grace that it was never perceived. When the time came for her to leave the world, she ordered everyone except me to leave the room where she lay. After everyone was gone, my lady ordered me? to close the door. Once I had returned to her, she said to me, ‘Dear daughter, I know truly that I shall leave this world tonight. Now, dear, sweet daughter, go to my case where my precious stones, rings, and other jewels are, and bring me a white box you will find there.’ “I did as she ordered; when I had brought the box to her bed, she raised herself as well as she could, so that she was on her knees in her bed, and then she began to sigh deeply from the heart and to weep and beat her chest in *“Everyone except me....ordered me” supplied from Hucher variants, Sommer, and Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail anguish. After she had been in this attitude! for a long time, she ordered me to put the box down and asked me to bring her water to wash her hands. Once she had done so, she took the box, opened it, and [275] pulled out our Holy Savior in the form of bread and received it with a great number of sighs and tears. Once she had done this, she said that now she was completely reassured and did not fear the devil at all, since she had received health that could withstand all sickness and protection against all the enemy’s tricks and assaults. “After that, she said to me, ‘My beautiful daughter, I am leaving you, and I do not know whose protection to put you under, if not that of the One who will never abandon those who hold to Him. My dear daughter, this is the One whose holy law you have received and held for some time. Be sure that you keep it as it was confided to you, and be sure that you do not return to the old perfidy. Worship only one God in three persons, and three persons in one God. Keep from angering Lord God in every way nature makes possible; be ready and willing to keep His commandments. “Always remember how He deigned to be born of woman and live in the filth of the treacherous sinful world, and how He underwent and suffered all those things that belong to human nature, with the sole exception of sin, of which He was always free and pure. And you should always keep before your eyes His deep graciousness when He suffered the [276] great marvelous anguish of having His hands and feet pierced, by His own will, in order to protect those who wish to hold to Him and deliver them from the pain of hell. You should remember all these things in your heart, beautiful sweet daughter, for where you find such high memory, you will lose all will and desire to sin. “Henceforth, I wish and command you to have your Savior with you at all times, and you must do so as I have since the time I received the holy faith. For ever since you and I received Jesus Christ’s baptism by the hand of the holy man, I have constantly had with me the body of the One who deigned to undergo bodily torment for you and me. I have always kept this body, and there has never been a day since, thanks be to God, when I have not seen it, though I’m not worthy of it. And nevertheless, my lovely daughter, you never knew that I kept it, for I was reluctant to show it to you because I was committing too great a sin by holding it and yet refusing it. I kept it in case you should leave this world before I did, for I would have given it to you to take communion; and if I were to leave before you, I would receive it just as you have seen me do. [277] “Dear, beautiful daughter, I am leaving you now, so I beseech you and command that once I am dead, you go to the saintly man from whom we received the holy faith and ask him to think about remembering this sinner’s soul in his prayers. And if you beseech him, for the blessed love of the Lord he serves, to give you the company of!! this Lord, it means that you will not leave this sorrowful life without receiving your enduring salvation. I am certain that he will 104 ttitude,” as in Sommer and Ponceau (Hucher has “faith”). ee give you the company of,” as in Ponceau (Hucher, who seems to have misread the manuscript, has an incomprehensible passage here). The History of the Holy Grail give it to you willingly. Be sure, as you hold your life dear, not to put it in a place that any earthly thing has frequented, but take this white box, for he himself gave it to me, and put inside it what the good man will give you. Look at it each day, and convince Him with sighs and tears that in His pity He should keep you from wanting to believe in or worship any other, for there is no other in whom one should put his belief or thoughts.’ “In this way my mother instructed and taught me to do all those things that she knew would be profitable to my soul, and to avoid all those things that could be harmful to me. After she had finished speaking, she ordered me to open the door to the room. I did, and the ladies and maidens came forward, in great numbers. Once they had done so, she called me and, whispering in my ear, asked me whether I saw anyone [278] around her bed. I looked immediately and saw a man who was holding His hand out to her, and He was just like the One I had seen in the chapel, the One the hermit showed me. When I saw Him, I was so amazed that I was very frightened. She asked me what I saw, and I replied that this was our Savior. She said that He should be worshiped and thanked because He deigned to show Himself to me, for now she knew very well that He wished to demonstrate something. “Then she said to me, ‘Fair, sweet daughter, I commend you to God. Now kiss me, for this Lord is going to lead me into the eternal and most delightful house that ever was, and I see it with my eyes.’ These were the last words my lady said to me; as soon as she had said them, her soul immediately left her body. “Thanks be to God, I did exactly as she had told me. I went to the holy man, and he entrusted me with the glorious body of our Savior Jesus Christ. After he had spoken to me awhile about the frailties and perils that occur in this unhappy world and admonished me about the works and commandments of Our Lord, he commended me to the protection of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, and ordered me to return, for he could hardly speak, so burdened was he with the illness that gripped him. As soon as I had taken leave of him and left his enclosure, clasping the box [279] that held my Savior, I heard the greatest and sweetest song ever heard, I believe, and this song went from the chapel straight up toward the clouds. “After going about a half league from the hermit’s house, I encountered a man dressed in a completely black robe. He was very thin and pale and had long, white hair and a similar beard. The man was dressed in such a way, and he was hurrying along so quickly that he was dripping with sweat, and he was saying I know not what between his teeth. As soon as he saw me, he began to weep very hard, and he said to me, ‘Ah, Christian, you are too hasty to return, when you have not been with our brother Salustes long enough for the spirit to leave his blessed body.” When I heard him call me a Christian, I jumped immediately down from my palfrey and asked him very softly what kind of man he was. And he responded, weeping, that he was Jesus Christ’s servant, that he desired greatly to see me, and he had come from very far away at the admonition of the Holy Spirit, to bury this good man who had passed away. 45 And I said to him, ‘My lord, I have just now left him, and he was still alive, but certainly, he is very sick.’ “What!” said the worthy man, ‘Dear child, didn’t you hear [280] Our Lord’s angels, who are just now carrying away the soul from his glorious body, before the face of Our Lord Jesus Christ?’ When I heard this, I was in despair, and I began to weep very softly. I called two of my servants who had come with me, in whom I had great confidence, for I had bought them as small children and had raised them until they were grown and well-trained and well suited to serve in a good house. These two were with me, along with no one but a cousin of mine, who was a maiden and still is, for she never wished to have a husband; rather, she said that she would never have carnal relations with a man, and she is still here. “Thus the four of us returned with the good man, and when we reached the hermitage, we discovered that the saintly hermit had passed away. When the good man saw!2 this, he fell from his full height onto the dead man and began to lament and grieve deeply for him. After he had lamented and wept a great deal, he stood up and went directly behind the altar, and when he came back, I saw a place fit for burying a body. Then [281] he himself went and dug out the earth right in front of the altar, until he had made a trench large enough for a man’s body. Once he had done this, he raised his hand and made the sign of the holy cross on the body. Taking the body by the head to put it in the grave, he had me come forward and ordered me to take it by the feet. I said, ‘Ah, how do I dare touch him, I who am a sinner! It seems to me that it’s not right for me to touch such a holy thing.’ He replied at once, ‘Don’t hesitate to come forward, for you are carrying a holier and higher thing than this.’ And then I knew indeed that he was a good man when he spoke in this way of hidden things, for he spoke of Jesus Christ’s holy body that I carried in the box. Then I went forward, took the body by the feet, and we put it in the grave between the two of us, for he did not want anyone else to touch it. “When it was completely covered with earth, and the good man had said everything he should, he began to speak to me about Our Lord. Then he began to look at my two]3 servants and my cousin, and he said to them, ‘Say there, what are you seeking in Jesus Christ’s!4 holy places, you who are not worthy of even seeing His house? You are so bold that you enter within, you who are in the filth and sin of the devil, whom you worship and serve day and night.’ He spoke to them so long about Our [282] Lord and His works that all three of them fell at his feet and asked to be baptized right away, for they would never remain in the evil faith where they had been for so long. When he heard them speak in this way, he was overjoyed; he himself ran inside the little house, took a jug, and filled it with water from a cistern dug by the holy man who had died. Then he came back and baptized all three of them in the name of the Holy Trinity, beseeching and exhorting them to hold to Jesus Christ’s holy faith and to avoid the idols that cannot help, but rather harm. Then he showed 12«saw,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “heard”). 13«child” omitted, as in Ponceau. 14Tesus Christ's” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 46 them the articles of the faith and beseeched me, for God’s sake, to teach them as much good as I could. “Thereupon he commended us to God, and we left, while he stayed there. He said that he would never leave as long as he lived, for he had very little time left to work on earth. Thus he remained. After that, through his hands, Jesus Christ worked many beautiful miracles and many great wonders, but he did not live much longer. He was called Hermoine the Hermit; and God, in His grace, gave me the wonderful gift of being at his burial, just as I had [283] been at the other one. Ever since, I have held to the Christian faith, never, thanks be to God, returning to the disloyalty of worshiping wood or stones.” After Josephus had listened to her account from beginning to end, he said, “My lady, since you have received faith in Jesus Christ, why don’t you act like His loyal handmaiden? Why didn’t you free your lord a long time ago from this great filth in which he has lain so long?” “Indeed,” said the lady, “I was waiting for Jesus Christ, in His pity, to send me the proper moment to speak to him about it. But the time has never come, for my lord is a very cruel man, and he would have left or abandoned me or destroyed me right away if I had spoken to him about something that did not please him, and perchance he would always have suspected me. Now Our Lord, through His pleasure, has led him to the point where he can be turned away from the bad way and brought back to the right way, which leads, for whoever believes, to eternal life, that is, Jesus Christ. And I beseech you, glorious servant of Our Lord, to ask the True Crucified One, in His great mercy, to defend him from the peril of death and bring him back healthy and in great honor to the true faith in His holy name. If he could be brought in, he would be a very loyal and strong servant, [284] for he would be won over first and then all of his land. And if I saw that he believed, I would be so happy that there is nothing in this world that could distress me, nor would I care when I might die. But it has frightened me terribly that you told him he would be in the power of his mortal enemy for three days and three nights.” Josephus replied that it was true, and that it could not be changed by any living man. And the lady said to him, “Josephus, surely you can tell me at least if your Lord has shown you whether he will escape from this battle.” She asked him so often, inquiring again and again, that he told her everything, as it occurred from day to day. The lady held him dear and honored him and very willingly listened to him speak and say the good words that he drew from the Scriptures. Thus Josephus and the other Christians were honored and served in the city of Sarras by Queen Sarrasinte and the members of her household. 12. Evalach’s and Seraphe’s Conversion! The story says that King Evalach was at Orcaut, very happy and joyful. He had inquiries made about what became of the White Knight, who he could be, and what land he came Corresponds to Hucher II: 284-301; Sommer I: 73-77, Ponceau §112-121. The History of the Holy Grail from. But no one he [285] spoke to could give him any information. The night after returning from battle and the next day, the king had a search made for him and inquired about him. When he saw that he could not be found, he was very sad and distressed, and he was surprised that he was unable to hear any news.* That night the king ate nothing; he and? his brother-in-law, Seraphe, spoke incessantly about the White Knight, and he said he would never* be happy or satisfied until he learned true news about him. Thus they talked about him all night long, and the king said they should cherish him, for he knew that through him he had recovered his honor. Thus the king spoke that night about the White Knight, and his feats of arms were often called to mind until he, Seraphe, and the others went to bed, for that day they had exhausted themselves. They were thus” worn out and badly needed Test. When morning came and the king had arisen, he went to see Tholomer. And when the latter saw him arrive, he fell at his feet and begged for mercy, being very much afraid that he would kill him. The king took him by the hand and raised him [286] up; because he was a king, he did not want him to lie before him on the ground for long. After that Tholomer called Evalach’s nobles and beseeched them to speak to their lord about peace. When they came to Evalach and did so, he replied that he would not listen to anyone who spoke about this before he had returned to Sarras. The discussion therefore broke off. The king went to Sarras, taking with him his brotherin-law Seraphe, who was very badly wounded. Seraphe said he would rather go to his land, where he would be more comfortable than elsewhere, if the king did not object. The king replied that he wanted him to come to Sarras, for he would show him the greatest marvel that any man could believe: a man who had told him, when he set out, everything that actually happened to him in the battle. And Seraphe said he would gladly see this man. Thus they headed straight toward Sarras. As soon as the king had given them leave, the others departed, each one going to his own country. When Evalach reached Sarras, and the queen saw him and her brother Seraphe riding together, she rejoiced over them. And all the other people were overjoyed, for no one had thought [287] there would ever be peace or concord between them, since they had hated each other so long. As soon as the king had dismounted, he asked for news about the Christians. And the queen asked if there was any truth or faith in their words. The king told her that of all the words Josephus had said, every one had turned out to be true. The queen was very happy about this. She sent for Josephus, and he came right away. When the king saw him coming, he stood up to meet him and said that he was welcome as the most truthful of all the prophets. Then he had him sit down next to him and 2“Thus they spoke all that night about him” omitted here, as in Ponceau. 3“His wife and” omitted, as in Hucher variants and Ponceau. 4“Cease searching or” omitted, as in Ponceau. 5“Were thus” supplied from Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail said to Seraphe, who was lying on a couch, wounded and exhausted, “Seraphe, my dear brother-in-law, I want all my people to know that it is through the prayers and counsel of this man and by your valiance that I recovered my land and all earthly honor and won victory.” Josephus replied, “King, it was neither my prayers nor Seraphe’s valiance that kept you from losing your land and gave you victory, but the high Lord, whose sign you were carrying and whom you called upon sincerely in your great need, who delivered you and returned your land and honor.” Then [288] Seraphe asked him who this Lord was, who had such great power and of whom he spoke so confidently. Josephus replied, “Listen, Seraphe, and I will tell you who He is, just as He Himself tells you through me. This is what the Christian God says: ‘I command you, Josephus, to tell Seraphe when he asks who I am, that I am the True Crucified One. You will tell him that I am the beginning and end of all things. I am the One who rescued you from the seven knights when you were in such a state that the blood was streaming from your nose and mouth and from your’ ears and eyes. I rescued you from death there. And if you think you performed the marvels you did in the battle through your power alone, you are wrong. The prowess you showed before will bear witness, as well as you yourself, who wondered at your great feats,® for you did not believe, nor did it seem reasonable to you, that any man could have the strength to do such great deeds. You know this very well. At the beginning, as soon as you set forth to plunge into the battle, Evalach, the king who is here, said as he saw you move out, “Ah, Seraphe, dear friend, go now under the protection of this Lord whose sign I am carrying; if He is the true God, as has been attested, [289] may He protect your body from shame and peril today, and may He send you the greatest honor you could have.” I protected you from peril because of the prayer of this man, who called My name sincerely and appealed to Me and remembered Me. And I gave you a great deal of worldly honor, for never was any prowess spoken of so much as yours, and if you wish, I will give you even more, for you will have the great honor of heaven and the joy that will never end. But take care to conquer it wisely.’” After Josephus had said this, Seraphe was astounded because he spoke of things that he thought no man could know. And King Evalach said that indeed he spoke the truth; and that he had been led so far as to fear death, when he uncovered the sign and when he called on the Lord who had been placed there, just as Josephus had taught him. Then Josephus asked to see the shield where the sign was portrayed. The king had his shield brought in; once it was uncovered, they saw clearly a red cross, and on it a crucified person who seemed to have just been crucified. While they were looking at it, it happened that a man entered who had just had his hand cut off in a melee. When Seraphe saw him carrying his [290] left hand in his right, he called Josephus and said, “Josephus, if your God S«says,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “is”). 7“Nose and mouth and from your” supplied from Ponceau. 8You showed before . . . feats” supplied from Ponceau. 47 has such great power as you affirm, may He show it now. If He returns to this man his hand that has been cut off, so that it is just like the other one, then I will really say that He is the true God, and I swear to you that I will believe in Him without further admonition.” “Indeed,” said Josephus, “I will tell you even more, because I do not want you to think that I am working spells or charms. Have the man come to the sign on this shield and touch it with his arm. If he is not healed right away, have me destroyed without further ado.” Then the wounded man came forward and touched the cross with his arm. As soon as he had done so, his arm was as whole and complete as the other one. And another thing happened: the cross, just as it was, stuck to the arm and? no longer appeared on the shield. [291] Everyone in the palace was more astonished by this than by the healing of the arm. When Seraphe saw this, he said that he would wait no longer, but would become a Christian henceforth, for one should believe in the One who had the power to perform openly such wondrous miracles. He stood up, sick and wounded as he was, came to Josephus and fell at his feet, telling him to make him a Christian right away. [292] Then Josephus baptized him, in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, and he was given the baptismal name Nascien. As soon as he was baptized, a great light descended on him so that it seemed to everyone there that all his clothes were on fire, and they saw openly a brand of burning fire entering his mouth. After that they heard a voice that said very loudly and frightfully, “The last have taken the body’s honor from the first by the quickness of their faith.” As soon as the voice had spoken, Nascien felt that he was healed and cured of all his wounds and injuries. His body was immediately filled with the Holy Spirit, and he began to tell things that were to come, and he set forth the strong words of the Scriptures as well as—and even better than—the wisest clerk of the world. He said to King Evalach, “Ah, king, why are you waiting to request baptism? The Holy Spirit of Our Lord is showing me all the secret things, and the Holy Spirit says, ‘Why are you waiting to wash your hands? The tables [293] are set; go and sit down to eat.’ This message is sent to you by the true Lord, the True Crucified One, through my mouth: ‘The lazy worker will receive his pay lazily.’ In order that King Evalach may know that he should not consider me crazy or out of my senses, the Holy Spirit has just shown me that Tholomer the Fugitive is now dead and passed away from this world.” Nascien spoke so much!° about God and told them so much that King Evalach hurried to be baptized, as did the man whose arm and body had been cured by the sign of the cross. As soon as each one was baptized, he found his name written in the middle of his forehead, exactly as he should be christened. The name that King Evalach bore was Mordrain, which is a Chaldean word that means “late to 9“Just as it was, stuck to the arm and” supplied from Hucher variants, Sommer, and Ponceau. 10«S4 much,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “right away”). 48 believe,”!! and the name given to the man with the cross on his arm was Clamachides, which means “Standard-bearer to the glorious Lord.” After that the king!? called Sarrasinte and ordered her to be baptized, and she replied that it was not permitted for her to receive baptism twice. The king asked her what this meant; she replied that she was a Christian, and had [294] been for seventeen years, and she recounted how this had occurred just as she had told Josephus. And she told him that the good man who baptized her did not want to change her name, but said that it suited her well, for it meant “full of faith.” Once they were thus baptized, the others came in such a hurry that they would not have gone more quickly, it would seem, to gather up a great pile of deniers, if they were spilled out. Nor did they want to let anyone other than Josephus baptize them, for they did not believe they would be well baptized by another man’s hand. Josephus held a large silver basin and poured it over the head of each one, in the name of the Holy Trinity; that day he succeeded in baptizing at least five thousand three hundred fifty-nine people. The next day Nascien left the king and his sister, taking Joseph with him, to baptize the people throughout the land and teach them to keep the law and the faith. Meanwhile Josephus remained in Sarras and had the statues knocked down and the altars!> broken into pieces; he had new altars made, and he purified the temples just as Jesus Christ had taught him to do, with holy water. After he had received and converted all the people of Sarras, he went throughout the land around, as far as the kingdom extended, accompanied by all the Christians who had come from Jerusalem with him except for [295] three, who remained to watch over the ark where the holy dish was. These three were called Anascor, Manathes, and Lucan. It was they whom Josephus had made the main guardians of the ark, as the story recounted earlier, when it spoke about his consecration.!4 Thus these three stayed, as well as all the women, while all the others went throughout the country baptizing the people and preaching the name of the True Crucified One. There was not one among them in whom the Holy Spirit did not appear so openly that they spoke all languages and prophesied everything. And they numbered forty-nine, apart from Josephus and his father. When Josephus reached Orcaut, he went first of all to the temple; once inside, he began to think very intently. After reflecting for a long time, he undid his belt; then he ran straight to one of the altars, holding his belt, and began to pronounce exorcisms and make the sign of the cross over an image on the main altar, until a devil came forth, the ugliest and most hideous thing that could be found. Josephus threw his belt around its neck and dragged it out of the temple before the king and all the people who were NN “Which is a Chaldean word that means ‘late’” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 12King,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “rains,” “queen”?). 134 ttars,” as in Sommer and Ponceau (Hucher has “statues”). 14see Chapter 7. The History of the Holy Grail following him. It bellowed so loudly!> that it was heard clearly throughout the city, so that a great [296] many people ran there. Then the king asked him why he was punishing it so, and what wrong it had done to him. Josephus replied that he would hear about this in time, and he began to ask the devil why he had caused Tholomer to fall from the windows to the ground. He replied, “Josephus, you are the servant of Our Lord Jesus Christ. Let me go a little, and I will tell you.” Josephus removed his belt and took him by the hair. Then he ordered!® him to tell him quickly what he had asked. The devil said, “Josephus, I saw the marvels that God did for you and for your father when you caused the man whose hand was cut off to be healed at Sarras by touching the sign of the cross; and I saw that you had Seraphe and King Evalach baptized, so I feared that you might do likewise!” with Tholomer. Therefore, in the form of a man, I brought him news. I told him that Evalach had ordered that the next day he be dragged by the tails of horses and then hanged. After I had told him this, he was very frightened about what to do. I told him that if he rewarded me well, I would deliver him from prison, for I knew more about spells than everyone in the world. And he replied that he not [297] only promised me his entire fortune, but would become my vassal for all the days in the world, nor would he ever do anything that would harm or bother me if I could deliver him from there. Then I changed before him into the shape of a griffin and had him get on me; once I had climbed on high, I dropped him so that he broke his neck and one of his arms.” Then Josephus took him again, put his belt back around his neck, and led him through all the streets so openly that everyone saw him. And he said to the people, “Wretched people, with foolish thoughts, devoid of sense and faith, here is the figure of the god in whom you have always believed and through whom you thought you lived on earth.” Then he asked the devil what he was called, and the devil told him his name was Selaphas, and that it was his charge to spread fear in the people through the bad news he brought them. When the people heard these words, a great many of them hurried to be baptized. Josephus entered the king’s palace from the city and baptized them right away, purifying them with holy water. Then he let the devil go, adjuring him [298] never to bother anyone who had the sign of having received the faith. Then the king’s ban!® was cried throughout the city, that all should come to the palace to hear his order. Once they were at the palace, inside the enclosure, Josephus climbed up to the windows and announced Jesus Christ's word. After he had preached to them for a long time, he had the king issue the order that they all go to be baptized. Those who did not want to do so were given leave by the king to quit the land, never to return. 151+ bellowed so loudly” supplied from Hucher variants, Sommer, and Ponceau. 16“; dered,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “began”). 177 ikewise,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “autre dolour,” which would give “some other harm to [Tholomer]”). 18Ran,” as in Hucher variants, Sommer, and Ponceau (Hucher has “baptism”). The History of the Holy Grail Upon hearing this speech, a great number of the people ran to be baptized. But there were quite a few who, as soon as they heard the order, said they would rather leave the land than change the faith and belief they had always held. That day there were a great many men and women who received Jesus Christ’s faith. And when those who did not wish to receive it left the country, they fell dead of sudden death as soon as they had passed through the last gate. There were some who went out of their senses; there were some who were struck in the body so that the wound was seen [299] but not the one who did it; and others who did not have these ills were injured either in the limbs or in the thigh, or their necks were broken. But none of those who were baptized was hurt. There were so many dead and wounded that the news came to Josephus where he was baptizing the people. When he heard this, he ran there, very frightened. Upon approaching the gate, he looked ahead and saw the devil he had just released, holding in his hand a bloody sword. As soon as he saw Josephus from afar, he began to shout, “Now look, Josephus, how I take!9 vengeance on the enemies of your God!” Josephus asked him why he was doing. this extraordinary thing and who had ordered him to do it. The devil replied that he was doing it by Jesus Christ’s order. “Coward,” said Josephus, “I certainly never ordered you to do this!” Then he ran toward him, intending to tie him up. As he ran, he looked ahead and saw an angel whose face was [300] as red as a burning thunderbolt, as were his feet and hands, while his clothes were as black as pitch. When Josephus saw him in these clothes, he was very frightened and wondered what this angel could signify. At that moment, the angel approached him and released a lance he was holding, which struck him in the left thigh so hard that the tip hit the bone. As soon as the angel had struck him, he dropped the lance without pulling it out, and said, “This attests to my people that you have stopped baptizing in order to rescue those who scorned my faith. This reproach will endure all the days of your life, and do not be surprised if you pay for it elsewhere.” Thereupon the angel turned away. Josephus pulled out the lance29 very easily, and it did not seem to hurt as he did so. After pulling it out,?! he saw that the tip had stayed in the wound, yet he never felt any pain, any more than if it had all been a dream. But he realized all the more keenly that the angel had told the truth in his reproach, for there was never a day as long as he lived that he did not [301] limp from having been struck in the thigh” by the lance. Nor could he ever stanch the bleeding of the wound as long as the tip was in it. And he paid for it further in another place, as the angel had said should not surprise him, and the story will recount this later, when the time and place come.?? But here the story stops speaking about the wound and the lance, except to say that Josephus 19Take,” as in Hucher variants, Sommer, and Ponceau (Hucher has “prove”). 20-7 ance” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 2]pulling it out” supplied from Ponceau. 221 the thigh” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 23Despite this announcement, nothing more is recounted about this. 49 carried the lance to the palace. Many people looked at it, but no man who saw it was ever able to say what kind of wood it was made of. 13. Josephus Is Healed; the Grail Quest Is Announced.! Josephus returned to the palace, very frightened and afraid, not so much because of his wound but because he feared that Our Lord was angry with him. Even though he had bandaged his wound, it did no good, for it continued to bleed, which astonished the king and the others and made them marvel. He told them not to be astounded, for? it had happened to him because he had tried to rescue the unbelievers from the hands of the devil, to whom they belonged. When the people heard this news, those who were baptized were very happy, and those who had not yet received baptism immediately ran to Josephus and requested baptism for fear of the devil, who had treated the others so badly. Thus they received Jesus Christ’s faith in a great crowd. [302] Josephus was in the city of Orcaut for three days with all the people that he and his father Joseph had led out of Jerusalem. And Our Lord worked so well through them that by the third day they had baptized all the men and women in the city. They converted both humble and great to Jesus Christ’s faith through the true words they spoke and through the great miracles God did for them. And the others who went through the surrounding countryside succeeded so well that all the land contained in the kingdom was led to the holy blessed religion that had newly begun. And the images in all the temples and places where they could be found were burned and smashed. Before returning to Sarras, Joseph? converted Nascien’s entire land to the Christian belief. After that, he returned, very happy because it seemed to him that he had accomplished well Our Lord’s faith and task. Nascien came with him; once they had arrived, when Josephus heard the news, he was very joyful. He chose some of his companions and gave them the orders and dignity of priests. Then he decided that some of them would go to Nascien’s land, while the others would remain in King Mordrain’s land, so that there would be some in each city. Thus Josephus divided them until only [303] sixteen remained in his company, while thirty-three were sent into the two lands. But before they took leave of him, he made them bishops, just as Our Lord had done with him,‘ so that there were thirty-three bishops, while the sixteen who remained with him all received the order of priest. Once the land was completely brought over to the holy faith and the pastors were all established in each city, Josephus Corresponds to Hucher II: 301-321; Sommer I: 77-84; Ponceau §1 22-133. 2“te told them not to be astounded, for” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 3Joseph,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “Josephus”). 4corrected to singular, as in Ponceau. 0 decided not leave the rich city of Sarras without a holy body. Through the advice of good Queen Sarrasinte, he went to seek the bodies of the two holy hermits where she told him they lay. When he got there with his followers, he prayed that Our Lord, in His sweet mercy, would deign to show him their names and merits. After this prayer, he dug them up; in each grave he found a little book in which the life story of the worthy man was written, with his name at the beginning. The first book said, “Here lies Salustes, Jesus Christ’s loyal servant,” and his biography said that he had been in the hermitage for thirty-six years without ever tasting any earthly food brought to him by the hands of any mortal man or woman. In the other [304] book it was written, “Here lies Hermoine,” and his biography said that he had been in the hermitage for twenty-nine years and six months without ever removing his shoes or his clothes; when the first shoes wore out, he did not put on any others, and once the first robe wore out, he never put on any other than that sent by Our Lord. And his biography also said that he was born in Tarsus, while Salustes was from the city of Bethlehem. Thus Josephus learned the life stories of the two worthy hermits and the names of these blessed holy bodies, and he took them to Sarras. Nascien beseeched Josephus to give him Saint Hermoine, which was granted.® And Nascien had the body taken to Orberica. Upon arrival, he had the body placed in a very rich vessel, and he founded a rich and honorable church. And for Saint Salustes a very beautiful church was founded in the city of Sarras. In each of the two churches twelve priests were invested to celebrate the service and advise the people under the bishop, for the bishop could not advise so many people by himself, since they were still too recently [305] converted to the faith. The bishop who was established in Sarras was called Anathites, and the one in Orberica was called Juvenal. Thus Josephus the blessed® honored the two cities with the two blessed holy bodies, which were so high and holy, for the glorious Son of God performed great miracles for love of them and will do so until the end of the world. In the way you have heard, the kingdom of Sarras was conquered and won over to the service of Jesus Christ’s glorious body. After that the king told Josephus that he and Nascien wished to see the holy object they carried, and where they said their prayers. Josephus led them to the ark and showed them and the queen, and no one else, what was inside, When they saw the vestments in which Jesus Christ had ordained Josephus, they prized them greatly, and even more so the throne on which he had sat, and they said that this was the richest and most beautiful chair they’ had ever heard of. But when they saw the holy dish, Nascien said that everything they had seen was naught compared to this holy vessel. Once he had looked at it closely from the outside, with more sincerity and deeper understanding than the others, [306] he called it by its name, which has never fallen into disuse since then. He told the king and Josephus 5«Nascien beseeched . . . granted” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 6“Tosephus the blessed,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has Josephus [honored] the blessed hermits”). 7Corrected to plural, as in Hucher variants and Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail he had never seen anything earthly in his life that did not displease him in some way. But now he saw something he had always desired, for what he saw pleased and satisfied him beyond anything he had ever seen. “Now I see very well,” he said, “that all my thoughts have been fulfilled. For it happened that when I was a squire, as I rode through a great forest, I lost all my companions and then all my dogs, who were following a large stag I was pursuing. After losing them from hearing and sight, I happened to fall into a reverie, which I did not soon leave, but in which I remained for a long time, holding it dear at heart. While I was thinking so intently, I heard someone—I know not whom—speak. But I never saw anyone, and yet I clearly heard this voice say to me, ‘Seraphe, what are you seeking and thinking about? You are thinking for naught, since this thought in which you are plunged will never be fulfilled before the time when the marvels of the Grail will be revealed to you.’ That is why I am sure that this is the Grail, for all my thoughts were fulfilled as soon as I saw what agrees® with me and pleases me in every way.” After saying this, what he had seen was not enough for him, but he stepped forward and raised a flat plate, the paten, covering the glorious vessel. When [307] he had looked inside, he stepped back and began to tremble, as if his entire body had been taken with fever. He sat down; once seated, he realized he could not see anything, and then he was very frightened. When the king saw him sit down, trembling, he marveled and asked him what? he had seen. Nascien replied, “Certainly, my lord, I can tell you this much: he who seeks his Lord’s secrets is miserable and false, for he wins His anger and hatred.” “What!” said the king. “What have you seen that makes you so afraid of!° having brought on Our Lord’s hatred?” “By my faith,” said Nascien, “I know He is truly angry with me because I saw by my offense what no mortal man should see.” When the king heard this, he was very frightened and asked Josephus!! what this could be. Then Nascien said, “What!? is this? Josephus, do you intend to look inside? I tell you that if you do, you will never be healed of the lance tip that remained in your thigh at Orcaut, where the angel struck you. Because of the great offense I have committed, I have lost my eyesight, which I will never recover until the tip [308] is removed from your thigh by the very one who drove it in.” Josephus remained silent, and the king began to inquire about this, asking him whether he could say anything about what he had seen. Nascien said that he would tell him as much as a mortal tongue could or should reveal. “I have seen,” said 8The word “agrees” was chosen in order to reflect the folketymology relating the Old French words “agree” and “Graal.” What,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “which man”). 10«Seeing and” omitted here, as in Ponceau. 1 Josephus,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “Joseph’). 12what,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “who”). The History of the Holy Grail he, “the beginning of the bold endeavor, the occasion of the great exploits, the search for!® the great knowledge, the founding of the great religion, the separation of the great sins, the proof of the great marvels, the end of goodness and true kindness, the marvel of all marvels.”!4 After these words, they remained awestruck by the marvels he had thus named. The king asked him if he was telling the truth about the loss of his eyesight. Nascien replied that he would not have wanted to retain his sight if that meant he would not have seen this great marvel. Then the king began to question him again about what this [309] marvel could be, and Nascien said that nothing more could be known for certain except that he had seen something that could not be explained by any tongue. Everyone who heard this wondered about it. Josephus remained before the ark, pensive, without saying a word, for a long time. While he was thinking in this way, a voice cried out inside the ark very loudly and said in the hearing of all, “After my great vengeance, my great remedy, and after my fury, my calm.”!5 As soon as the voice had thus spoken, an angel came out of the ark, completely dressed in a white robe, holding a white box in his left hand. Once outside the ark, with his right hand he took the lance that had struck Josephus in the thigh and that Josephus himself had brought from Orcaut when he departed, leaving behind the priests he had ordained—just as you have heard—and that he had leaned against the wall next to the ark. [310] The angel took this lance so that the king and queen and everyone there saw it clearly. After that they all saw him come straight toward Josephus and strike him!® with the tipless lance in the very same spot where he had struck him before, when the tip stayed in. And when he pulled the lance out, everyone saw that the tip had come out with the lance. The angel took the box in his left hand, put it on the ground,!” and placed the lance tip on top of it. Many large drops of blood began to fall and were collected in the box underneath, until it was completely full. Everyone there saw this marvel clearly, and they were frightened by the blood that ran down from the lance head in large drops. The angel took the box in his hand, came to Josephus, and washed and anointed the entire wound with the blood that had flowed into the box from the lance head. Then he came to Nascien and washed his eyes with the same blood; as soon as he had done so, Nascien saw as clearly as ever. The angel said to Josephus, “Look!” Josephus did so and saw that his wound was completely healed, so that all that appeared was a mark where it had been. Then the angel stepped forward, took the lance, and asked, “Do you know what this lance symbolizes?” Josephus answered, [311] “No, my lord.” 13OF the great exploits, the search for” supplied from Ponceau. 14«The marvel of all marvels” supplied from Ponceau. 15«Caim” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 16“The angel took this lance. ... strike him” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 17On the ground,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “ariere,” “behind”). py “This is,” said he, “the beginning of the marvelous adventures that will take place in the land where God intends to lead you. There the great marvels will occur, and the great deeds will be demonstrated. And then the true earthly feats of chivalry will be shown and revealed. Then the false will be separated from the company of the true, for earthly chivalric exploits will become heavenly. No one will be informed about these adventures or be certain of when they will occur ahead of time. But when they are to begin, it will happen that this lance will bleed, as you have seen it just now. Not a single drop of blood will fall from now until the time when the adventures are to take place, just as you have heard. And then the marvels will begin to occur throughout all the lands where this lance is, and they will be so great and so frightening that everyone will be terrified. All these marvels will happen only because the good who will exist at this time will so desire knowledge of the Holy Grail and this lance that they will undertake to suffer the difficult burden of earthly exploits of chivalry in order to learn about the marvels of the Holy Grail and the lance. And then will take place its adventurous marvels, to which the truly [312] courageous will abandon themselves, and through this it will be known who possesses prowess. You may be sure that the marvels inside the Grail will be seen by only one mortal man, and he will be full of all the qualities that can or should be in man’s body and heart, for he will be good to God as well as to the world. On earth he will be very good, for he will be filled with every prowess, beauty, and bravery; he will also be good to God, for he will be filled with charity and great religion, and he will be the master key of all chastity. “This lance with which you were struck will strike only one man, who will be a king descended from your lineage, and he will be the last of the good. He will be struck between the two thighs and will never be healed until the marvels of the Holy Grail are revealed to the one who will be filled with all goodness. The one who will see these marvels will be the last man in Nascien’s lineage. Just as Nascien was the first man to see the [313] marvels of the Grail, he will be the last to see them, for the True Crucified One said this: ‘I!® promised to demonstrate My marvels to the first and last of the precious lineage.’ He also said, ‘I will spread the vengeance of My adventurous lance on the first and the last of My new ministers who are anointed and consecrated at My pleasure, because I want these two to be loyal witnesses to Me, for it was through the blow of My lance that My death on the cross was sought and approved by the evil Jews.’ You can be sure, Josephus,!® that the marvelous adventures in the land where God will lead you and guide you to settle your descendants will last as many years as the number of days you carried the tip of the lance in your thigh. It is now time for you to go, for you have remained so long in this country that you have accomplished a great part of the task and will of your Creator.” 18<q 7 as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “aage” [for ge, ‘1”?], which would give “last age” instead of “last of the precious lineage”). 197 osephus,” as in Sommer and Ponceau (Hucher has “Joseph”). De Thereupon the angel turned away. Those who had listened to his words were astounded by the marvels he had spoken about. And there was great rejoicing over Nascien, who had recovered his sight, for he had been very frightened. Josephus began right away to count how long he had carried the tip of the lance in his thigh, and he discovered by true count that it had been twenty-two whole days. They departed at once, and the king led all the [314] Hebrew”? Christians into his palace,?! except three who remained to guard the ark. When they were in his palace, he called Josephus and asked him to explain to him and Nascien the vision he had seen in his palace the night before he had set out with his army. “And nevertheless,” said he, “I know very well what one part means, but I want Nascien to learn it from your own mouth.” Then Josephus began to speak. In the hearing of everyone there, he said, “King, you saw three trees in your palace, and it was right here in this place. These three trees were of the same girth and height and appearance, except that the one in the middle was covered with a very ugly, black bark. The one with the black bark was the symbol of the Son of God, that is, Jesus Christ, who covered Himself on earth with ugly mortal flesh, and the other two symbolized the Father and the Holy Spirit. The kind of people who were under the Father symbolized the beginning of the world, for at this time the Trinity was not yet known. The two who left the company of the others and jumped into the pit symbolized the first man and woman, who went to hell as soon as they died. All the others followed, for after that there was no one, no matter how much good he did during [315] his life, who did not go to hell as soon as the soul left the body, until the time came when the Son of God suffered death. The people who remained and who chopped the tree and pierced the four branches and the trunk symbolized the Jews who pierced the hands and feet and the side** of the Son of God with a lance, which made His death apparent, just as the angel told me just now before you. “Then the tree came and fell so that all the bark remained in a pile, and it flung itself into the pit where all the people had jumped earlier. After it had been there for some time, it flung itself out, pulling with it a large number of*5 the people who had been in the pit. Then it returned to its place and put back on the ugly bark it had left behind; when it had done so, the bark was not as it had been before, but had completely changed and was a hundred times clearer and more beautiful than crystal. “I will tell you the meaning of this. After the Son of God died on the cross, His body was put in the sepulcher like a mortal thing, and my father can be a loyal witness to this, for he laid Him in the sepulcher with his own [316] hands. When the body was buried, the spirit went immediately to hell and pulled out all those men and women who had been in His service on earth since the 204ebrew” supplied from Ponceau. 21Into his palace” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 22Corrected to singular, as in Ponceau. aaa \ large number of” supplied from Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail beginning of the world. Once He returned from hell, He took up His body again, but He changed it, for He left behind all mortality and became heavenly. “The branches and the leaves of the tree, which you saw people taking, some of whom were cutting them and some burning them, symbolize Jesus Christ’s limbs. These are the loyal ministers, some of whom were killed, while others were burned and yet others stoned, in order to glorify His name and spread His faith. Thus by the three trees you can understand the Trinity: three persons in one God, and God in three persons of the same importance and power, none less or more than the other.” “Indeed,” said the king, “I have understood all this very well. But explain to me the writing, which said, ‘This one creates,’ ‘This one saves,’ and ‘This one purifies.” “This,” said Josephus, “can easily be understood. The One who creates is the Father, for the Scripture says that the Father created everything from nothing. At the beginning of the world, knowledge about the Son had not been set forth, and the first people did not know anything about Him; because of this, the creation of all creatures belongs to the person of the Father. And because the person of the Son came down to earth to redeem man, man’s salvation belongs to the person of the Son. And because the Holy Spirit came to earth [317] on the day of Pentecost to purify and purge the disciples’ bodies— though it was not only on this day but on many other days and nights—the purification of the body and the heart belongs to the person of the Holy Spirit. Now you have heard the properties of the three persons who are only one power and one God.” “You would have made us very certain about all these things,” said the king, “if you had gone so far as to tell us the truth about the child I saw enter my room where I thought no living creature could know the entrance.” “I see that your faith is still imperfect,” said Josephus, “for this is something that you should understand by yourself, but I will tell you. This child who entered your room and left it without opening or damaging the door symbolizes the Son of God, who entered and left the body of the Virgin without damaging her maidenhead.” “Now tell me,” said the king, “who the child was, for I have understood the meaning, and a voice said these very words to me after I had seen it.” Josephus began to think how to answer this; he soon replied, “King, now understand that He who entered and left the room in the form of a child was the Holy Spirit of Our Lord, from whose [318] mouth these words came: ‘Nothing is hidden that is not known, and nothing is covered that is not uncovered.’ So that you may not consider this a lie, He tells you through me to go remove the traitorous figure that you have always kept in the basement of this very room. If you do not remove it and burn it in the sight of everyone, the Spirit of Our Lord orders me to reveal the great wonder about why you have kept it, and then you will see that nothing is so hidden that it is not known.” 24eNot” supplied from Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail This image was a wooden statue2° of marvelous beauty in the form of a woman, and it was dressed in a splendid robe—the richest and most precious the king could find. With this image the king lay carnally, and he had loved it for at least fifteen years with greater love than any man could have for any mortal woman. Nor did any man, no matter how close he was to him, ever know anything about this, for the king had had an iron door made, so subtly crafted that he believed no mortal could see it, no matter how closely he looked. When Josephus had [319] spoken to him thus, the king was very frightened and said that truly nothing could be covered nor hidden from Lord God. He immediately called Nascien, his brother-in-law, and the queen and told them that he would show them the shame he had indulged in for so long. Then he ordered a great fire made in the middle of the palace; once it had caught well, he ordered all his household to leave except for Josephus, Joseph, and the queen. Then the king led them to the door, which was sealed in the wall with a marble stone. The entire wall was painted and very well tinted in different colors. This door was so subtly crafted and sealed that as soon as it was closed, an iron device in the form of a bar fell inside so that the door was so firmly shut that no matter how much one pushed it, it would not move; rather, one would have to break it down in order to enter. When the king wanted to open it, he used a small iron key, marvelously thin; as soon as he pushed it into the joints between the colors, where the keyhole was the least visible, a copper device in the form of a hammer fell onto the first bar at the top, behind, lifting the top in front and moving it out of the hook that held the bar. In this way the king entered [320] when he wanted to go to the statue to commit his sin and shameful act. After he had shown them the subtlety of the door, he led them into the room. Upon reaching the basement, he took the statue himself and carried it to the fire before all of them. Once the robe it wore as well as the wood was entirely burned, the king said that God Our Lord, who had inspired this decision, was very powerful, for he had not believed his heart could ever be delivered from this by any means. After that, he himself acknowledged his sin so that everyone heard, and they marveled a great deal, for they had never heard of such a thing. Thus, through Our Lord’s pleasure, Josephus turned the king and his land away from unbelief and led him to the faith of Our Lord Jesus Christ. The day after the king had burned the statue, Josephus left Sarras, taking leave of the king and Nascien and the queen. And they escorted him and his followers a long way. When they parted, there were deep sighs of anguish and many tears shed between them. And when the people learned they were leaving, a great many followed,?” saying that if Josephus wanted them to accompany him, 25In this image and semblance” omitted, as in Sommer and Ponceau. 26“and from the great mischance that was to happen” omitted here, as in Hucher variants and Ponceau. 27-Deep sighs of anguish... . followed” supplied from Ponceau. oe) they would never leave him. And he retained [321] two hundred seven of them. Josephus took leave of the king and his retinue, beseeching them to glorify Holy Church to the best of their power and to keep to the holy religion of Jesus Christ. Thereupon he left them, and the king returned very pensive and in tears, like those who think they have lost everything, since Josephus was leaving. And you will hear how events were played out through God’s commandment. Josephus and his followers left, through Our Lord’s pleasure and commandment, but the story does not speak here of all their days of traveling, all their adventures, or each place where they were lodged. Rather, the straight way of the chronicle returns to King Mordrain and his retinue, who remained in the city of Sarras. 14. King Mordrain’s Vision.! Here the story tells us that that night, after the king had gone to bed, he fell into deep thought; he was so absorbed that no one could get a word out of him. He was plunged in thought for a long time, as you have heard, and he was crying so bitterly? and sighing so deeply that the queen, who lay next to him, was very frightened. But no matter how often she asked, he would not tell her anything, and she did not dare to insist against his will, for he [322] had been very cruel to her, so she greatly feared his wrath and anger. Thus the king remained plunged in painful and distressing thought until it was probably midnight. And then it happened that he fell asleep, fatigued from the thought that had been troubling him. As he slept, he fell into a perilous dream, for it seemed to him that he was holding a splendid and honored court in the city of Sarras. All the knights and ladies of the country came to this court. After leaving a very lovely church that he had never seen before, he entered his palace and sat down to eat, as well and richly as was right and customary for a king. As he was seated at his meal, and was taking the first bite to put in his mouth, lightning descended from the sky and caused the morsel to fly out of his hand and his crown to fall from his head to the ground. When he tried to pick his crown up, intending to put it on his head, a great whirlwind picked him up and carried him to a strange place very far away. It seemed to him that he remained in this place for a long time, and that a lion and a wolf came to him. The lion brought him all the good foods and riches of the world, while the wolf took so much away that only a very poor subsistence remained. Finally, when he saw that the wolf was robbing him in this way, he decided he would no longer endure it, [323] but would combat it. One day he fought the wolf,> vanquishing it with great difficulty. Thus the wolf fled and never again took his food. lCorresponds to Hucher II: 321-331; Sommer I: 84-86, Ponceau §134-138. 2“Bitterly,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “softly”). S“He fought the wolf” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. oe After that it seemed to him that he found his crown again, but when he started to put it on his head, he found it to be completely changed, for he thought it was of the brightest and most beautiful stone any man had ever seen. Once he had put it back on his head, he saw a large bird in the form of an eagle take his nephew—his brother-in-law Nascien’s son—and carry him across the sea into a strange land, where the eagle put him down. When he was on the ground, all the people of the country came to him and knelt before him. After they had all done this and rejoiced over him, he saw a large lake come forth from his stomach, and from the lake sprang nine beautiful, large rivers. Eight of them were of equal width and depth, but the last was wider and deeper than all the others in appearance, and it was so rapid and noisy that no one could endure it. This river was as murky and as thick as mud at its source, while in the middle it was as clear and pure as a precious stone, and it was as rapid and noisy as you have heard. Yet it was different at the end, for it was one hundred times clearer and [324] more beautiful than in the middle, and it was so sweet to drink that no one could get his fill. And besides all this, it flowed so smoothly that no sound or loud noise came from it; rather its course was so calm and peaceful that everyone who saw it thought that it was not moving. Then the king looked and saw a man coming from the heavens bearing the sign of the true Crucifix. When he reached the lake, he washed his feet and hands in it, as well as in each of the eight rivers. Upon coming to the ninth, he went all the way in and washed his feet, his hands, and his whole body very well. The king saw this vision in his sleep, and it lasted so long that it was very close to daybreak. Thereupon the king awoke, very frightened and thoughtful about the marvel he had seen. And the queen, who had seen him4 pensive and distressed all night,® was very frightened and did not know how to make him divulge his thoughts. As soon as she could see daylight, she arose; once she was dressed and [325] ready, she went to her brother Nascien’s bed, sighing and weeping very hard. When Nascien saw her crying, he was very afraid, for he loved her dearly. He took her in his arms and asked her quickly why she was crying so. The queen sat down next to him and recounted her husband’s adventure and his sighs and tears during the night. , “My dear brother,” she said, “because of this, I fear that he may have fallen into evil thoughts, and I beseech you, for the love of the high Lord in whom you have placed your faith, to go to him and ask for a boon. When he has promised, on his faith, to give you one, ask him to tell you what he thought about so long last night, for this is the thing in the world that I would most like to know.” Then Nascien arose and went straight to the king; when he arrived, the king was already up. Nascien greeted him and requested a boon. The king answered that he knew very well that there was no boon so great in the world that he would not give it to him without protest or delay. After Nascien had got him to swear his faith, he told him he 4“And the queen, who had seen him” supplied from Ponceau. 5“And he was very frightened and did not know how to act. And Queen Sarrasinte, his wife” omitted, as in Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail wanted him to tell him what he had thought so much about all night long. When the king heard this, he knew right away that the queen [326] had informed on him, but he immediately recounted his entire vision to Nascien, describing what he had seen about him and his nephew. “But I have still not told you the reason why I was so pensive,” he said, “and this is the favor you requested. I would be dishonest if I did not tell you the truth, since I promised it to you. It is true that I lay next to the queen and began to think in my heart that I had sinned a great deal in the past, and I should indeed suffer because of it. My conscience reproached me for continuing to lie in shame, but I could not understand why. I searched my heart to try to find the reason, but I did not think I had betrayed anyone except you; and this is the thing in the world that made me the most sorrowful, for you are the one living man toward whom I should least act wrongly. And I will tell you what this betrayal is. “It is true that after I was routed at Tarrabel and you came to rescue me as I came from La Choine, we pardoned each other, and I, who had done you a number of injuries, promised you as [327] king, without your having asked for anything, that within a week® of my return, I would go to make things right with you at your house, before my nobles and yours. I have not kept this promise, nor does the shame lie with you or anyone else except me. And no doubt because of the anguish of this thought, I fell into the vision I have recounted to you, which partly makes me very happy, but partly very frightened. And I don’t know how to find out the meaning of this dream, now that Josephus has gone, for if he were still here, he would have revealed the truth to me right away.” As he said this, he began to think very intently, and Nascien said to him, “My lord, leave off thinking about this thing. For we have entered a realm we were not in on the day you made this promise; just as we have changed the life we led then, we must change our desires and abandon our bad intentions, for otherwise, we would go against the commandment of Him in whose guard and in whose authority we have put our bodies and souls. But I would willingly know the meaning of the dream you have recounted, for according to my understanding, it seems to me there should be no menace [328] of evil. And yet I suggest that you ask the advice of the pastors of Holy Church whom Josephus left in his place to guard and advise our souls, for you know very well that he told us we should always seek the counsel of Holy Church in case of any need, be it of the body or of the soul.” After he had said this, they both left the palace and went to the spiritual house that was founded to perform the office and service of Holy Church. Once there, they heard the glorious service first and then took’ the holy sacrament just as Josephus had established it, by Our Lord’s order, to be accomplished every day. After they had taken communion and heard the service, the king called all the priests of the church and told Guy week,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “two weeks”). 7“Took,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “heard”). The History of the Holy Grail them his dream just as he had dreamt it, but none of them was able to tell him anything about it for certain. Rather, they answered that there was no mortal man who could tell the truth about such® things unless God Himself by His grace showed it to him. With that the king and Nascien left, no less frightened or pensive than before, and the king said he would never be [329] happy until he knew whether this vision carried any truth and if it had been sent® by God. Thus they returned to the palace pensively. When they were both seated on a couch without any company, they felt the palace tremble from its foundation up to the main vaulting. Then lightning began to flash so intensely that the sky seemed to be crisscrossed with burning brands. After that such great and frightening cracks of thunder began to resound that they both thought the end of everything had come. Along with all this a wind so dangerous and strong was blowing that all the windows and doors in the palace were broken, and the palace itself cracked so loudly that it seemed it would be completely destroyed and fall into an abyss. Amidst all these things such great darkness fell there that anyone who saw it thought he would never see light again. Nor did anyone in the city except those inside the palace see these marvels. However, the latter heard nothing but the thunderbolts that came from the heavens and [330] saw only the flashes of lightning that struck through the openings in the doors and the windows. And if they wanted to leave the palace, they could not, for they could not see the way, and even if they could see, they could not move, so frightened were they by the great marvels they saw. Thus, they remained in this sorrow and anguish for quite a while, until they heard a sound like a trumpet blowing; and it was so loud that it seemed to the king and Nascien that everyone could hear it as clearly as in the palace. After the trumpet had sounded, a voice spoke that said, “Here begin the fears.” When they heard the voice speak in this way, they fell in a faint from fear and lay there in a daze just as if they were dead. And then were fulfilled the words that the prophet spoke: “They will be two in a bed; one of them will be raised, and the other left behind,”!® for as soon as the voice had said, “Here begin the fears,” the king was immediately raised from the bed, and the Spirit of Our Lord carried him far away from his land, the distance it would take seventeen days to go. It was indeed the hour of tierce at the time he was taken from the palace and lifted from the bed. And when the Holy Spirit put him [331] down, it could well have been the hour of nones, but the story no longer speaks of him now; rather, it ceases to speak of him and speaks about Nascien and the queen, who remained in Sarras. 8“guch,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “these”). 9“Sent,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “perceived”). 10See Luke XVII, 34. 2) 15. Nascien’s Imprisonment.! Here the story recounts that when the king was raised from the bed where he lay beside Nascien, Nascien remained in a faint as if he were dead. This great calamity that happened inside the palace was neither heard nor seen outside; though people in the city heard the thunder crash and the horn sound, they neither heard nor saw the other adventures. Then the queen happened to return from seeing a church she had founded in the name of the Virgin Mary. When she entered the palace, she found all the servants lying on the ground in a faint. Believing they were asleep, she passed through, until she found a large company of the king’s knights, who were in the same plight as the servants. Wondering what this could be, she had them called. But they had lost their hearing and sight, so they had no sense or memory of anything, and they were so pale and wan that they seemed to have just left the sickbed. When the queen saw them thus, she was so frightened that she nearly fell to the ground in a faint. [332] Seeing that it was impossible to get a word out of them, she turned back through the large court straight toward the main room, which was called the royal chamber.” Upon reaching the door, she looked inside and saw her brother Nascien sitting on the couch from which the king had been lifted. Nascien was crying bitterly, and he was addressing a man who seemed to be in front of him from the words she heard them speaking to each other, but she could not be sure of anything else. Only the voice could be heard; nothing could be seen of the person from whom it came—only Nascien speaking to him. Hearing the voice and seeing no one frightened the queen, for she feared a bad spirit had attacked Nascien, wishing to remove him from the holy faith. She entered immediately, ran to her brother, embraced him, and asked him why he was crying so bitterly. When he saw her, he began to weep again and cry out harder than before. Upon seeing this, the queen cried out and then fell to the ground in a faint. Nascien took her in his arms, lifted her up, and began to kiss her on the mouth, calling her his sweet sister. When she came to and opened her eyes, Nascien, who was on his knees before her, began to call her name. She sighed deeply and asked for the king. When Nascien heard this, he could not answer, but wept, his tears flowing as thickly as if water were being poured over his head with a goblet.4 [333] When the queen saw him crying thus, she asked him what he had done with the king. She was very frightened and fainted again immediately. Then they all were afraid that she might lose® her senses and her memory because of lCorresponds to Hucher II: 331-338; Sommer I: 86-88; Ponceau §129-143. 2“Room .. . chamber” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 3“Bitterly,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “softly”). 4“Upon seeing this, the queen cried out... . with a goblet” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 5 “Body and soul and” omitted, as in Hucher variants and Ponceau. 56 the anguish of her faint. When she came to, she began to weep and cry out, “Dear brother Nascien!” Then Nascien came before her, and she cried out to him, like a woman who has lost her senses, to tell her why he had looked so terrible. He told her the truth right away, how the king had come to be lifted from beside him and carried he knew not where; and that this was the reason he had been lamenting as she had seen. At these words the noise in the room became very loud; the queen kept fainting, and the king’s men—the knights and the men-at-arms—began to cry out. The laments began to increase throughout the palace;® the queen grieved so much and fainted so often that she could not pay attention to anything but her grief. Nascien took her in his arms, doing his best to comfort and calm her, saying [334] she should be assured that the king was safe and sound where he was, for the person with whom he was talking when she entered the room had given him true news. She asked him who this was, and he said it was a messenger of Our Lord Jesus Christ. The queen grieved deeply. No mortal man could relieve her sorrow. The news was spread throughout the country that the king had disappeared in such a way that no one knew anything about him. The nobles assembled and asked one other’s advice about what this could mean, and what could have happened to the king. At this council there was a knight who had been in the king’s household for a long time. He was called Galafre, and he was more cruel and traitorous than a mortal heart could imagine. He stepped forward and said in the hearing of all the others that he had searched so long that he had learned that Nascien had killed the king treacherously, because he wanted to have the kingdom; for it was proven truth that in the place where he disappeared there was no one but him and Nascien, and Nascien himself did not know what to say about what had become of him. To this they all responded that if it were true that Nascien had been in the place where the king vanished and did not know what to say, it would indeed seem that there had been treachery. If he was certain of this and if Nascien was deemed guilty, it would be right to guard him for a [335] while until they heard news of the king. They all agreed to this decision and swore on holy relics that all of them would help to seize Nascien as soon as they were summoned. Thereupon they went to court, where they found Nascien and the queen grieving so deeply that no living man could calm them. It was the third day after the king had disappeared. When they came before the queen, they inquired about what had truly happened. And Nascien recounted it all to them, from beginning to end, just as he had heard and seen. After that he told them the dream the king had had the night before this happened. They questioned him at length about everything, and he told them the truth about it all, admitting that only the two of them were in the room when the king vanished. At these words, they seized him from all sides. He asked why they were doing this, and they replied that it was because they were suspicious about the king’s death, and no one but him was suspected. Since he was not guilty, Nascien denied 6Throughout the palace” supplied from Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail everything fiercely and offered to undergo any trials if anyone came forward [336] to accuse him of the king’s death. But all this was of no use; he was put in prison. He offered to put up his land as ransom while he searched for the king, until he brought him back, if he were alive in a land where mortal people lived. They took his land as ransom, but when they wished to free him, this was opposed by Galafre, who had advised that he be seized. This Galafre pretended to be a Christian, but he was not, for when the other people throughout the land were baptized, he did not want to be, and he hid. And he hated the Christians more than any creature. He came to the nobles who held Nascien and told them that they should know in truth that, if they let him go, war would evermore be theirs. “And you can be sure, my lords” said he, “that he will never rest until he has taken all the land back, and then everyone who resisted him in this will be destroyed.” By his advice, Nascien was held and imprisoned; thus they held his person and his land. When Queen Sarrtasinte saw that she had lost her lord and that her brother was imprisoned, one need not ask whether she was afraid [337] and sorrowful in her heart, for he was the person she held most dear after the king. She grieved deeply and often, and would willingly have freed him from prison if she had had the power, but she was a woman alone and thus could not prevail against her noblemen. Thus Nascien was in prison. Despite the pain and sorrow Nascien experienced, the devil was unable to lead him to be angry at God or to despair. He constantly begged for mercy from Our Lord for his sins, saying, “Dear Lord God, I do not complain about this torment in which I find myself and which I suffer, for I deserved it when I was foolish enough to dare to look at the great wonder of Your secrets, which neither I nor any other man conceived or engendered by human frailty is worthy to see unless Your Grace alone cleansed and purified him beforehand.” In this state of mind Nascien suffered great torment in prison, night and day; nor could he be moved from this state of mind. But now the story ceases to speak about him and his works and returns’ [338] to King Mordrain, who was believed to be lost because no news could be heard about him, and it speaks of him in the following way. 16. The Rock of the Perilous Port.! The story says here that King Mordrain was carried seventeen days’ travel away from his kingdom. After the king had seen all the splendors of the lands below, which the Holy Spirit showed him, he was put down on the ground at the hour of nones. Once on the ground, he began to look around, afraid and worried, for he found himself alone in a strange land, from which he thought he would never escape. It was not surprising that he was afraid, for he was not very reassured about the great marvels that had happened to him in his palace, and it seemed to him 7“And his works and returns” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. Corresponds to Hucher II: 338-353; Sommer I: 88-93; Ponceau §144-152. The History of the Holy Grail they would never stop, because of the great anguish he had suffered. And besides all this, he did not know how he had come to the place where he was, or what could have carried him. After having looked around for a while, he was even more frightened than before, for he saw nothing but the clouds above* him and the sea around him, except for [339] the space taken up by part of the rock. This is the place where he was. This rock lay in the ocean, along the direct passage from Babylon to Scotland, Ireland, and other Western parts. The rock was on this route, and it was so high that one could survey the entire Western sea® as far as those places where land could be found. And in the other direction, to the right, toward Galerne, one could see the land of Cordova and the entire tip of Spain. The rock was as high as you have heard, and it was in the wildest and least frequented place that exists among habitable sites at sea. This place was so uncultivated and unpleasant that there was no earthly sustenance there at all, not even a handful of friable soil. Rather, it consisted entirely of raw stone, up to the edge of the sea. Because the rock sat in such a wild and perilous place, the people living around there called it the Rock of the Perilous Port.4 And long ago [340] a pirate called Foucaire built a very proud house there. This pirate was unusually large and so strong that no man could hold out against the strength of his limbs. The pirate came to this rock, and he made his home out of the rock itself, which he dug out until he had a house that could lodge twenty men. In this lodging he and his numerous companions stayed, but they could not all® sleep inside the rock, for they numbered a good ninety, and sometimes there were one hundred or more. So they siept beyond the rock in their galleys, which were at all times prepared for them. During the night when it was very dark, they put great brands of burning fire on the rock. Often those who came there, such as merchants or other people passing by, did not escape without peril, for it often happened that the ships ran up against the rock so hard that they broke up,® and the pirates were ready to attack them with their galleys. Thus they fell upon two dangers, for some were drowned, while others were killed when they thought they had reached safety. For a long time the pirate led his disgraceful life in this way, until it happened that the great Pompey, who [341] was the Roman emperor at that time, crossed the sea of Greece and came into the land of Syria. After he had gone throughout the lands of the East and captured the defended fortresses as far as Babylon, he heard about these pirates who thus killed everyone who passed there. And then he said that everything he had done was for naught if he did not rid the land of this pirate. Right away he found the finest ship possible and had it 2“Above,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “below”). 3“The rock was... sea” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 4The description here suggests this might be the Rock of Gibraltar; however, the text later places the rock in the middle of the ocean. Geography in this romance tends to be imprecise. 5“All” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 6«S6 hard that they broke up” supplied from Ponceau. 7. prepared and supplied with good foods, bold knights, and splendid arms. When he had readied his cargo, he set out to sea. He had provided forty of the strongest men on his ship with twenty large iron hooks to hold the galleys when they attacked his ship at sea. Pompey and his men voyaged until they saw the high and marvelous rock, and then they cast anchor to wait for night. After a good part of the night had passed, they set out and went along until they came close enough to the rock to throw a stone by hand. When the pirates heard therm coming, they boarded their galleys and prepared to assault them. The men steering Pompey’s ship knew the narrows of the rock, so they did not try [342] to head straight toward the fire but went to the side of it, thus blocking a galley between them and the rock and causing it to run against the rock so hard that it broke up completely and flew into pieces. The men in it began to cry out. Thinking the big ship had been broken up, the men in the other galleys attacked immediately, assaulting them with five galleys. As soon as the pirates came on, impatient to attack, the men inside the big ship threw their hooks out at them and held them tight until the others had boarded, their swords and knives drawn.’ Meanwhile, the boatmen and the men-at-arms lit great brands of fire, which were plentiful in the ship. When the pirates saw that they had been surprised and could not resist, they defended themselves fiercely in the face of defeat.® Realizing they could not hold out, they withdrew little by little toward the rock; those who could raced within. Upon seeing them run to safety, Pompey called out to his knights and swore that they would regret letting a single one get away. Thirty of the best knights rushed after them. The pirates had already occupied the top of the rock, where they defended themselves? so fiercely that they could not be overcome. Those attacking outside numbered thirty, while inside they numbered only nineteen, for all the others had been killed or thrown into the sea. The robbers defended themselves for a long time. When they began to grow tired, they dropped a large beam that came from the side of a ship that had [343] broken up on the rock. The beam, which was large and heavy, fell onto those who were attacking, killing everyone it touched and knocking them into the sea. With this blow Pompey lost eleven of his knights. This grieved him so much that he nearly went out of his mind. Then he himself sprang out after those who were assaulting the pirates, swearing that he would rather die in an assault than fail to avenge the knights he had lost. When one of his knights saw him take it to heart so, he thought that he was placing himself in great danger, for no man’s assault could succeed. And if he were killed in this way, the empire would be greatly dishonored by the fact that the pirates had killed the emperor. Then he called Pompey and said, “My lord, if you are willing to trust me, I will tell you how you can capture all those inside, without putting your honor in 7Drawn” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 8“That they had been surprised... defeat” supplied from Ponceau. *Where they defended themselves” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 58 danger or losing your knights.” Pompey, who was very distressed, asked him how. “My lord,” said the knight, “have the assault stopped today, and tomorrow when daylight comes, you will see better where you can attack them and harm them the most.” [344] He and the others advised this so strongly that Pompey had the assault stopped. But he was very distressed and sorrowful because of the knights he had lost and because he considered it shameful to remain there to capture a band of robbers. Thus the assault stopped until the next day when it was broad, clear daylight. And then Pompey saw that the rock was so impregnable that those within feared the attack of no living man. Rather, he said it was a great wonder that all his knights had not been killed in the assault. He called his knights and asked their advice about how to take the rock more rapidly without remaining there. But not one of them could advise him about this, for they did not think it could be captured without starving the enemy out. When he saw that they were unable to give any good advice, he reflected on it and then said he believed he had found a solution. “I have decided,” said he, “to destroy them by setting a fire at the foot of the rock so that the flames will reach the entrance of the cave. And then they will have to die, for they won't be able to put the fire out, since we will prevent it from down here with [345] arrows and big stones, while those above will prevent it with lances and swords. If we cannot take them in this way, I don’t see how we can capture them without starving them out.” They all agreed to this decision. Pompey sent forty knights forward and had them light the fire with pieces of ships that had broken up on the rock, which were plentiful. When the fire had caught well, the flames shot up to the entrance of the cave where the pirates were, and much of the smoke went in. Upon seeing this, the pirates took fresh water, which they had in abundance, went out, and poured it onto the fire, which became so full of smoke that it was nearly extinguished. However, those below shot numerous arrows and threw stones at the pirates, wounding four of them. When the thieves saw the injuries inflicted on their side, they withdrew into the cave, but there they were more uncomfortable than outside, for so much smoke filled the cave that they could not see a thing. Realizing they could not endure it, they all went out and did what they could to put the fire out. The knights attacked them, fighting them boldly, and the thieves defended themselves fiercely, [346] despite having been injured and wounded. The melee lasted a long time, and many were wounded on both sides. When Pompey saw that the enemy were holding out so long, he was grieved; he immediately ran up to the fire, where the thieves had already descended to put it out, and he himself pursued them so fiercely that they did not dare to wait for him. They fled back up into the cave, with Pompey rushing after them, along a narrow path cut into the rock, for there was no other way to go. The cave was in such a steep place that no one could reach it except by the path, which was cut into the solid rock. And yet the cave was not at the highest point on the rock, but on one of the sides, in the widest part. And the entrance was so low and narrow that only one man could enter at a time, and he had to do so sideways. [347] The History of the Holy Grail Thus Pompey followed them up the path, holding in both hands a battle-ax with which he gave great blows to those he could reach, as they continued to flee straight toward the cave. Those below shot arrows and threw stones, wounding a number in their flight. And Pompey himself was wounded in three places. Once the brigands reached the cave, they found that they were unable to enter freely. The men below harmed them a great deal with the arrows and stones they were throwing, while the smoke had somewhat troubled their vision, so that they could not enter the cave fast enough before Pompey had cut off the heads of three of them and thrown two!® into the sea with the blows he was dealing with the battle-ax. Thus Pompey killed five of them with the battle-ax, leaving only fourteen, six of whom were so badly wounded that they could do little to defend themselves. When the knights saw Pompey undertake such a bold action, they trooped after him up the length of the path. Pompey was already at the entrance of the cave behind the pirates, who had all gone in, except for!! their leader. When the latter saw that Pompey was alone and that [348] a single man had forced his men to flee so ignobly, he considered it very shameful and humiliating. Ready to enter the cave after the others, he changed his mind and tured back. Pompey raised the battle-ax in both hands, thinking to strike him on the head, but Foucaire dodged the blow, and the ax struck the slope of the rock so hard that the entire blade shattered, and the handle flew into pieces. At this blow, Foucaire threw out his hands and grabbed Pompey by the shoulders with the intent of throwing him onto the fire below them. But Pompey’s knights had reached the place where Foucaire and Pompey were engaged in hand-to-hand battle; the first to arrive struck Foucaire with his lance so fiercely that he made him stagger, and his feet flew out from the path. The pirate was tall and big and heavy; as he fell, he struck Pompey in the chest and head so hard that he caused him to lose his footing, and they both fell, holding on to each other, into the fire below. Pompey’s knights raised a cry, and the men in the ships came out and hurried to the fire, spurring there rapidly. Finding [349] their lord lying in it in a faint, as if he were dead, they pulled him out at once, removed his helmet, and opened his visor. Once they had uncovered his face, they saw he was as pale as if he were dead and that he was not moving his legs, feet, or hands. Very much afraid for him, they put him on his shield and carried him into the ship to put him to bed, while the others seized Foucaire. They discovered that his right arm had been broken when he fell under Pompey and that he was also badly wounded and injured from the fire into which he had fallen. They captured him easily, !2 for they found him lying in a faint. Then they took him and tied him up securely until Pompey could order what he wanted done. 10Three of them” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau; “two,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “of them”). 1l“Two men and” omitted here, as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 12Rasily” supplied from Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail After that the fire was lit again. There was so much wet wood that an extraordinary amount of smoke came out, nearly killing the men in the cave. No matter how much pain or distress they suffered, they would not come out, and those outside marveled at how much they could suffer. During these events Pompey came out of his faint. He opened his eyes and saw that he was lying in his bed, and he wondered how he came to be there, he who had just been in battle.!5 Then he jumped up and asked for his battle-ax. When his men saw him, they rejoiced and said it had been shattered, and they recounted how. Then!4 they turned Foucaire over to him. He [350] asked them how he had been captured, and they showed him how his right arm had been broken when he fell and how the fire had burned his face and body. Then he ordered that he be well guarded, and he grabbed a sword, left the ship, and asked the men watching the fire where the other brigands were. They told him about the great anguish they had suffered, and that since then none of them had shown himself. Then Pompey ordered the fire broken up, after which he climbed up to the entrance of the cave, sword in hand. When his men saw him go there, they ran after him, as they were very afraid for him. He went straight to the entrance of the cave and listened. After listening a while at the door, not hearing a word, he did a very bold thing, for he entered the cave and struck the first of the pirates in the body with his sword. Once he had done this, he saw that the others neither spoke nor moved. Wondering about what this could be, he stepped forward until he saw very well that they were all dead. He lifted them [351] and threw them out, one by one, in the sight of his knights, who considered it to be a great folly. And they were not wrong, for this was the boldest and most foolish thing he had ever done, he who had done great deeds. When he came down from the rock, he had all the robbers’ bodies thrown into the sea. Then he had Foucaire’s left arm and thighs broken, after which he had him thrown into the sea with his companions. Thus Pompey delivered the country of the pirates. This was one of the most honorable feats he ever did. But it was the least remembered of all his feats and courageous deeds, and I will tell you why. It happened that on his way back to Rome, he came to Jerusalem, where he had his horses stabled in the temple of Our Lord, causing the Jews great sorrow. In the city there was a very worthy and religious old man, the father of Saint Simon, who presented Jesus Christ in his arms at the temple on the day of the Purification of the blessed Virgin Mary. When he found out about the great violation Pompey had committed by stabling his horses in Our Lord’s holy house, he said that he had lived too long, for he saw! sons thrown out of their houses and dogs eating at the tables. How could his heart [352] see and endure filthy dogs making private rooms out of the glorious place that Our Lord had sanctified for His service? He went straight to Pompey; once he was before him, he began to shout and cry out just as if he had lost his 1344e who had just been in battle” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 14«Then” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 15Corrected to singular following Ponceau. ag, senses. Then he said, “Oh, Pompey, it seems indeed that you have fought Foucaire, for you have taken on so many of his habits that you have stopped being Pompey and have become Foucaire. We believed that Pompey had killed Foucaire, but Foucaire has killed Pompey, for!® if Foucaire had put this city under his authority just as you have, he would not have committed a greater act of perfidy than you, who stabled your horses in the noblest and most honored house that ever was. And do you know whom you have dishonored? He who will dishonor you, that is, the omnipotent Lord who made everything, whose house you have defiled.” Thus the worthy man spoke to Pompey, who considered it all to be senseless ravings. And yet the man said nothing that did not eventually happen: thereafter, Pompey, who had always been the most renowned and lucky knight in his time, left!” every field he entered to fight [353] vilely and shamefully. And when he left Jerusalem, he forbade all his household ever to speak of Foucaire, for he did not wish to be reproached for having used all his power and forces to attack and capture a robber. Thus this feat was kept silent, for it was not put in writing among his other deeds. The fact that he and his household kept it secret prevented it from being renowned, although it was the greatest deed he had ever done and for which he would have been remembered best. But now the story stops speaking about Pompey and returns to the king on the rock. 17. The Silver Ship and the Black Ship.! Now the story says that King Mordrain was very frightened and worried about the fact that he did not know where he was or how he had got there. He looked around, but he saw nothing but sea and sky—nothing that might bring help or sustenance. The rock was high and in a wild place, and the only lodging was ugly and hideous and dark. He went all around the base of the rock as far as he could find a way, until he entered the path cut into the rock, which led him to the cave. When he reached the entrance, he found it so ugly and black that he refused to enter. [354] Realizing he would find? no comfort, he sat down and began to weep and sigh deeply, thinking in his heart that he had lost everything if Our Lord had forgotten him and did not care about him, As he suffered this sorrow and anguish, weeping and thinking these things, he indistinctly heard a crashing of the waves. He raised his head, looked up, and saw a ship coming, bearing a very handsome man, who was all alone in the ship. He sat in the front, facing all the while toward the rock. The ship was very small, and it was made entirely of 16Foucaire has killed Pompey, for” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 171 eft” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 1Corresponds to Hucher II: 353-404; Sommer I: 93-107; Ponceau §153-179. 2“Nothing and” omitted, as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 60 silver. The mast was gold, and the sail was as white as fallen snow, with a large red cross in the middle. When it reached the rock, it seemed to the king that every good scent one could enumerate among herbs, trees, and all other things were brought together in the ship. And when he saw the sign of the holy [355] cross® on the sail, he was somewhat reassured, for he thought that nothing accompanied by the cross would result in evil. Then the handsome man disembarked. When the king saw him coming, he stood up to meet him, welcomed him, and bowed. The handsome man began to ask him who he was, and he replied that he was a Christian. Next the man began to ask how the king had come there, and he said that in truth he did not know—only that he had somehow found himself there. Then the king asked the handsome man who he was and, if it pleased him, to tell the truth. The handsome man replied that he was an artisan and had a craft never heard of before; no man could know anything or work anything except through him. Then the king asked what this craft was. And he said that he could change an ugly man or woman into a beautiful one, when it pleased him, and he also knew how to make a foolish person wise, a poor one rich, and a lowly one high, when he willed it. “Certainly,” said the king, “this craft surpasses those any mortal man could learn by himself. Please tell me what you are called.” He replied that his name was All-in-All. [356] The king said he had a very beautiful name and profession, and then he said, “My lord, because of the sign of the cross you carry with you, it seems to me that you belong to the faith of Jesus Christ.” The other replied, “That is why I carry this sign with me, for without it one cannot do any good work perfectly. As long as you have this sign with you, you can be certain that nothing will harm you, provided you have perfect faith. Take care not to keep company with any man who does not carry this sign, for he who does not carry it is not with God.” The man from the ship spoke for a long time with the king. He uttered so many words of solace and comfort that he made him forget all his sorrows, nor was he hungry for any earthly food. And the king asked him for advice about what he should do, whether he advised him to remain there longer or depart. “What!” said the man. “Didn’t you tell me you have placed all your faith in Jesus Christ?” The king replied that truly, he believed completely in Jesus Christ, and the man from the ship said to him, “Then you can truly be sure that He has not forgotten you, for He will never forget anyone who relies on Him and remembers Him at all times. And where man fears what may happen to him, there, I say [357] in truth, he is beyond faith. Once he has placed his body and heart in the belief of Lord God, then it is right that he rely on Him for all the things he needs, for such is Our Lord’s custom that He loves man more and holds him dearer than man himself does. Thus it is right and reasonable that man not take any pains about what is fitting for him, but allow Him to decide, who loves him more than he could love himself. And where man does not trust in God for himself or his needs, he falls into despair, just as if 3 “Which was completely red and when” omitted, as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail he said to someone who blamed him, ‘Dear sir, do you want me to rely on God for everything I need? Do you believe He has all His thoughts on me? He has enough to think about elsewhere.’ He falls into despair when he thinks this perfidious thought, for he considers the Deity to be mortal when he says He has enough to think about elsewhere.’ It is just as if he were to say, ‘If God wished to think about me and all the other people and He wished to bring everything to its conclusion, all His thoughts must come to naught, for He could not bring everything to a proper conclusion.’ You can be sure that [358] he who has such thoughts has no faith, but is worse than a publican. Solomon, who had greater wisdom than nature can give any mortal man, said to his son, ‘Dear son, if you want profitable advice, I will give it to you; you must not reject it, but hold it at all mes enclosed and sealed in your heart. Be sure to let Lord God decide about everything; never rely on anything else.’” The words the man from the ship spoke were so pleasing to the king that he lost himself in thought while listening to him. He thought neither about himself nor about anything else; he remembered only what he heard. What he was listening to pleased him so much that for a long time he remained just like someone to whom a vision appears in the night, who does not know for sure if he has seen it while sleeping or waking, and who believes at one and the same time that he is asleep and awake. The king remained thus, knowing nothing for certain about himself—whether he existed or not. When he came out of this reverie and his memory returned as before, he began to look around, [359] but he saw neither the ship nor the man who had come in it. He stood up and began to look out to sea in all directions. And when he realized he could not see it in any direction, he sat down again. Then he began to think very intently again, wondering in his heart about who this could be who had spoken to him so long, for he had brought him great comfort. Finally he realized that the man to whom he had talked could only have come from God, which made him very joyful. For if he were opposed to the faith in Lord God, he would not have carried the sign of the cross with him, nor would he have spoken so willingly of God and His commandments. And if he were a mortal man, he could not have gone away so quickly without being seen in some way. For a long time the king remained in these thoughts, until he looked to his left toward Galerne and saw a richly draped ship. The ship was splendidly appointed, and it was very beautiful. It was completely covered with a very rich silk cloth, all in black, [360] and the sail and the mast matched it exactly. The ship was covered in the same way inside and outside down to the edge where the waves struck it. Thus the ship came splendidly on, as you have heard, though no man or woman appeared to steer it. In this way it came straight to the rock, and when the king saw it arrive, he began to wonder what this could mean and what the ship had come to seek. Then he stood up and began to 4Into despair,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “from hope in God”); “when he thinks this perfidious thought . . . elsewhere” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. “Struck it,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “were”). The History of the Holy Grail look at the ship intently. As he did so, he saw disembark one of the most beautiful and appealing women he had ever seen. He was astounded to see her; nonetheless, he said that she was very welcome, and the lady replied® that doubtless she had well come, since she had found the man she most desired to see in the world. “King Evalach,” said she, “all the days of my life I have desired to speak to you, but I have never had the opportunity. Since you have come here, now I will have the chance to speak to you, and unless you refuse, I will take you to the most delightful house you have ever entered.” The king replied, “Certainly, my lady, I came here and do not know how, for I never saw the one who brought me here, but found myself on this rock. Nor do I ever seek to leave if I am not taken away by the One who commanded that I be brought here.” [361] “By the command of the one who brought you here,” said she, “you will leave, for I brought you here through my knowledge, because I wished to have a place and the time to be in your company, which I have always so desired. If you do not refuse such lovely company as mine, I will take you with me and make you lord of all my land, which I possess in great abundance.” “What!” said he. “My lady, are you so powerful that you can thus carty those you wish anyplace?” “Indeed,” said she, “I am so powerful and so wise that I can take al] those I wish and carry them wherever I please.” “My lady,” said he, “then you are very powerful and wise. I did not believe that any man or woman in the world had as much wisdom as I have heard from a certain man and from you. But this man is still more powerful than you, for he can make ugly men handsome, poor men rich, and fools wise. And he told me that no one can make a perfect or lasting work if he does not carry the sign of the holy cross.” “Ah, King Evalach,” said the lady, “you have been deceived, for I will tell you how you have abandoned the faith through which you have always been honored. As long as you hold to this faith that you have received, you will never have a day of honor or peace. You can already see very well the beginning of this, for since [362] you converted, you have had nothing but ills and sorrow, such as the marvels that happened to you in your country, where your brother-in-law Seraphe remained in such a terrible state that he will escape only through death.” “Ah, my lady,” said the king, “for God’s sake, how do you know that he is as sick as you say?” “Certainly,” she answered, “I know it truly for having seen it with my own eyes, after you were raised from the bed where you were seated together.” Then the king was very frightened, and he believed she was telling the truth—that his brother-in-law was dying, because of the other true signs she gave, which he recognized very well. He was so heartsick about this news that he nearly fell into despair, and he believed for certain that Our Lord had forgotten him and did not care about him. 6*She was very welcome, and the lady replied” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 61 The lady spoke again.’ “King Evalach, if you wish to believe me and do my will, I will even do what is necessary for you to recover all your land. You can be sure that you will never recover® it through any living man or woman but me. Nor will you ever leave this place where you are now if I do not deliver you; rather, you will have to stay here so long that you will die of hunger, for this is the wildest place that exists in any part of the sea. And you will often see such marvels come that [363] you will soon lose your senses. Do you know who this is who knows how to make ugly men handsome and poor men rich? He is a sorcerer. You should know that long ago he loved me,’ but I did not deign to love him.!® And if you remain here for long, he will eventually kill you because he will realize that I love you, I who do not care to love him. Thus, do what you wish and what you think best. If you remain here, you will die, and if you come with me, I will make you richer than you ever were, as long as you do my pleasure.” At these words, the king began to think about what to do—whether he should go with this lady who told him that she loved him so, and who was so full of wisdom that she told him what had happened to him and what was yet to come. After a long time he called the woman back and said, “My lady, explain to me where I am and how far away my land is.” She replied, “This I will indeed tell you. Now be assured first of all that you are on a rock [364] called the Perilous Port because it is the place in the sea where the most treacherous and perfidious things have been done. And if you wish to know how far away you are from your land, you can be sure that it is a good seventeen days of travel from here where you are to the beginning of your land. For no matter how good a wind might be encountered, no ship could cross the sea from here in less than eight days; and from the edge of the sea up to the boundary of your kingdom, it would take anyone at least nine days. Thus you can see that between here and your land there are indeed seventeen days of travel, nor could you ever go in your lifetime, if I did not take you and guide you.” When the king heard that he was so far away from his kingdom, he was even more dismayed than before, and then he began to think again, in great anguish. The lady said, “King, why are you thinking so much? If you wish to be led to safety, come with me. I will take you to the most delightful place in the world, where you are the most desired, but if you don’t want to come, I [365] will leave. You can be sure that you will see so many troubles and vexations happen to you that there is no place in this world so poor or indigent that you wouldn't rather go there than remain here.” The king was so distressed and overcome by his thoughts that he could not respond to what she had said; The lady spoke again” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 8«Recover,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “deliver”). Long ago he loved me,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “he never loves for long”). 10“1im,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “anyone”). 62 indeed, he was so worried that he was completely amazed and silent. When she saw that he would not reply, she turned away. After putting off from shore in her ship and setting out on her way, she said so softly that the king could barely hear her, “Ah, it is a marvel that no tree was ever so fruitful as the one that begins to bear in its old age.” The king heard this phrase clearly, and then he lifted his head and saw that she was already quite far out to sea and that such a great storm followed her that it seemed to him the entire sea was about to leave its bed. The ship ran along in the thickest of the storm so quickly that no wind, it seemed, could go faster. And the king stood on the rock, watching the tempest for a long time and wondering who this woman could be who was followed by such a great and ugly marvel. The king thought a great deal about this woman and was very sorry [366] that he had not asked her more about who she was, what she was called, and what land she held. He would have gladly asked until he found out the truth. But this could not be, so it troubled him, for he thought he would never see her again. And what she had said about his never having joy or peace as long as he believed in this faith worried him so much that he did not know what to do. Then he began to remember the great riches he had long possessed and the great comfort he had always had and the great honors he had received because!! he had been so feared and dreaded and esteemed. He remembered all these things. Then in his heart he recounted the difficulties he had suffered since receiving Jesus Christ’s baptism, and he was so troubled in his mind that he fell into deep despair. He remained in this torment of mind until night, and then he began to reflect about how he could act. He realized the barren and [367] hideous rock was in an extremely wild place, off the route of any travelers, unless chance were to bring a ship there. Then the king climbed the steps to the cave. He came to the entrance, which he found to be very black and dark, for many days had passed since any living man had been there or slept there. Remaining at the entrance for a long time, he said to himself that he would not lie down outside in the open. Then he hastened to enter, but when he tried to set foot inside, he fell backwards in a faint, for he felt two hands holding him by his hair. In this way he fainted; when he came to, he was completely in a daze, and he saw that the entrance to the cave was blocked. He listened and heard such a great storm coming from the sea toward the rock that it seemed to him the depths would rise up to the sky and knock down the entire earth and firmament. After that came such great darkness that he could not see anything at all, any more than if he had descended into an abyss. And when he saw that he had lost sight of everything, he was so frightened that no one could [368] recount how great his fear was, except the one who had comforted him after his great fear. After he had been in this darkness for a long time, because he was so afraid, he lost his senses and his memory so that he did not know where he was, and he did not remember all the things that had happened to him. All night long the king remained this way, unaware of himself or anything else; rather, he was just like someone land the great comfort... because” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail who is in a faint and has lost feeling, hearing, and sight. When it pleased Our Lord to spread the light of His day across the countryside and the lands, and the rays of His sun warmed the world, the king, who still lay on the steps before the opening of the cave, just as you have heard, felt the warmth of the sun, whose rays struck him on the face. Then he opened his eyes, just like someone who awakens, and began to look around. When he saw the sea and the rock on which he lay, he immediately raised his right hand on high and made the sign of the holy cross on himself. At once he recovered all his senses and his memory, just as before. So he got down on his [369] bare knees!2 and began to pray to Jesus Christ, in the following way. “Dear Lord God, You who are the true advisor and comfort to those in peril, who call on You and on Your holy glorious name with good and simple hearts, I worship You and give thanks to You for protecting me and delivering me from the great misfortunes and shame I would have had to suffer if Your graciousness did not exist. Lord, I am Your creature, to whom You showed such graciousness and mercy that You helped me in my need, for my soul was approaching the road to hell, when You, in Your great sweetness and pity, pulled it and called it back to the straight road of fearing and knowing and worshiping You. “Glorious Lord Father, however I may have come here, may You be adored. I would have come here through my own will, by Your grace and Your commandment, for more lightly would I suffer the difficulty and torment and travail. Lord, I am here ready to suffer Your commandment and Your pleasure, but may Your sweet pity protect me from [370] being deceived by the temptation of the devil, whose works and counsel J have left.” Upon finishing his prayer, the king stood up; then he looked out to sea toward the East and saw again the beautiful silver ship that he had seen the day before, when the handsome man had come who had spoken to him for so long. When he recognized it, he was greatly reassured because of the good words the man had spoken to him, which had made him forget all his sorrows. Then he began to blame his state of mind of the night before, crying out to God for mercy. Seeing the ship approach, he descended from above; he went down to the foot of the rock and gazed. Inside the ship he saw in splendid abundance all the foods fit for man. When he saw the master of the ship, to whom he had spoken so long the previous time, he greeted him and told him he was welcome. The man then disembarked and asked the king how he had managed since he had left him. The king told him, “Certainly, I have had nothing but sorrow and worry since you left me.” And then he recounted the entire adventure just as it had happened: the woman who had come [371] in the ship and the other marvels he had seen and suffered all night long. The lord of the ship replied, laughing, “Oh my, man of poor faith! Sin and covetousness and the ties of despair bound you. You should not be sorrowful or regret suffering any discomfort, since you suffered it for the love of your Creator, for He does not forget anyone who strives to do 12The text has “on his elbows and bare knees.” At times the position for prayer must have been similar to that of modern Muslims. The History of the Holy Grail His service. David the true prophet said this, when he spoke of the graciousness of the Creator. ‘Our Lord,’ said he, ‘is always ready to help those who call on Him with sincere hearts and in truth.’ }$ “You should put your trust in this, for if you believe it perfectly, you will have everything your heart requests without fail. Being bound and imprisoned should not cause you fear, for if you put yourself completely under His protection and abandon yourself to His will, you will have greater and richer help from Him than your heart would dare to imagine. This is what David said in the psalm where he himself calls upon us to praise God. ‘Our Lord,’ said he, ‘unties the imprisoned. Our Lord returns the heart’s vision to those blinded through earthly frailty. Our Lord heals the wounded and raises up the injured. Our Lord loves and holds dear the just. Our Lord watches over strangers. He upholds and guides orphans and [372] widows.’ !4 “Now you can understand that he who has lost the heart’s vision, that is, the knowledge of his Creator, has nevertheless not lost his Creator, for as soon as he returns to His true knowledge, the One who refuses no one is ready to receive him and will immediately give him the ability to understand His commandments. This is the heart’s vision. That of the eyes is different, for the eyes are not permitted to know any spiritual thing; all their knowledge resides in earthly things. Thus you can understand that the eyes have the body’s sight, while the heart has the soul’s sight.!® Yet it sometimes happens that the heart sins. Despite this, you should not believe that is its nature, but it happens because of the great weakness of the flesh with which it is burdened. For flesh is mortal and thus naturally cannot think of anything that is not mortal, but the heart is spiritual and must be attentive to spiritual things. Now you must learn what the heart is, since I have told you!® it is spiritual. The heart is nothing but the knowledge of good and evil; that is why it must be called the sight of the soul. Thus the very high Lord gives [373] the heart’s sight to those who have been blinded!” by mortal things, when they wish to seek!® His medicine and counsel. “How does He untie the prisoners David spoke of, as I have said? It is true that as long as man is in sin, he is in prison, for he is bound with the devil’s ties. But as soon as he comes to the fountain of counsel, that is, the way of confession, the devil loses what he possessed, and then man is untied. For as soon as he gives up and denies what he held from the devil, he is free of his homage. Henceforth nothing can claim him or hold him in its bonds, unless he returns to the devil’s works. In this way the Savior unties those who are bound with the ties of hell. 13gee@ Psalms CVL, 18. 14gee Psalms CKXXXVI, 7-9. 15“The body’s sight,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “have lost the heart’s sight”); “while the heart has the soul’s sight” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 16¢you,” as in Ponceau (Hucher transcribes “ne,” which would make the phrase negative). 17«R)inded,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “anulés,” probably a misreading of “avulés,” “blinded”). 18«Seek,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “believe”). 63 “How does He raise up the wounded and the crippled? There are many men in this world whose limbs are very well formed and yet who are so crippled that they cannot move. I know no one more crippled than someone who has lost the limbs of the soul, that is, the good riches of the heart, like religion, pity, reverence, concord, innocence, and compassion. These virtues are the limbs of the soul, for through them the soul is guided, kept on its way, and sustained. These are the soul’s hands and feet, and the soul that lacks these virtues is sure to have no limbs; thus it is true that [374] it is crippled. But as soon as the soul can recover these virtues, it is raised up, for the body is well sustained when the limbs are healthy and whole. Thus the All-powerful raises and heals those who because of the body’s filth are crippled and wounded in the soul.” These were the words the master of the ship spoke. His words and advice comforted the king, who asked if he knew the lady who had come to him and wanted to take him away. He replied, “You saw her as very beautiful and very richly dressed and adorned. You may be sure, truthfully, that formerly she was a hundred times richer and more beautiful than she is now. And in this great beauty she was so comfortable and so much the lady of my house that anything she wanted was done. But when she saw that I had glorified and raised her so much that my entire house was at her disposition, she became proud and thought she would not suffer this any longer, but would make herself as much the lady as I was the lord, so that I would have no power over her. Thus she thought she would act, and as soon as she had [375] thought it, I knew it, for I am certain to know every thought. When I saw she was thinking such folly toward me, I did not want to permit her to be in my company any longer but immediately threw her out of my house, pledging that she would never again be so beautiful or comfortable. Since then she has willingly put all her shrewdness and pains to work to make anyone she thought I loved angry with me until he left me. Because I came to visit you and took pity on you, she tried to see whether she could move you to turn away to her will and separate you from your Creator by her evil teachings. Since you have placed yourself completely under your Creator’s protection, !9 think therefore so much about Him that no promise of comfort or riches may cause you to bend or yield, and be ready at all times to obey His commandments.” The man from the ship spoke this way to the king for a long time, telling him how the good words could hold his faith firm, far from the ways of the devil. The king listened to him most willingly and attentively. What he said pleased him greatly, and [376] he was marvelously happy. Then the lord of the ship came forward, took him by the right hand, called him by his baptismal name, and asked him if he was hungry. The king replied that however great his affliction might be, he would forget it if he could be in his company for long. The lord took him and led him to the ship and showed him the great array of beautiful foods, which were 19py her evil teachings. ... protection’ Ponceau. supplied from 64 plentiful in all the varieties that a heart could imagine or a tongue relate. Then he said, “I place all these foods you see here at your disposal, so that you may take whatever you wish to eat.” Simply by looking at this great wonder, the king was sated, so that he felt no more hungry than if he had just eaten, and he said, “My lord, I want you to know that I am now so restored by your good words and by seeing these beautiful foods here that if the disposition that holds me now continues, I will never again want to eat or drink. But since you have comforted me so much, please advise me about what I should do, for as the true knower of all thoughts, you know mine, and you should advise me [377] about the subject of my thoughts.” And the lord answered. “I know indeed,” said he, “what it is. You are thinking about your brother-in-law Nascien, about whom the woman gave you news last night. Do not be afraid for him, for the One you saw in your vision descend from heaven and bathe His entire body in the ninth river, which was bigger than all the other eight, will not forget him.” When the king heard these words, he was astonished and wondered in his heart who this man could be, for he did not believe any mortal man could know the things he said. Because of this, he thought in his heart that he was not a mortal man, but he was not bold enough to enquire further. After waiting for a long time, nevertheless, he said to him, “Dear lord, for God’s sake, tell me the meaning of this vision you spoke about, for I have been frightened by it for a long time.” The man replied, “You will not find anyone to explain this until you have vanquished”? and chased away the wolf that will try to take your good food. Then you will know for certain who this wolf is and why he wishes to take your food. After that you will know what the entire vision means from beginning to end. But I enjoin you not to be frightened by anything you see, for you can be certain you will see great wonders. That is why, when you and Nascien lay [378] in the bed where you fell in a faint, the voice in your palace said, ‘The fears begin here.’ That means that after these words the True Crucified One would show to those He wishes such things as would surpass any terrible ‘marvels that have occurred before. And if you, in good faith and stout heart, might wish to hold firm against everything you see, you will gain this: whatever marvel you see will occur not to harm you, but to make the devil more hateful and remove him to a distance, and to strengthen and reinforce you in the holy faith. If it happens that any man or woman wishes to deceive you through promises or gifts, in order to separate you from the company of the Creator, be sure always to keep in mind how Adam, the first man, was deceived because he consented to the devil's counsel through the advice of a woman. “Always keep this in mind. By this you will be able to know which advice is given for your salvation and which for your peril. Because you depend on the will of your Lord for everything, you should not believe any advice that is against 20Vanquished,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “véeut,” “seen”?). The History of the Holy Grail His will. If you are promised great gifts and riches to do something that is against His pleasure, remember“! that earthly gifts [379] cannot compare to heavenly ones, for earthly ones are fragile, while heavenly ones are whole and enduring. And if you weigh them against each other, so that you know how to choose the most profitable ones and reject the harmful ones, the eternal enemy’s evil temptations will thus be driven away from you forever, and you will have approached eternal counsel.” The man spoke to the king in this way for a long time, and his words pleased him greatly and comforted him. At last the king asked him, “Lord, tell me if I will remain on this rock for long.” And he replied, “You will remain here until the devil delivers you with his left hand. You will not leave before then.” Thereupon he ceased speaking. The king was very frightened by what he had said about the devil freeing him with his hand. Then he looked down toward the ground and began to think very intently. While he was deep in thought, the lord returned to his ship and set out to sea** without saying anything more. After the king had been plunged in thought so long that he had followed his thoughts through, [380] he began to look around, but he saw nothing, neither the man nor the ship. He climbed back up all the steps to the entrance of the cave and looked for a long time out to sea. But he could not see anything, and then he remembered that he had left in the same way the previous time. Then the king sat down and began to think very intently about what could have become of this man who had told him about the things that had happened to him and that were to happen. He blamed himself greatly for not having inquired more and for not having asked him whether he was God or not. With that he affirmed in his heart that he would ask him right away if he lived long enough to see him again. Thus the king spoke to himself, until he heard the waves of the sea ringing out and making a loud noise. Then he stood up and looked toward the West. He saw coming from the West the ship in which he had seen the lady once before. Seeing the ship frightened him, for he feared that the lady in it was from an evil place, and that she had come to trick and seduce him. Then he began to pray to God [381] to watch over his soul, whatever might happen to his body, and that the flesh not act in such a way that the body be turned away from the good intent he had undertaken. After this prayer, he turned toward the East and knelt in this direction with heartfelt emotion, in the name of the glorious city of Jerusalem, where the blessed Son of God had been crucified in order to deliver His friends from eternal misery. At that moment the ship arrived, as beautiful and splendid as before. The lady stepped out, but the king neither greeted her nor said a word to her. Seeing this, she addressed him first, asking him how he had fared since she last saw him.*> He replied that it was not her affair 21“Remember,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “agree”). 22"To sea” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 23“She last saw him” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail and that he should not answer her, since she was not of Jesus Christ’s faith, as he was. When she heard him speak this way, she began to laugh just like someone making fun of another and mocking him, and she said, “King Evalach, now I see very well that you have lost your senses and the greater part of your memory. For you know truly that [382] since you received this faith you speak of, no good or honor has come to you. Rather, since then you have had all the sorrows and troubles a man can have, and yet you do not learn from it at all but are as proud as if all the honors and good things of the world had come to you from this. Now I will give you news that I know to be true, for I will not tell you anything that I have not seen with my own eyes. It is proven truth that I have just arrived from your kingdom, and J have been to Sarras since I left you yesterday. You can be sure that Seraphe, your best friend, is dead, and you will never see him or your wife Sarrasinte again.” When the king heard this, all his blood drained away because of his great anguish, and yet he did not really believe this news. But because he cherished his brother-inlaw and his wife, he was fearful and suspicious. Thus the woman troubled and distressed him with these words and others that she spoke, all of which were designed to vex and hurt him. And yet no matter what she said to him, she could not make him change his mind and go in her company, or leave the rock. When she saw she could not@4 lure him away, she told him to come see [383] the riches and beauty in the ship. The king replied that he would not enter the ship or leave the rock, despite anything he saw or heard. The lady immediately removed the black cloth covering the ship and said, “Now look, Evalach!” The king looked inside and saw that it was full of what appeared to be precious stones and the richest materials he had ever seen. And she said to him, “King Evalach, you believe that I am not from a good place because I do not believe in your foolish faith. Is it your opinion that such great riches and precious treasure come from an evil place? All these riches, which you have never seen in such plenty, would be yours if you followed my advice and counsel.” The lady admonished the king a great deal through words and promises, but nothing she said to him could bring him to her will. Nevertheless, she troubled his mind with the news about his wife and his brother-in-law and with other words with which she assailed him harshly and often. But she found him to be so firm and steady in the commandments of his Creator that when she called him Evalach, he said [384] he would never respond to this name, for he had left it to the devil, from whom he had always held it. And she laughed mockingly and said that under this name of Evalach, he had won all the honors and high positions he had held, but under the name he had now, he had never won anything but sorrow and trouble ever since he had received it, and as long as he held it, he would never be without great affliction or sorrow. The discussion between them lasted a long time, for she reproached him regarding the great honors and comforts he had always had, and he retorted by evoking the 24«Could not” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 65 great precious honor®> of the holy faith in the true Savior he had received. Since then he had prized it greatly and would rather continue in earthly poverty than have the great riches that the devil used to give him, through which he would go to everlasting ruin. When she realized that she could not move or bend him from his intent, she turned away as angrily as she had the previous time. Immediately after her followed a storm, greater and more terrible than the one that had occurred before. And the king remained there pondering about who this woman could be who had shown him such great riches and who had come from his country in so little time, and yet testified that it was seventeen days away from [385] this rock. When he saw such a great and hideous tempest, he was again terrified. It began to thunder and lighten, and the sky became so dark that the king could hardly see anything because of the brightness: all he could see was the lightning and the light of the sea. After the thunder and lightning had continued for a long time, a loud noise came from on high. The king was so dazed that he could not stand up or use his limbs, though he managed to grasp the steps cut in the rock with both hands and keep his grip. While he held on in this way, lightning descended from on high and struck the highest part of the rock so hard that it split it down to the bottom of the sea. It split straight down the middle so that half of it remained standing just as it had been before; on this part the king remained. And the other half, which broke off from it, fell into the depths of the sea so that it was never seen again by any living man. On the half that remained, the king lay in a faint, just as if he were dead, for a long time. When he came to, through Our Lord’s pleasure, the storm had passed. He opened his eyes and saw the quiet and peaceful sea but nothing of what he had heard and seen before. When he had come out of the daze, he began to look around and saw that the rock was split from the summit down to the bottom of the sea. He was so frightened that he nearly fell into the sea, completely lost in fear and despair. Then he made the sign of the holy cross on his head, limbs, and body and prayed to the glorious Savior of the world to give him, in His mercy, a serene and whole heart so that he might be firm and strong against these marvels and fears. Thereupon the king sat down again. He was overtaken by such a great desire to sleep that finally he slept perforce at the foot of the rock in the little space he had. When he awoke, he was so terribly hungry that he thought he would escape only by death. After bemoaning his misery for a long time, he looked behind him*® and saw [386] lying on top of a step a very black loaf of bread. He joyfully got up right away to get it, for he was overwhelmed by hunger. Once he held it, not wanting to wait to break?’ it, he put the entire loaf to his mouth to bite into it. As soon as he had opened his mouth and was about to bite into the bread with his teeth, he heard a great noise come from the sky, so that it 25Corrected to singular following Ponceau. 26“So that half of it remained standing just as it has been before; on this part the king remained. .. . he looked behind him” supplied from Ponceau. 27Break,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “saw it”). 66 seemed to him that all the wings of all the birds of the air were all around him. Because he was terribly afraid, he raised his head and looked up. Thus he saw a very large and marvelous bird descend straight toward him. The bird was so bizarre that he had never seen or spoken of or heard of anything like it. This bird had a head as black as pitch and eyes as red as burning coal. [387] Its teeth were similar, and the head was marked like a horned serpent. Its neck was like that of a dragon, the chest just like a lion’s, and its feet were exactly like those of an eagle.2® Where the chest and the shoulders joined, it had wings as noisy as thunder, as hard as steel, and as sharp in the front as a well-tempered lance. Behind, at the loins, there were other wings as white as snow and as noisy as a storm of hail when it falls in a strong wind in the midst of many branches. And the tip of the tail was as sharp as a sword and as fiery as a descending thunderbolt when it strikes. The bird was such as you have heard. And divine Scripture testifies that it never flies except to frighten those in whom the Savior of the world wishes to [388] spread fear. So much is it feared by all creatures that no other bird or beast will show itself when it flies; rather they flee before it as darkness does before the light of the sun. By nature only three of them can be together, for as the true Scripture says, they are born of the female without mating with a male. When they are ready to be born and hatch from the eggs, they are so cold that nothing could bear it except the mother. And even the mother cannot bear it entirely,?9 for when she has endured it so much that she can no longer continue, she leaves the eggs and flies until she finds a kind of stone that is always in the valley called Ebron. This stone is by nature so hot that if anything rubs against it, it immediately catches fire. Nevertheless, if it is not rubbed, it can be held in someone’s hand without the hand catching fire. But as soon as it is rubbed against anything, the color changes at the point of contact, for it is naturally completely white, but as soon as it is rubbed, it becomes completely red,*9 like blood at the place where a person is rubbed. And then the entire thing it has touched catches fire without being destroyed and without a flame ever appearing. [389] Once the mother of the birds has found this stone, she rubs against it and strikes it with her beak until she feels it warm up. Even so this heat is not enough, for she seems to be very small to have suffered such great cold, so she rubs more and more until she feels the great heat, and then she takes flight and returns to her eggs. When she arrives, the fire has burned inside her body so that she can no longer do anything about it. Because she feels the great heat in her body, which she cannot cool down, she knows that the eggs will burn if she sits on them. Then she flies a little above the eggs, and the great heat emanating from her warms the eggs so that the birds 28-Those of an eagle” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 29-Except the mother. And even the mother cannot bear it entirely” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 30-74 immediately catches fire. ... completely red” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail inside hatch, which otherwise would have died of cold. When the mother is completely burned and turned to ashes, the birds gather around and are nourished by these ashes,?! which they eat until they have a little strength in their bodies and limbs. Once they have eaten the mother’s ashes, they will never taste any other food. Then come forth the two males, who have become proud and so arrogant that neither can tolerate the other. Once they have reached their great strength, they are so full of pride that each of them [390] wants to be lord over the third bird, which is female. Because of this there arises between them? great hatred and a great melee so that the two males fight and kill each other. Only the female remains, who is called Serpilion; and the stone from which she burns is called Pirastite. Such was the bird that descended to the king on the rock after he put to his mouth the bread he had found on the steps. When he heard the bird descending so noisily, he was afraid. With all the strength with which it had descended, the bird struck the bread he held so hard that it flew out of his hand and fell into the sea. After doing this, the bird rapidly mounted on high and then returned noisily. Finding the king lying flat on the ground, it dropped its right wing forward so that it struck him, cropping all his hair close to the head and tearing all his clothes to the skin. Then the bird left so noisily that no one could tell the truth of it had he not seen it. The king lay in a faint on the ground for a long time. He did not get up or move or come out of his faint before it was nearly nightfall. A good part of the day had already passed at the time when he [391] fainted, and it could well have been early evening. When he came to, he was weak and dazed so that he could not see anything, and though he had been very hungry before, he felt as if he had eaten all the foods his heart desired. Thus he remained that night until morning came, and he saw day break. Seeing the daylight made him very happy compared to how he had felt all night, for he had been afraid and in danger. And when he remembered that he had been very hungry and that the bird had taken the bread, he began to sigh deeply and weep softly, saying, “Dear Lord God, the true Redeemer, who saved me from eternal destruction, I worship You and thank You for making me see that the sin I wanted to commit displeased You, and for sending me so many words of solace and comfort that I should indeed forget the body’s hunger in order to satisfy that of the soul. Now I know that he through whom the bread was sent and prepared for me did not do it for my benefit but [392] to harm me by leading me to death. Because You have made such a clear demonstration, my mouth will never taste of any food while I am in this peril, no matter how distressed the body might be, unless You, through Your graciousness, send it to me. Nor will I set foot outside of this rock unless You, through whose will I believe I came here, remove me.” 31“A shes,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “stone”). 32-Between them,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “among the three of them”). The History of the Holy Grail The king remained on the rock in this way for six®? days. Each day the man from the ship came first and then the lady. The man from the ship spoke all the good words that could bring him comfort and solace, while the woman spoke all those words that could be harmful to his soul and body. On the seventh*4 day, the man from the ship returned and comforted him greatly. He told him that the time of his deliverance was now approaching, if he could guard himself against the devil’s traps. The king asked how, and the other replied, “If you can keep from angering your Lord all day long today, you will soon be delivered from all the fears and earthly troubles that have happened to you. If you have not angered Him, if you keep from believing advice (such as to leave this rock) that might go against His will, you will have overcome marvelously great sorrows and fears; and you will have many such sorrows if you do not deign to keep watch, for it is with great difficulty that you will see yourself delivered.” (393) Thereupon the man departed, and the king remained, very happy and joyful, affirming in his heart of hearts that whatever he might see, he would not leave the rock. Thus he stayed for a long time, until it could well have been past the hour of nones. He looked far out to sea and saw a very large, rich ship coming, but he saw neither man nor woman in it. The ship was very beautiful, and it was furnished with splendid, beautiful decks. After it had traveled across the sea for a long time, it headed toward the rock. Suddenly a great storm began to come up at sea.*> The ship came closer and closer to the rock, while the storm, which was so great and hideous that there was nothing alive that would not have been frightened had it seen it, began to build up. The ship went along downwind so long, tacking one way and then the other, that it came at last to shore at the rock. The wind held it pressed so close to the rock in the direction from which it came that it could not move off. The weather was terrible. It rained and hailed; thunder and lightning crashed. It seemed that the entire firmament must fall to pieces. Anyone who saw it would have believed that the end of everything had come. The king was seated on the rock. The rain struck him from all directions. He had no place to hide, for the part of the rock where the cave was had fallen into the sea when the thunderbolt struck it, just as the book described earlier. The king looked long and hard at [394] the large, tall, splendid ship, but he neither saw nor heard anyone inside it. The weather steadily worsened; lightning continued to flash violently, and thunder struck around him so often that he could not count the times. The peril was so great that he did not even wish to escape it; rather, having given up all hope, he thought he would never escape. Thus the king suffered the anguish of this terrible weather in both body and mind. For in his body he suffered the rain and the hail and the dreadful wind, while in his heart he suffered the lightning and the thunder and the striking of the 33«giy,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “eight”). 34«ceventh,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “ninth”). 351, headed.... sea” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 67 thunderbolts. But despite all these discomforts, he could not be induced to board the ship and leave the rock. After the storm had continued for a long time, the sky began to clear, and sun’s rays spread brightness everywhere. Noticing the change in the weather, the king was very happy. The warmth of the sun struck him. He began to shake the water out of his clothes; the weather warmed up, and he was quickly dry. Then it became so hot that he thought the entire earth would bur to a crisp and that the sun [395] had descended on earth to turn everything into ashes. The king felt this great heat, and if he had been uncomfortable before, his pain and his discomfort now increased a hundred times. Suffering from the heat, he saw the ship ready before him, where he could go if he wished to avoid the sun. But he feared the anger of his Lord, for he was ready to suffer death rather than leave the rock. For a long time he suffered this painful heat—so long that his strength of heart failed him, and he was so weak that he could no longer bear up. So he fainted, falling face down and lying for a long time on the ground like someone who has lost his hearing, his feeling, and his sight. When he came to, he lifted his head a little to find out if the heat was still as great as before. And when he saw that the day had become temperate and the air sweet and mild, as it should between the hours of nones and vespers, and that the heat had dissipated, he was very happy. Then he tried to see if he could stand up, despite the weakness of his head. As he started to get up, he felt no pain in his head or any of his other limbs. Thereupon he sat up and began to marvel] at the great adventures that had befallen him, wondering what they could mean, for it seemed to him that he had undergone extremely great pain and then felt nothing. [396] He marveled so much that he thought it was a dream, and yet at the same time he remembered all the adventures that had happened to him, just as you have heard. Thus he thought and reflected in his heart. Meanwhile the day passed so that it began to get dark. Then he looked far out to sea, and saw a ship coming. It was so beautiful and impressive that never in his life had he seen one so richly and beautifully appointed. The ship came on very rapidly and noisily; once it had come closer to him, he saw two shields hanging at the two windows of the beautiful little forecastle at the prow. He recognized the two shields: one was his and the other belonged to his brother-in-law Nascien. At that moment all his blood drained away, so frightened was he. And he began to think so intently that he completely lost himself in thought. While he was plunged in thought, the ship approached; in it a horse began to whinny and neigh and stamp its feet so violently that it seemed to him the entire ship would break apart and capsize. The king listened to the horse and recognized it by the whinnying. He knew for sure that it was his horse, the one he had won from Tholomer in the battle at Orcaut. He was able to recognize it because [397] its whinny was different from that of any other horse, and it was also different in other ways. He wondered how the horse and the shields had thus come to a foreign place. The ship then reached the rock, and the king stood up to see what kind of people were inside. As he looked, he saw a great many very handsome 68 people; then he saw a man who seemed to be a knight come forth. When he was nearby, the king recognized him as one of his knights, the brother of his seneschal, the one who had been killed in the battle against Tholomer. When the knight saw him, he greeted him, looking very unhappy. The king ran quickly to embrace him and asked him why he looked so sad. The knight answered, “Oh, my lord, because I bring you terrible news, which will make your heart grieve, and it will not be surprising if you are saddened and chagrined by it. And be assured that we have had many difficulties and travails in our search for you since we left your land.” “What!” said the king. “What have J lost then?” “Indeed, my lord,” said he, “you have lost the best of all your friends, your brother-in-law Nascien, [398] who is lying dead in this ship.” Upon hearing this, the king fainted, falling flat on the ground. When he came to, he asked to see Nascien, crying out terribly, like a man who has lost his senses. The man who had told him the news raised him up, took him by the left hand, and led him into the ship, while he grieved so much that he nearly killed himself. Once on board, the king saw the bier and ran straight to it. He lifted the rich cloth covering it and saw Nascien’s face and appearance as clearly as ever. He fainted again, losing consciousness so completely that those who saw him did not think he would escape without dying or being wounded. When he stood up, wishing to ask the knight how this had happened, he looked back toward the rock and saw he was so far away that he could hardly see it. Thereupon, he was so grief-stricken that he could not utter a word, but fell back into a faint before the bier. When he came to, he crossed himself. At once he saw no man or woman, nor the bier in the ship. And then he began to sob bitterly, saying, “Oh, dear Lord God, I have so badly kept watch! [399] I can see that You are angry with me, and I have indeed deserved it.” Suddenly, he saw at the prow of the ship the man from the beautiful ship who had spoken the good words to him all week. He despaired, saying, “Oh, my lord, I have been tricked by the one you told me to watch out for! You certainly told the truth when you said that the devil would take me from the rock with his left hand.” And then he began to cry and grieve. The man said to him, “Don’t cry so much. Be quiet and avoid doing worse, for you certainly need to.” And the king said, “Oh, dear sir, you who know all things, for God’s sake, tell me what I should do and how I should act.” The man replied, “A number of terrifying adventures will befall you. Do not drink or eat anything until you see Nascien, your brother-in-law, come to you as a good and true Christian. As soon as you see him acting as a Christian should, you can be sure that your deliverance has come. And I will tell you the truth about the wolf, which I told you this morning you would vanquish before you could understand® your vision. “The one who told you today that Nascien was lying dead in the ship was the wolf, for this was the devil, who is 36“Un derstand,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “see”). The History of the Holy Grail always a wolf against Jesus Christ's sheep, that is, against His people. This is the wolf in your vision that took all the good foods the lamb had brought you. You will learn yet more about what this lamb [400] symbolizes, not now, but later. And then the meaning of your vision will be revealed to you. You should know that the devil who took you from the rock by the hand was the woman who came to you every day and who said the evil things and unprofitable words. Now go and be sure to keep watch better*’ than you have until now, for you will often see things that will soon bring you eternal death if you do not take care.” Thereupon he became silent and spoke no more. Rather, he disappeared and was no longer seen. Thus the king remained alone on the ship, and the wind struck the sail and carried it some distance before he found land. He drifted all day long and all night in this way, until it was about the hour of nones the next day. Then the king sat on the main deck of the ship; he looked ahead and saw very far away at sea a man coming across on top of the water just as if he were on foot. When he approached, he saw two birds under his feet bearing him more rapidly [401] than any bird could fly. Once the man reached the ship, he stopped and made the sign of the true cross over the sea; he took water from the sea in both hands®8 and sprinkled the entire interior of the ship without saying a word. The king watched and wondered who he might be and why he was sprinkling the ship. After the man had sprinkled the entire ship, he spoke to the king and said, “Mordrain.” The king was astonished when he heard himself called by his baptismal name, and he replied, “My lord.” The good man said to him, “Do you know who I am?” And he said no. And the good man said,?9 “I am your defender, your protector after Jesus Christ. I am Salustes, in whose name and honor you founded the splendid church in the city of Sarras, and I have come to advise and comfort you. The lamb sends you this message through me, the lamb who in your vision brought you the good foods that the wolf took away from you: he tells you through me so you may know better that you have vanquished the wolf. And this was through the sign of the cross you made when you saw you were so far away from the rock. Then the wolf left you; this was the devil who fled, who earlier took from you all the good foods that the lamb had brought you. These were the good words that the man from the ship spoke to you every day. This man was the lamb who in your vision brought you the good foods. You should know that it is this lamb who was crucified for the human lineage, Jesus Christ, the Son of the Virgin, who came to comfort you every day.*° He [402] sent me here to counsel you and reveal your vision just as He showed it to you, so that you may know what it means. 37Better,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has ne... mie,” which would make the sentence negative). 38Tn both hands” supplied from Ponceau. 39«Do you know who I am?’ And he said no. And the good man said” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 40The lamb who in your vision brought you the good foods. . .. every day” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail “You saw a great lake come forth from your nephew, and from this lake came nine rivers. Eight of them were alike in size and appearance, while the ninth, which sprang forth last of all, was as big and beautiful as all the others together.4! The lake was very clear and beautiful. You looked up and saw a man who looked like the True Crucified One come down to earth; he then stepped into the lake barefoot and washed his feet, hands, and legs in the lake, as well as in all eight rivers. Once he had done this in all eight, he came to the ninth, where he completely undressed and bathed himself.42 “This lake, which sprang from your nephew, symbolizes a son who will come from him. In him Jesus Christ will bathe His feet and His hands; that is, he will lead such a good life that he will be true sustenance and a pure dove of the true Savior’s holy faith. From him will issue the nine rivers; these are nine men who will descend from him. They will not all be his sons, but will descend43 directly from him, engendered one by the other. All the other eight will be equally good, but the ninth will be nobler, of greater merit. Because [403] he will surpass the others in goodness, Jesus Christ will bathe Himself in him completely. He will not bathe clothed, but completely nude, for He will undress before him in such a way that He will reveal His great secrets to him—what He has never revealed to any mortal man. This one will be full of all those qualities that man’s body or heart can or should bear, and he will surpass all those who have come before him“ and all those who come after him and who undertake to bear arms. He is the one the angel spoke about at Sarras, when he struck Joseph with the avenging lance and said the marvels of the Grail would never be revealed to any mortal man but one. He will be the ninth of those who descend from your nephew’s son, and he will be such as you have heard. But the great miracles that will happen on earth through him, where his body will lie, will not be attributed to him, because at this time very few will know the true sign of his sepulcher. “Now I have spoken to you enough about your vision, and I will speak to you about why I sprinkled the ship, as you saw. This ship belonged to the devil, who was chased away when you made the sign of the holy cross. Because it was his, he would perforce [404] return sometime if it were not purified. But now through the sprinkling of the water, which was purified and sanctified by the sign of the holy cross, and through the invocation of the Holy Trinity, it is purified of the filth and wickedness that clung to it. No evil spirit will ever enter, for evil spirits fear nothing as they do the holy cross and its sign, which is sanctified, and the invocation of the holy faith. If you wish to enter a fearsome place, take water and purify it first by the sign of the holy cross and then by the invocation of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. By this holy benediction, the water will 4l«while the ninth... together” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 4244is limbs” omitted, as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 43«They will not all be his sons, but will descend” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 44«all those who have come before him” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 69 be sanctified and cleansed and purified of all filth. And wherever it is sprinkled in good faith, the devil will not remain; no matter how bold he may be, he will immediately flee. Once it has been sprinkled, he will not approach it but will go away from it. Do this, and you will be safe, for wherever you may do so, the devil will not have the power to do anything to your body through which your soul might be damned.” Thereupon the holy man stopped speaking and left, while the king remained in the ship as you have heard. Here the story stops speaking about him and turns to Nascien. [405] 18. Nascien’s and Celidoine’s Liberation.! Here the story says that Nascien was imprisoned the way you have heard and taken under guard by the perfidious and traitorous infidel knight called Galafre. This knight took Nascien and all of his land under his guard. Once he held him under his domination, in prison, he was very happy, acting haughtily and making? Nascien's imprisonment hard and cruel. ‘Nascien was placed in the depths of a dangerous, black, very dark cell, removed from the company and solace of any people. He ate and drank litle. He could not use any of his limbs, for his hands and feet were in chains; at all times he was in the same state, never taking off his clothes or shoes but lying day and night in them. Once Galafre had imprisoned Nascien in such a terrible place, he sought to torment him further and succeeded in imprisoning one of Nascien’s young sons, who was only seven years and five months old. This child was very handsome and seemed to be descended from a noble family and high lineage. [406] When he was baptized, he was named Celidoine, a name that suited him because of the life he led after that, for Celidoine means “given to heaven” in Latin. He was indeed given to heaven, for during his entire life his heart and desire were intent on heavenly works, and he knew as much about astronomy as any man could through proper and well-intended study. At his birth a great and unusual marvel occurred in the city of Orberica. He was born on a beautiful summer day, around noon, on the second day of the month of June. At the time he was born, the sun, which should have been at its brightest and hottest, suddenly appeared just as clearly as in the morning when it rises, while the moon and the stars were seen as Clearly as if it were night. This certainly meant that he would probe and learn? all the properties of the heavens. This [407] sign marked the child’s birth, and it was indeed right, for his life after that was such as the symbol announced, and the words that come hereafter will illuminate its truth. Corresponds to Hucher II: 405-418; Sommer I: 107-111; Ponceau §180-185. 2«Making,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “[Nascien’s imprisonment] was”). 3“And learn” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 70 Galafre held this child prisoner with his father Nascien, who remained a good seventeen days in the prison you have heard about. On the seventeenth night Nascien was in bed, in a seated position, for he could not lie down, and he began to doze. As he dozed, he felt a hand grasp him by the arm. He needed to sleep so much that he pushed it away. The hand took him again, and he pushed it away* again. The hand took him a third time, and he pushed it away a third time. Thinking he would continue to sleep, which he had a great desire to do, he felt the hand _take him again by the hair and pull him up despite himself. Feeling this, he tried to cry out, but he could not utter a word; astounded, he wondered what this could be. Once he was standing, he felt that his hands and feet were unbound;° as he took his first step, he felt his chains lying before him. Then he was happy and relieved. And when he was at the foot of the black, dark cell, he saw a light appear just as if it came out of the wall. [408] He looked up and saw something like a red cloud. Out of this cloud appeared the hand that was holding him, white as snow, and the® forearm, in a sleeve as red as burning fire. Thus the hand, which held him by the hair, and the sleeve above it appeared clearly, as you have heard. But he could see nothing more of the body to which the hand belonged—only the form, which was enveloped in the cloud, just as the form of a body appears when wrapped in a shroud, though the body is not seen clearly because it is covered. In this way Nascien saw the body and the hand that held him and lifted him. He felt his feet leaving the ground, this marvel frightened him so much that he did not dare show anything of what he saw or felt. Thus the hand lifted him up. He saw it clearly, and the hand holding him by the hair did not hurt him at all. Once he was in the air [409] at the top of the vault covering the cell, he saw open before him an iron door through which one entered the cell and lowered its prisoners. After going through this door, still being led by the hand, he went right past the bed where Galafre lay. Upon reaching the entrance of the house, he saw the gates open before him. And the cloud still passed before, with him after. As soon as he was outside the main gate, he heard a sound like a man spitting.’ Once they had gone a small stone’s throw from the gate, Nascien looked back and saw that it had caught fire and was burning. The fire was large and made a great deal of noise; those in the house noticed it and began to cry out loudly. When Galafre heard the cries, he jumped out of bed. As soon as he saw the open entrance through which Nascien had left, he ran to the iron door; seeing it open, he was so astonished that he did not know what on earth to do or say. Then he had a servant lowered into the cell. The man searched the entire cell and said that Nascien was not there. When Galafre heard this, he nearly [410] lost his 4“The hand took him again, and he pushed it away” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 5“Unbound,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “bound”). 6Nude” omitted, as in Ponceau. 7 “Spitting,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “cachier,” which is probably a lapsus). The History of the Holy Grail mind, and he began to lament bitteily. Seizing a lance, he jumped onto one of his horses and ordered all his men-atarms to follow Nascien, each one taking his own route. He himself took a path that led to the main road, The moon was shining beautifully and clearly, and the night was rather peaceful and balmy. After having gone along the road a good half league, as fast as the horse could carry him, Galafre looked ahead and saw Nascien. Recognizing him, for he had seen him often, he spurred after him. When Nascien saw him coming, he was very frightened. The hand continued to hold him, and then the cloud spread out over him so that he saw clearly the body to which the hand belonged. It seemed to him that it was so large that no tongue could describe it accurately, and it was so full of such wondrous light that the sun, when it is at its brightest and hottest in the summertime, does not have a hundredth part of the light the body had. He was so astonished and overwhelmed that he lost all his senses and did not know where he was. He remained thus in a faint, neither seeing or feeling anything. When Galafre came to the place where he had seen Nascien, he looked all around but saw nothing alive except the cloud going along the road, just like a wave of fire blown by the force of the wind. [411] This red flaming thing he saw frightened him so thoroughly that he could not remain in the saddle but fell to the ground in a faint. The cloud passed over his body where he lay stretched out on the ground, and the one who was in the cloud put his hand on the right side of his face and his foot on the left. Thus Galafre lay in a faint. His horse turned and fled as fast as it could go, straight to the dwelling from which it had come. Those in the house who saw it come without their lord were very frightened. Galafre’s household lamented greatly, believing he was dead because they had seen his horse return without him. At dawn the next day, they went to seek him, but they did not know for certain which route he had taken to follow Nascien. They searched high and low until they finally found Galafre in the middle of the road where he still lay just as if he were dead. They took him and raised him up, but he was in such a state that even the threat of having his head cut off could not have made him stand up. They looked and saw on the right side of his face the mark of the hand that had touched him and on the left the mark of the foot. [412] The mark of the hand was as red as iron when the smith pulls it out of the furnace, while the mark of the foot was as black as pitch. The black mark was as cold as ice, and the red as hot as burning fire, as he himself recounted when he returned home. When the men who had found him raised him and saw him in such a state, they were very much afraid, for he could not say a word or open his eyes, so they believed in truth that he was dead. In this way they carried him up to the house, without his uttering a word, opening his eyes, or moving his feet or hands. Once inside, they laid him in a bed, while his wife and children and the rest of the household lamented loudly around him. At the hour of nones, he let out a loud cry. His wife ran to him in a fright. He stank so badly that she nearly fainted from anguish. He opened his eyes, looked all around, and asked for water to put out the fire The History of the Holy Grail that was burning him. His servants ran hurriedly for water. After [413] they had thrown the water on both sides of his face, they saw that the flesh on the right side was gone, so that the cheekbone appeared completely white, while the flesh all around was as red as fire. They looked at the left side and saw that it was full of worms, and it stank so that they could barely stand it. As soon as they had thrown the water on him, he began to cry out again, and he fainted so dead away that anyone who saw him would believe he was in fact dead. When he came to, he opened his eyes and began to complain bitterly, saying he felt death was very near. Then he began to get very angry; he said that it grieved him terribly to die in such a way and to fall into such suffering at the best moment he had ever known. Because of his great grief, he cursed Hin. who had caused him to be born, when he was to die so soon and in such a way. Next he asked for news of Nascien, but the people in the house replied that they knew nothing at all about him. When he heard thit, he fainted again. As soon as he came out of his faint, he ordered Nascien’s son Celidoine brought before him. Once the child was there, Galafre said he would take vengeance on Celidoine for his anger with his father, who had fled, and for the death he had received [414] because he had pursued Nascien. Then Galafre ordered the child killed right away. His wife fell immediately at his feet, beseeching him not to do that; if he wished to cause the youth’s death, he should make him starve so that he might die in prison or in some other way. But Galafre, who had more evil in his heart than a tiger or lion or other wild beast, replied that he did not want the child to live on after him, but rather to see him die with his own eyes. Then he called his men-at-arms and ordered them to carry him, sick as he was, up to the battlements of the tower on high. They did as he ordered. Once he had been carried there, he ordered Nascien’s son Celidoine brought up. When the child was there, Galafre called his men-at-arms and ordered them to throw him from the battlements of the tower down to the ground before his eyes, for he himself wished to see justice done, after which he did not care when he died. The men were very upset for love of the child, but they did not dare refuse to obey their lord. They took the child and lifted him up above the battlements of the tower. [415] When Galafre saw him up there, he ordered them to throw him down. The tyrant had himself raised up, for he wished to see him die, so cruel was he, and the men dropped the child. When the child reached the middle of the tower, the men above looked, believing that he had already fallen to the ground, smashed to pieces. But as soon as they looked, they saw nine hands that seemed whiter than snow holding him—two by one of his hands, two by one of his feet, two by the other foot, and two by the other hand, while the ninth was holding him by the chin. In this way the nine hands carried the child without touching ground until they had taken him far away. When Galafre saw him borne away in this manner, he grieved so in his heart that he fell back in a faint. At once there descended on the tower such great darkness that the men could barely see each other. Then a voice spoke so loudly that they all heard, “Let anyone who is a friend of the True Al Crucified One flee immediately, for the vengeance against His enemies approaches.” As soon as the voice had said this, it began to thunder and lighten so terribly that it seemed it was the end of the world. All of Galafre’s men-at-arms turned and fled out of the tower, [416] leaving their lord lying in a faint. Fire immediately descended from the heavens, striking the left part of the tower so fiercely that it toppled half the battlements from the top down to the middle floor. In the part that fell lay Galafre, who died so vilely that he was smashed into tiny pieces before falling to the ground. None of the other people suffered any harm except fear, for Our Lord had put them there so that they would see this, because He had chosen them for His service. For they had all received the law and had been baptized in the name of the Trinity. Thus the True Crucified One saved those who had turned to His faith and delivered over to death the man who had revolted against His glorious name, for He is the One against whom all power is mortal. In the way we have heard, Galafre passed from temporal life to eternal death. The news of his death soon spread throughout the kingdom and the land, as did that of Nascien’s escape and the way his son was carried away. When Queen Sarrasinte learned the news, she was very happy and much comforted, for she believed truly that Jesus Christ’s power had unbound them and that wherever they might be, they were there because of Him. When the nobles of the kingdom through whose advice Nascien had been seized learned the truth about [417] his deliverance and Galafre’s death, they were very much afraid—some® because of the vengeance God had taken, and some because of the valor they knew Nascien possessed.? Thus even the boldest wished that they had never thought of it. Then they all came to the queen and begged for mercy for having consented to the great injustice done to her brother; surely she knew all this had been done through Galafre’s advice, and God had taken the great vengeance he deserved. Having seen clearly His true demonstration of this as well as Nascien’s innocence, they were there to cry mercy to her. “My lady,” said they, “send someone to find your brother, and have him sought until he is found. We will place ourselves and our lands in his mercy, to do what he pleases and finds good.” When Queen Sarrasinte heard them speak thus, she was overjoyed. She immediately chose five messengers, giving them great riches and splendid horses, she ordered them, as they held their lives dear, to seek Nascien throughout all the lands as long as the riches and the horses lasted. In order that he might not disbelieve anything they told him, [418] she gave them a letter sealed with her seal. With this she put the proof of what she had said to him: the anguish and torment that her lord the king had suffered all night before he disappeared. Thus the queen charged her messengers, and they set out!® as she ordered until they finished their quest, just as the story will 8«Some” supplied from Ponceau. 9“And were very sad” omitted, as in Hucher variants and Ponceau. 10“Set out,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “came”). 72 tell farther on.!! At this point the story stops speaking about the queen and the five messengers and speaks about another quest, which it will bring to an end before this one. 19. Flegetine Sets out to Seek Nascien.! Now the story says that after Nascien was put in Galafre’s prison, and his son was imprisoned with him and all his land seized, his wife, who was a young and very noble woman—the daughter of the king of the Midians—was exiled from her land. The lady was so beautiful that everyone who saw her considered the beauty of her figure and face sovereign over that of all women. Besides being beautiful, she also possessed good traits, for she was generous toward God, gracious to people on earth, and simple, faithful, and chaste toward her husband. And she loved him so much that nothing could make her heart joyful unless she knew first that her husband’s heart was content. [419] The lady was such as you have heard, and her name was Flegetine. When she learned that her husband and lord was in prison, you can be sure that she lamented and grieved. In the midst of her great sorrow, the nobles of the kingdom sent word to her to relinquish all her land. On that day she was at Orberica, the main seat of the duchy. She relinquished it willingly because she thought her lord would thereby be released from prison, but Galafre’s counsel did not allow this, just as the story recounted earlier. When she saw that the affair had gone so far that she would have neither her lord nor her land, she was more sorrowful than before. Then the lady went to the home of a vavasor, an old man of great loyalty, who had always been her son’s tutor. The lady had always had great affection for him and had often given him and his wife gifts. It seemed to her that she would find greater love in him than in any other because she had raised him from great poverty to great riches, and so she had greater confidence in him. The duchess Flegetine went to this vavasor’s home, very sorrowful and distraught. And he to whom she had given great gifts and high honors received her with great honor and [420] rejoicing, if it were possible for her to be joyful, and if people who had so many worries and sorrows could be joyful. The vavasor’s joy at the arrival of his lady was as great as his heart could show her. But she had hardly arrived when her son was taken to be imprisoned with his father. Then the lady was so full of anguish that all the sorrow she had felt in her heart was nothing compared to what she felt now. She lamented so deeply that anyone who saw her would think that she could not possibly escape alive, for there was no one alive, either man or woman, who could comfort her in her chagrin. Queen Sarrasinte, her sister-in-law, who held her dear for love of her brother and because of the great good she see Chapters 25 and 27. 1 Corresponds to Hucher II: 418-427; Sommer I: 111-114; Ponceau §186—192. The History of the Holy Grail knew she possessed, heard the news of her great sorrow and of the grieving she did day and night. She asked Flegetine to come to her so that they might comfort one another. But Flegetine did not want to go; she said that she sought no company in her grief, but wanted to have the bad all alone since she had had the good alone. When the queen saw that Flegetine did not want to come to her despite any message she might send, she went to seek her herself. As soon as they saw each other, their sorrow was renewed all day long. [421] The queen and the duchess grieved more than anyone has ever seen. Their tears and cries of grief and anguish lasted for a long time. The queen, who was a good and wise lady, was the first to speak, comforting the duchess and taking great pains to calm her. After she had spoken many words and pointed out several things, she beseeched her at last to go with her, but the duchess did not wish to put into action anything that was said to her. Rather, she said, “My lady, I have come to the home of a man whom I have found the most loyal in the world. He is one of my vavasors, and be assured that his heart would be very chagrined if I were to give up his company at this point. I will not leave him, my lady, for since he accompanied me at the beginning of my exile, I should indeed accompany him when God grants the restoration of my joy and my rank. And I will suffer less chagrin and sorrow here than I would if I were with you, for each time we saw each other, our sorrow would immediately be renewed.” The queen took great pains to try to find a way to take her sister-in-law with her, but Flegetine did not want to leave the vavasor despite any of her prayers. Thus, in sorrow and distress, the queen departed, and Flegetine remained, grieving unceasingly. Indeed, her tears and sorrows grew deeper each day. For a long time the lady led [422] this life without anyone being able to comfort her until the day came when Nascien, her lord, escaped, and her son also. When she had news of that, she began to be a little comforted and appeared more cheerful than before. On the seventh night? after Nascien escaped from prison, it happened that she lay slumbering in her bed, not having slept in a long time, and she was now beginning to rest. As she slumbered, a vision came to her in which Nascien appeared before her and said, “Dear sweet sister, follow me, for I am going to the sweet land in the West that God has provided; it is to be increased? and honored with my seed and yours.” When she awoke in the morning, she remembered this dream and wondered what it could mean. And yet it seemed to her it could not have any truth in it. That morning she went first of all to Holy Church to worship. At that time Holy Church was still very tender and young, as it was then just beginning in that country. As soon as she had listened to the service, she recounted the vision to the 2“Night,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “day”). 3 : , “Increased,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “known”). The History of the Holy Grail priest and asked him, in holy charity, to pray to Our Lord [423] Jesus Christ to give her guidance soon. Thereupon the lady returned to the dwelling of the vavasor, who took pains to comfort and console her in every way he could. The lady called him aside in private and related the entire truth about her thoughts and her vision, just as it had happened. And the vavasor said, “My lady, may it please God, this vision signifies only good. Whatever you have to do and wish to undertake and venture to command, Iam ready to do.” When the lady heard him offer to do her wishes so readily, she began to cry very hard and said that he was to go with her, where she wished to go. “My lady,” said the vavasor, “I do not know what you want to do, but whenever you wish to set out, command it, for your baggage is all ready—horses, companions, and possessions.” “In faith,” said the lady, “I wish no company but yours, for I wish to leave so secretly that no one alive will know a word about it except you and me.” “My lady,” said he, “may everything be as you command. But if it pleases you and if it seems that I speak wisely, we will take my oldest son with us, for I never saw a lad who could endure greater suffering than he, and he will be a great help to us, if your will is that he come. You can be sure, truly, that I’m not saying it because I am unwilling to bear all the suffering that any man of my age could, but no lady [424] of your position should be attended as she travels by the service of only one man. If you and I left without anyone else and something happened to me, you would be completely forsaken, in a foreign land where you do not know anyone. And even if my son comes with us, I will not go as a knight but as your servant, for no affliction that I might suffer for you could be disagreeable or painful to me. Now tell me your will and when you wish to leave. And if the company that I have suggested pleases you, tell me what your pleasure is, for I do not dare to inquire of you the reason for this trip, and yet this is something I would willingly know.” Then the lady said that since he recommended it, she would be happy to have his son go. And she said, “I would very much like you to know the reason for the trip. It is true that I will never be content until I see my lord. This is the trip I want to take. But I don’t want any living person to know about it because people whose company I would not like might wish to come with me.” “My lady,” said the vavasor, “this is the one voyage in the world that I will most willingly take. [425] And be assured that as soon as I knew that Nascien had escaped, I would have advised you to go, but I feared you would not wish to take me with you. But since you have undertaken it in this way, we have only to depart in the morning without any further delay.” Thereupon their discussion ended. The vavasor prepared gold and silver, which he had in plenty, for Nascien and the duchess had enriched him for love of their son, whom he was raising. The next day the duchess arose early in the morning and went to Holy Church, just as she 4“ See” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 73 was accustomed to do, in order to worship. The vavasor had told his wife that the lady wished to go see” her sister-in-law the queen, and he had already had the horses saddled and everything prepared to leave. As soon as the lady returned from church, she mounted, as did the vavasor and his eldest son, who the story says was called Elicanor, while his father was named Corsapin. With that the duchess took leave of the vavasor’s wife, as did her lord and her son, but her lord never let on that he was to go farther than to the queen, for he did not want his wife to be aware of anything, since his lady had forbidden it. Thus all three departed. They took four horses, three of which they rode, while the fourth was a packhorse, completely laden with deniers [426] struck in gold, silver ingots, and rich and beautiful dishware. Once they were outside the city, they turned onto the direct route to the city of Sarras. The vavasor did this so that it would be believed they were going straight to the queen. They traveled more than a league along this road. Then the vavasor addressed his lady, saying, “My lady, now tell me where you recommend seeking my lord, for I don’t believe you really know what land he is in. Because we don’t know with any certainty, we must go where we will by chance.” “Indeed,” said the lady, “it is true that I don’t know the truth about it, but because my lord told me in my vision that he was going to the land of the West, my heart draws me more in that direction than toward any other land, and I recommend we go that way by the most direct route we can.” Then they turned onto a road on the right and crossed a river called Arecuse that ran through Orberica. After that they traveled rapidly until at nightfall they arrived at the edge of Nascien’s land. They took lodging at a very late hour, staying in a castle called Hemelian situated on the border of the duchy. The next day they arose very early; the [427] lady did not wish to be seen in the city because she was traveling so poorly. And there was also another reason, for the people in the castle and the entire country around were Saracens, who bitterly hated the people of Sarras and Orberica because they were Christians. After traveling five leagues from the castle, they entered Calamine Valley in a land in which nard, cinnamon, and balsam were very plentiful. They traveled until, on the third day, they arrived in a very rich city named Nuisance, which was the main seat of the king of Meochide’s realm.® But now the story stops speaking about the Duchess Flegetine and her companions and returns to the messengers about whom I had begun to tell you, who had left at Queen Sarrasinte’s behest to seek her brother Nascien. And yet before it tells about the messengers, it will recount how Nascien came to the place where the messengers found him and how he found his son Celidoine, whom he had left in Galafre’s prison and about whom his heart was more uneasy than about any living thing. [428] 5«See” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 6“Realm” supplied from Ponceau. Ue: 20. Description of the Turning Isle.! Now the story says here that after the cloud? had carried Nascien to the place where Galafre had overtaken him, as you heard described earlier, and Galafre had fallen in a faint, frightened by the red cloud, and the body inside the cloud had marked Galafre on both cheeks with the mortal seal—after that the cloud carried Nascien to a very remote place. This was an island in the Western Sea, thirteen days distant from the place where Nascien had been imprisoned, and the local people called it the Turning Isle. This island was rightly called turning because it is true that it turned. But everyone who has heard about it does not know how it turns, and it is right that this story show the truth, for if it did not clearly show the reason and knowledge about every doubtful thing it mentions, it would only be words interlaced together, just like some people who speak many words, claiming their truth, but who cannot cite any support, except that they have heard it from others. This story eschews this bad way, for it does not set forth any doubtful statement [429] without explaining it with utter clarity. That is why it is rightly called the Chronicle of Chronicles. Now the chronicle stops to recount the true ways of the island where Nascien was carried, which the local people call, as I told you, the Turning Isle. It is proven truth that at the beginning of all things, when the Founder of the world divided and parted the four elements, which had all been piled up in one mass, and separated? heaven, which is full of all light and purity, and which the Scripture calls fire, from the other three, He established it in the highest place, for He made it cover and enclose all the others. Because heaven and air and earth and water had once been a single mass, each one, even though they were all of clashing natures, was inevitably* bound up with the others and linked according to its particular properties, heaven being by nature hot and light, and earth by nature cold and heavy. And so anyone can understand that heaven felt to some extent the cold of the earth or water, and these two likewise felt to some extent heaven’s great heat. [430] Thus you can understand the clashes among them; they were harmful to one other and could not bear one another. Because the earth, which is heavy and cold and a mass of filth, touched heaven, which is light and hot and the source of all purity, it happened that heaven gathered up filth in the form of masses of iron slag from earth as well as rusty matter from water. But when the Sovereign Father, who is the source of all knowledge, had separated one from the other and disjoined them, He placed heaven in its true honor and led it to purity, for He made it clear and shining and light and full of all warmth, while He left the earth cold and heavy, making it a mass of every heavy thing. Corresponds to Hucher II: 428-452; Sommer I: 114-124; Ponceau §193—205. 2“Cloud,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “hand”). 3“Separated,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has ” Le “deseure,” “on,” probably a misreading of “desevré,” “separated”). 4The word “ne” supplied here from Ponceau and Sommer in order to give this reading. The History of the Holy Grail Once He had cleaned and purified heaven of all earthly slag and watery rust, and shaken earth and water out of heaven’s burning heat, this earthly slag and watery rust could not naturally rejoin the earth and water from which they had come. Nor could the heavenly heat and burning that were recovered from the earth and the water honorably repair to such a noble or pure thing as heaven, for they had gained no purity from earth and water, which are a mass of every kind of filth, while heaven, as [431] you have indeed heard, is full of everything pure. Because none of them could rightly return whence it came—neither the earthly iron slag to the earth, nor the watery rusty matter to the water—since they had retained some lightness and heat from heaven; and because the burning heat could not return to heaven, since it was sullied with the baseness of earth and water, all these three things had to stay in one mass. Someone might say, “Air was p’led up in the same way as these three; why doesn’t this story speak about it? It is proven truth that along with these three things that were amassed, there was a bit of air as well.” The story agrees with this, but it says that there was so little that it is not necessary to speak about it. Just as you have heard, the four parts that had been shaken free remained in one mass. And because this mass® could not naturally return to any of these four elements for the reason the story has explained, it had to fight against itself, and so it did without fail, for insofar as there was fire in it, which is from heaven, it was light and pulled upward; and insofar as it contained earth, it bore down; and [432] insofar as there was water, it was wet and quivering and clammy. But there was so little air that it drew no property from it. And because all the weight of the four elements is in earth and water—since these two collected all heavy things—the weight remained with them, in the way you will hear. It was proven truth that by the will and pleasure of the One whom all things obey, this mass fell into the sea, and because it tended in part to be light, in accordance with what it felt from heaven, which is very light, it floated lightly and could not go to the bottom. In this way it floated for a long time in the sea without being able to stop anywhere, until it came into the Western Sea between Oragrine Island and the Port of the Tigers. In a sector of this sea, which lies between this island and this port, there is a great deal of lodestone, or magnetic iron ore, down on the bottom. You heard earlier that the story says the earth in the mass was iron slag; now this stone called lodestone has the property of liking iron above all and readily pulls it close. Once the iron is next to it and can join its force to it, it is not easy to separate it, the strength of the stone pulls the iron so much that it makes it touch it, unless there is more iron than stone or some other thing that can overcome the force of the magnet. [433] When the mass about which I spoke to you came floating up to the place where the lodestone was, it 5“And shaken earth and water out of” supplied from Ponceau. 6“That had been shaken free” and “And because this mass” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail stopped, for the strength of the lodestone held it because it was ferrous, just as you have heard. But the force of the lodestone could not pull it enough to make it join to it, not because it had more iron than there was lodestone, but because the heavenly heat it held caused it to stay lighter, and that made it perforce pull upwards. In this way, the mass remained in this place in the sea. Since then it has been called an island by the local people, because all the masses of land that appear in the sea and other waters, wherever they may be, are called by this name. And because it partook greatly of heaven’s nature, it happened that no plants or trees ever grew there, nor could any animal or bird live there. And along with this quality, it has yet another one that comes from the nature’ it derives from heaven, which is that every time the firmament turns, the island turns in the same way as the firmament, that is, heaven. In the way you have heard, the island turns. Now the story has told you why the local people call it the Turning Isle. The cloud carried Nascien to this island and put him down. He was in a faint, having [434] so completely lost his senses because of the marvels he had seen that he did not know whether he was living or dead. After the cloud had put him down, it left, and Nascien lay on the ground for a long time, just as if he were dead. When he came out of the faint and regained his senses and consciousness, opening his eyes, there is no need to ask whether he was frightened. If his heart had not been firm toward his Savior, who had tested him in many ways and® who intended to test him further, he would not have held to his faith, for every misfortune and sorrow had happened to him since he had converted, and all joy? had left him. However, despite the disappearance of joy and despite any misfortune that might befall him, he did not deviate from his faith enough to require repentance. Just as Job, who had had so many beautiful treasures in his life, suffered willingly and wisely all his misfortunes, including lying in such a vile and awful thing as dung, without ever speaking a single evil word against his Creator, in the same way Nascien suffered graciously and willingly his numerous ordeals and misfortunes, without becoming angry with God or anyone else except himself, saying that he had deserved it.!° When Nascien found himself on the Turning Isle in the way you have heard, with nothing but sky and water to see, he was very troubled, for he did not know how he had come there. All around him he saw the ugly, barren island, [435] which was so hot that it was cruel and grievous to bear. He saw that he was alone and lost, and he did not know in what part of the sea he could be. He did not remember how he had escaped. He did not know what had become of his son Celidoine; this was what worried him the most. Tired and exhausted, his hands, feet, and sides 7“That comes from the nature” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 8“Who had tested him in many ways and” supplied from Ponceau. 9To him,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “which”); “since he had converted, and all joy” supplied from Ponceau. 10Fxcept himself, saying that he had deserved it” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 75 aching, he lay down on the ground with a tremendous desire to sleep. Once he was lying on the ground in one of the parts of the island that seemed the coolest to him, for it was summer—the ninth day of the month of June—and so the island was especially hot, he raised his right hand and made the sign of the holy cross over himself, so that it might be his shield and defense against the eternal deceiver, that is, the devil, who seeks only to deceive those who are illuminated with and desirous of Lord God’s love and faith. Thereupon Nascien fell asleep from his fatigue and travails. The moon shone very clearly, for it was nighttime, and he slept for a long time and very well, since he needed to sleep a great deal. Thus Nascien slept until about daybreak, when a vision came, in which it seemed to him that he saw a very great plain. In this plain there were a great many very beautiful birds, and it seemed to him when he looked at them that they [436] flew very high. There were some who flew very low and others that could not fly, but stayed on the ground. Then came the most beautiful and the largest one, which seized him with its claws and carried him up in the air very high and then said, “Fly!” When Nascien looked at himself, he saw that he had very large, light pure white wings, and he flew as lightly as if he were walking on his feet. Then the big bird, the one that had taught him to fly, came after him and asked him to give it something to eat, for it was dying of hunger. Nascien replied, “What do you want me to give you to eat?!! | will give you what you ask for and what I can obtain.” The bird said, “I won't be satisfied unless you give me your heart.” Nascien took it at once and gave it to the bird, which carried it away, rejoicing, and saying in its language, “Now I am completely satisfied, since I am carrying away what I wanted to have and what no one knows: this is the little mouse from which the big lion, who will vanquish all the earthly beasts through the power of his heart and limbs, will escape. Once he has vanquished them and made them subject to him through his great valor, and has [437] surpassed all earthly feats, he will think he has done nothing unless he also sees what is done in heaven. Then wings will come to him, and he will learn to fly in his old age, and he will fly over the top of all the mountains, through the thickness of the clouds, into heaven through the main gate.” This is what it seemed to Nascien the white bird was saying to him. With that his dream and vision ended, and he awoke. As he was waking, he felt the island move and turn according to the turning of the firmament.!* Mystified and frightened, he raised his head and began to look around. As he looked here and there, he heard such a great and marvelous battle and struggle at the bottom of the sea that it seemed to him that the entire island was about to sink and fall into an abyss. The tumult was so violent that » 1“Something to eat, for he was dying of hunger. ... eat supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 12tTe awoke. . . . firmament” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 76 no mortal man could see it without taking great fright, for throughout the island, from one end to the other, there was no place that did not tremble as violently as a leaf in a strong wind. This was because of the struggle at the bottom of the sea caused by the lodestone’s effect on the ferrous earth. [438] The island had to turn at the command of the firmament whose nature it had kept in part, while the lodestone whose force held the ferrous earth tightly did not want to allow it to move. But compared to the power of the firmament, that of the lodestone was like a little spring in comparison to the sea. And so you can be sure that it could not be held very well by the strength of the lodestone, for the firmament was more powerful. For this reason, the island turned despite the force of the lodestone, the weight of the earth, and the surrounding water.!3 Thus, the contest was so great between the earth and the lodestone that at times the island sank into the sea until the water covered the shoreline. According as cold or heat was more abundant, the island little by little drew closer to the lodestone or farther from it, so that sometimes it almost completely floated on the water. When Nascien heard this battle, he was very frightened, but no matter how much he thought about it, he could not perceive why this was happening. Then he stood up straight, feeling the island tremble beneath him, he looked and saw that one of the ends was sinking, [439] while the other was rising. And yet the island was not small. Rather, the truth attests it was twelve hundred eighty stadia long and nine hundred twelve stadia wide. The stadium is a measure of land that equals one-sixteenth of a league. Thus you can calculate that this island was exactly eighty leagues long. But even if the island were longer, the story is not lying, for it does not guarantee its words against there being anything more, but against anything less. For the story testifies, just as you will hear told later, that all the adventures of the Grail will not be known by any mortal man. Many must be left in silence. But in the holy story that was sent to earth by the Mouth of Truth, that is, by Jesus Christ, one will never find a false word, for anyone who would dare to add lies to such a noble history as the one the True Crucified One wrote with His own hand would be too full of foolish daring. This story should therefore be:held in greater honor, for we do not find as we read in any divine Scripture that [440] Jesus Christ, the true Son of God, the very sweet Lord, ever wrote with His own hand except in two places. The first writing He did was the high prayer the Scripture calls the Lord’s Prayer. This is the Pater Noster. He wrote it with His thumb on the stone, when He taught His disciples how they should pray. The second writing He did!4 was when the Jews brought Him the woman who had been caught in adultery, in order to test how He would judge her, and He began to write in the dirt before Him. After they had urged Him to tell them what He wanted to 13«wWater” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 14F7e did was the high prayer the Scripture calls... . second writing He did” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail do with her, He said, “Let him who is without sin cast the first stone.”!> He said this because the Jews had a law, which Moses himself had established, that stated that if a married woman was caught in adultery (that is, lying with another man than her husband), she should be lapidated without ransom (that is, she should be [441] killed with stones). Because Jesus Christ, who knew!® all things, knew very well that they were saying this only to wrong Him, if they could, He responded with these words. And He immediately began to write in the dirt, with His thumb, a phrase reproaching the great baseness and filth from which the human lineage was created, for these words appeared: “Oh, earth! Why are you so bold that you dare to accuse the earth?” This meant, “Look, man who is made of such a base thing as mud, how can you be so presumptuous that you dare to recall another’s misdeed, while you hide your own evil works, which sully you!” We find that Jesus Christ, the true Son of God, wrote in these two places you have heard recalled here before He suffered death on the glorious cross. But however He may have acted while He was wrapped in mortal flesh, you will never find a clerk bold enough to say that He ever wrote anything after the Resurrection other than the high writing of the Holy Grail. Anyone who wished to say that after the Resurrection He wrote anything else with His own hand could not find any divine authority to back him, and so would be considered a liar. Thus, I say indeed that it would be a very foolishly bold thing for anyone to try to append a lie [442] to such a noble story as this one, which the true God wrote with His own hand after laying down His mortal body and clothing Himself again in celestial majesty. But now it is right that the story be brought back to the main line of the chronicle, which it left for a while in order to speak about these things that it called to mind and placed among the words of the chronicle and yet are not in it. The straight way returns to the island whose length and width were told by the story. And it says next that Nascien was at the Western end of this island; yet he was not right at the shore but at a distance of six score stadia, which amounts to seven and a half leagues. When he saw day break, he was very happy, since he strongly desired to find out in what part of the sea he could be, and because he was more comfortable during the day than at night, for he still hoped that in the day chance might bring him solace and company. Thereupon Nascien got down on his knees, turned his face toward the East, and prayed to Our Lord Jesus Christ that through His mercy, as truly as he believed that He alone was God and that there was no other God in whom one should believe, He would send him help soon, which might succor him to the honor of his body and the salvation of his soul. After his prayer, he stood up and made the sign of the [443] cross before his face. Then he turned straight in the direction where he saw that the sea was closest. After going a half league, he looked far out to sea and saw something that seemed to be no bigger than a swan coming straight toward the end of the island where he was. He increased his pace as much as he could, but this was not 15See John VII, 1-8. 16«Knew" supplied from Ponceau and Sommer, The History of the Holy Grail much, for his feet hurt because of the chains he had worn in prison, so that he could not walk very well. And there was another reason why he could not walk!” well; it was because he was not used to doing it often. He walked until he saw clearly this thing that he had seen at sea since morning. Realizing that it was a very beautiful and splendid ship, he was very happy, so he tried to walk fast. Finally he reached the shore with some difficulty. As he arrived, he discovered that his feet were split open because of the heat of the island and the difficulty of walking. By now it was probably the hour of nones. [444] He was tired and exhausted and famished. Then he looked out to the right, in the near distance, and saw that a ship had arrived. It seemed to him it was the one he had seen all day, }8 and he turned in that direction. He went up to the ship; seeing its beauty and splendor, he wondered where such a beautiful ship could have come from.!9 After looking at it awhile, he marveled even more than before, for he saw no man or woman in it. He thought that it would be unfortunate if he did not see more. Then he went a little closer, thinking he would go inside, to see if he would find anyone and if the ship was as beautiful inside as out. As he was about to board, he looked at the bow of the ship. There he recognized golden letters written in Chaldean which said a very frightening and fearsome thing to all those who would enter. These were the words: TAKE NOTE, YOU WHO WISH TO ENTER ME, WHOEVER YOU MAY BE; TAKE CARE THAT YOU ARE FULL OF FAITH, FOR MY NATURE IS SUCH THAT THERE IS NOTHING BUT FAITH IN ME. THEREFORE, TAKE CARE BEFORE YOU ENTER THAT YOU ARE NOT SULLIED, FOR FAITH IS BELIEF. AS SOON AS YOU TURN AWAY FROM YOUR BELIEF IN ANY WAY, I WILL TURN AWAY FROM YOU IN SUCH A WAY THAT YOU WILL HAVE NO SUCCOR OR HELP FROM ME; RATHER, I WILL FAIL YOU IN ALL THINGS, WHEREVER [445] YOU MAY BE GUILTY OF DISBELIEF, AND TO WHATEVER EXTENT. Then Nascien stopped and began to think very intently about what the writing said. After a while, he said to himself that he wanted to enter the ship, but the words, which were so troublesome, made him afraid. After this, he said to himself that he would board the ship. Then he thought of something else and said, “Dear Lord God, this writing says that there is only faith in this ship. If it is true, then I know very well, without fear, that the ship came from You. And if it has come from You, then no harm or anything that might be contrary to Your glorious holy name can come from it to him who truly believes in You. I believe in You and worship You with my whole heart, just as I learned from Your servant’s mouth that You want to be believed in and worshiped. Trusting in Your holy name, I will enter, for faith in You saves all those who have their thoughts in You, whatever danger their bodies may be in.” Thereupon Nascien raised his right hand and crossed himself, and then he entered the ship. Once inside, he 17“and there was another reason why he could not walk” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, Sommer. 18Tay” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 19wWhere such a beautiful ship could have come from,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “such a beautiful one had never been seen”). a7 began to look all around, saying to himself that he did not think one could find another ship of such great [446] beauty or splendor as this, either on sea or land. After looking it over everywhere and searching out all the angles underneath and above, he returned to the main part of the ship, where he saw a pure white cloth stretched like a curtain over a large bed. He approached and lifted the cloth; then he looked underneath and saw the most beautiful bed he had ever heard of. The bed was very large, sumptuous, and marvelously beautiful. At the head there was a gold crown, while at the foot there was a magnificent sword. It was laid across the bed, pulled out of the scabbard a full palm’s length. This sword was very unusual, for the pommel was made out of a stone that had in it all the colors found on earth. The stone was of all these colors, and it had other unusual characteristics, for each of the colors had a quality that the story will certainly tell about when it speaks more of its power and strength than here.” Next, the story says that the hilt of the sword was made of two ribs that came from two different animals. [447] The first was from a kind of serpent that lives in Caledonia?! more than in any other land, and is called Papagustes. The power of this serpent is such that if any man holds one of its ribs or any of its other bones, he has no fear of feeling great heat, either from the sun’s strength or from the heat of work; rather, as long as he holds it, he is always moderately warm. The first rib is like this, and has this power. The other rib is from a fish that is not very large, and that lives in the Euphrates River and no other waters. This fish is called Cortenans. Its ribs possess such power that if any man takes one, as long as he holds it, he will not remember any of the joys or sorrows he has had except the one thing that caused him to take the rib. As soon as he puts it down, he will think again just as he is accustomed to, according to human nature. The two ribs in the sword’s hilt have these powers and these qualities. The hilt was covered with a [448] splendid red cloth with gold writing that said, I AM MARVELOUS TO SEE AND MORE MARVELOUS TO KNOW, FOR NO MATTER HOW LARGE THE HAND, I CANNOT BE GRASPED. NO ONE WILL EVER GRASP ME EXCEPT ONE PERSON WHO WILL SURPASS IN HIS CRAFT ALL THOSE WHO HAVE BEEN BEFORE HIM AND WHO WILL COME AFTER HIM.22 This is what the letters on the hilt said. As soon as Nascien had read them (for he knew Chaldean well), he wondered what this could mean. Then he looked at the blade of the sword, which was pulled out of the scabbard as far as you have heard. There he saw more writing, in letters as red as blood. He stepped forward a little and began to read them. He saw they said that no one should be so bold as to draw the sword unless he was to strike better and more boldly than anyone else; and that anyone else who drew it would be the first to die from it, and this had already been proven. After having read the writing, Nascien wondered about it more than anything else, for this was the thing he desired 20Despite this announcement, there is no further mention of the virtues of the colors. 21 scotland. 22This prophecy is realized in The Quest for the Holy Grail, by Lancelot’s son, Galahad; see Chapter 72. 78 the most*5—to draw the sword from the scabbard and see what it was like—and the marvels indicated by the writing made him desire this even more. Then Nascien began to look at the scabbard, but no matter how much he [449] looked it up and down, he did not know how to describe in his heart nor say with his mouth what it could be made of. But he knew for sure that it was as red as a rose petal. And it had letters on it, some of which were gold, while the others were azure. It did not have a sword-belt that suited such a splendid sword or scabbard, for it was of such a poor and lowly matter as hemp waste, and it was so humble, small, and weak in appearance that it did not seem it could hold the sword a single minute without breaking. The writing on the scabbard said such words as you will hear: HE WHO WILL BEAR ME SHOULD BE MORE VALIANT, BRAVE, AND CONFIDENT THAN ANY OTHER, IF HE BEARS ME AS THE WRITING ON THE SWORD SAYS, FOR THE BODY AT WHOSE SIDE I WILL HANG CANNOT BE SHAMED ON THE FIELD AS LONG AS Ir IS GIRDED WITH THE SWORD-BELT FROM WHICH I HANG. NOR WILL ANYONE BE SO BOLD AS TO REMOVE THE SWORD-BELT THAT IS HERE, FOR THEREBY HE WOULD BE SO UNFORTUNATE, AND SUCH GREAT MISFORTUNES WOULD COME FROM IT, THAT NEITHER HE NOR ANY MORTAL MAN COULD MAKE AMENDS. NOR IS IT GRANTED TO ANY MAN WHO EXISTS NOW OR WHO MAY EXIST IN THE FUTURE THAT HE BE THE ONE TO REMOVE IT. RATHER IT SHOULD BE REMOVED BYTHE HAND OF A WOMAN, THE DAUGHTER OF A KING AND A QUEEN, AND IN THE PLACE OF THE BELT THAT IS THERE, SHE WILL MAKE ANOTHER ONE FROM SOMETHING SHE HAS THAT SHE HOLDS [450] DEAREST, AND SHE WILL PUT IT IN PLACE OF THIS ONE. AND THIS WOMAN WILL CALL THE SWORD BYITS RIGHT NAME, AND ME BY MINE. BEFORE THAT, NO ONE WILL KNOW HOW TO NAME OR CALL US BY OUR RIGHT NAMES.”24 Nascien looked at the scabbard for a long time. After looking at one side of it for a while, he thought he would not fail to look at the other side, whatever might happen to him. Then he took it very gently and turned it over, but he was unable to turn it gently enough to keep the bed from trembling from one end to the other. After turning it? over, he saw that the sword was as red as blood on the other side, and it had letters as black as charcoal that said, HE WHO PRIZES ME MOST WILL FIND THE MOST TO BLAME IN ME AT THE MOMENT OF GREAT NEED, AND I WILL BE THE MOST CRUEL TO THE ONE TO WHOM I SHOULD BE THE MOST GRACIOUS , AND THIS WILL HAPPEN ONLY ONCE, FOR THUS IT MUST BE WITHOUT FAIL.2© These were the words spelled out by the letters on this side of the sword. Nascien looked at the scabbard and saw that on this side it appeared to be blacker than pitch. And if he had been [451] astounded when he had first looked at the other side, because he could not think or say what it could be made of, he was even more astounded now, for he 23This was the thing he desired the most” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 24This prophecy is realized in The Quest for the Holy Grail, when Perceval’s sister changes the sword-belt and names the sword and scabbard; see Chapter 72. 25That is, the scabbard with the sword inside. 26The sword fails Nascien himself; see Chapter 24. The History of the Holy Grail thought at one moment, and it seemed to him to be the truth, that it was made out of wood. And the next moment he swore that it was leather, but he could not say what animal it came from. And yet the next minute he said it was’ of iron or some kind of metal, and he wished to find out the truth for himself because he had never seen anything of its size that weighed so much. Thus Nascien debated with himself about the scabbard, so that at one and the same time he affirmed one thing and denied it, and he could not draw any conclusion without immediately questioning it. And the story does not tell here what it was made of, for neither the time nor the place has come when it should tell it, nor how and where the sword was forged, nor what the scabbard was made of, nor whence it was brought to the place where the sword was first placed inside it. Nor does it tell here the great power of the scabbard, nor what it was made of, nor the great marvels that happened after that in the kingdom of Logres and in many other places in Great Britain. [452] All these things are not revealed by the story in this part. But the time and place will come to show clearly the ways and the qualities of the scabbard and the sword-belt when the glorification of the sword comes. Then it will be known and called by its right name, just as the writing on the scabbard?$ says, But now the story stops speaking about the scabbard and the sword and speaks about something else. 21. The Tree of Life.! Here the story says that a spindle? was placed upright in the middle of the front side of the bed. Before anything else, you should know that the bed was made of wood from the trunk, not from any other part of the tree. And this spindle I am telling you about? was fitted into the wood that ran the length of the bed, on the front, so that it was standing upright. On the opposite side, fitted into the back of the bed, stood another one. It was also upright, and it was across from the one in front. These two spindles were separated by the width of the bed; on top of them there was [453] another small square spindle, which was fitted into both of the other two. There would be a great deal to recount about these three spindles if everything about them were told, but the story says only that the first one, which stood on the near side, was as white as new-fallen snow, and the one on the far 27“and yet the next minute he said it was” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 28«and on the sword” omitted, as in Ponceau. 1 Corresponds to Hucher II; 452-484; Sommer I: 124-136; Ponceau §206-223. The description of the bed, the origin of the spindles, and the construction of the ship are also found in The Quest for the Holy Grail, see Chapters 67-71. The two texts are nearly identical. “The word “spindle” was chosen in order to maintain the connection to weaving imagery inherent in the Old French “fuseau.” 3“And this spindle I am telling you about” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail side was as red as a drop of natural blood, while the one that lay across the other two was as green as an emerald.4 The three spindles on the bed were of these three colors. You should know that they were natural colors, not painted, for they had not been put there by any mortal man or woman. And because some people who heard about it might be doubtful and consider themselves deceived if they knew nothing more, the story turns aside from the straight road of its material in order to reveal the truth and put doubt to rest. This is something that is not to be glossed over but is very delightful to hear, for in the knowledge about the three spindles lies all the knowledge about the ship. It happened that when Eve the sinner, who was the first woman, had taken advice from the eternal mortal enemy—the devil, who began then to trick the human race in order to lead them astray—and he had beguiled her so much that he inflamed her with the mortal sin [454] that had caused him to be thrown out, exiled, and hurled down from the glory of heaven (this was cupidity), he had her carry out his treacherous desire by making her pick the deadly fruit from the tree, which had been forbidden by the Mouth of her Creator. The true story says that when she picked it, she broke off from this same tree a little branch along with the fruit, just as it often happens that the twig comes away with a fruit when it is picked. As soon as she had brought it to her husband Adam, whom she advised and urged to eat it, Adam took it in such a way that he broke it from the little branch and ate it, to our great sorrow and his,” and to his great ruin and ours. After he had broken it from the twig as you have heard, it happened that the twig remained in his wife’s hand, just as it often happens when one holds something in one’s hand without realizing it. As soon as they had eaten the deadly fruit, which should indeed be called deadly, for through it death came, first to them and then to all their descendants, [455] all the qualities they had possessed before changed. Then they saw that they were made of flesh and naked, for before this they had been only spiritual beings, even though they had bodies. Nevertheless, the story does not affirm that they were completely spiritual, for something created from such a base thing as mud cannot be spiritually pure. But they were just like spiritual beings, since they were created to live forever, if they always refrained from sinning. And when they looked at each other and saw they were naked and recognized one another’s shameful limbs, they were ashamed, so much did they already feel the consequences of their misdeed. Then both of them covered their ugliest parts with both hands.® But Eve still held in her hand the little branch that had remained from the fruit Adam had eaten; she had not let it go, either before or after. 4Following Ponceau and Sommer, the order of the two last colors is reversed. 5 “His,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “joy”). § “With both hands” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 79 When He who knows all thoughts and all intentions’ learned that they had sinned in this way, He came to them and called Adam first. It was right that he be charged more than the woman, for the woman was of a poor and weak constitution, [456] having been made from the man’s rib, and it was right that she obey the man, not the man her. That is why He addressed Adam first. After saying the cruel words, “You will eat your bread in sweat,” not wanting the woman to get off scot free, with no share in the sorrow, since she had shared in the misdeed, He said to her, “You will give birth to your children in pain and sorrow.” Then He threw them both out of paradise, which the Scripture calls the Garden of Delight. Once they were outside, Eve still held the small branch in her hand, having forgotten about it and not having let go of it despite everything. Then she looked at it and saw that it® was beautiful and green, as if it had just been picked, and she knew that the tree from which the branch had been picked was the reason for her disinheritance® and trouble. Then she said that in memory of her great loss, which happened because of this tree, she would keep the branch as long as she could, and she would put it some place where she would see it in remembrance of her great misadventure. Realizing she did not have a chest or any other case where she could put it, for at that time [457] there was not yet any such thing, she took it right away and stuck it in the ground so that it stood straight up, saying that thus she would see it often. The little branch was stuck in the ground by the will of the Creator, whom all things obey. It grew, sprouted, and took root in the ground. This branch, which Eve, the first sinner, took out of paradise, was charged with meaning. The fact that she carried it in her hand meant great happiness, as if she were speaking to her descendants who were yet to come, for she was still a virgin, and it was as if she were saying to them, “Fear not if we have been expelled from our!? heritage, for we have not lost it forever. Here is the sign that we will yet enter at another time.” And to anyone who would like to ask the story why the man did not carry this little branch out of paradise rather than the woman, since man is a higher thing than woman, the story responds that the bearing of the branch did not belong to the man but to the woman. For the fact that the woman carried it meant that by woman life was lost, and by woman it would be restored. This meant that by the Virgin Mary the glorious heritage that was lost would be recovered. But now the story returns to the little branch, which had sprouted and taken [458] root in the ground. And it says that it grew and multiplied greatly, so that in a short time it was a large tree. When it was big and gave shade, the trunk, the branches, the leaves, and the bark were all as See Psalm VII, 9, and Revelations II, 23. 8“In her hand, having forgotten. .. . and saw that it” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 9“Disinheritance,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “inheritance”). 10Here the manuscript Hucher and Ponceau use is missing several folios. Hucher uses BN 2455; Ponceau, BN 770. Our translation continues to rely on Hucher’s version, with corrections from Ponceau and Sommer. 80 white as snow. And this symbolized virginity, for virginity is a quality through which the body is kept pure and the soul white. The fact that it was white throughout meant that she who planted it was completely virginal at the time she planted it, for at the time that Eve and Adam were thrown out of paradise, they were both still virgins and pure of all base lust. You must understand that maidenhood and virginity are not the same thing, but there is a great difference between them, for maidenhood cannot by any means be compared to virginity, and I will tell you why. Maidenhood is a quality that everyone has who has not yet lain with another or been touched by carnal lust. But virginity is a higher and more virtuous thing, for no one can have it, neither man nor woman, if he desires carnal union. Eve still possessed this virginity at the time she was thrown out of paradise. At the time she planted the branch she had not yet lost her virginity. But after that God commanded Adam to know his wife, that is, he lay with her carnally, just as law and nature require man to lie with his wife and woman with her husband. Then she lost virginity and knew carnal union from that time on. Quite some time after Adam had known his wife, as you have heard, it happened [459] that they were sitting together under the tree. Adam began to look at her and bemoan his sorrow and exile, and then they both began to weep very tenderly for each other. Eve said that it was not surprising if they remembered their!! sorrow and affliction there, for the tree contained it, and no one could stay underneath it, no matter how happy he might be, without leaving in sorrow; and it was only right that all those who ever stayed beneath it!2 should be sorrowful, for it was the tree of death. As soon as she had said this, a voice spoke, saying to them, “Wretches, why do you predict and pronounce death thus to each other? Do not predict things anymore through despair, but be comforted, for you can be sure there is more life than death in the tree.” Thus the voice} spoke to the two unhappy people, and then they were both very much comforted, and ever afterward they called it the Tree of Life because of the good news they had heard beneath it. And because of their great joy, they planted many other trees that all descended from this one, for as soon as they broke off a small branch and planted it in the ground, it sprouted right away and took root easily, keeping the color and characteristics of the original tree. The latter continued to grow and send down roots. From that time on Adam and Eve often went to sit!4 under the tree. One day it happened that they sat together there, and the True Mouth of the Great Master says it was a Friday. After they had sat there for a long time, they heard a voice speak, [460] commanding them to join in camal union. They were both so ashamed that they could not bear to see each other doing such a base thing, for the man was as ashamed as the woman. But they did not dare to Their” supplied from Ponceau. 12s tayed beneath it,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “saw it”). 13“OF the king” omitted, as in Ponceau. 14«and rest” omitted, as in Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail transgress Our!> Lord’s commandment, for the result of the first transgression instructed them. So they began to look at each other very shamefully. Then Our Lord saw their great shame and took pity on them. Because it is impossible to avoid His will, which was that with this couple He wished to establish the human race in order to replace the tenth legion of angels, which had been thrown out of heaven because of their pride, He sent them great comfort in their shame, for He covered them in such a way that they could not see each other. They were both frightened by the way this darkness had descended so suddenly between them. They called out and touched each other blindly; and because all things must be done according to Our Lord’s will, their two bodies had to come together carnally, as the sovereign Father had commanded. When they lay together, they sowed a new seed, which lightened their sin somewhat, for Adam begot and his wife conceived Abel the Just, who was the first to serve his Creator by loyally giving his tithe. In this way Abel the Just was begotten under the Tree of Life, on a Friday, as you have [461] indeed heard. And then they saw each other just as they were accustomed to, for the darkness disappeared, and then they realized that Our Lord had done this to cover their shame. They were very happy about this, and soon a very great marvel occurred: the tree, which had been as white as snow throughout, became as green as grass in a field. And the bark, wood, and leaves of all those that descended from it after!® this union also became green. Thus the tree changed color from white to green. But those that were already descended from it never changed their original color. It was only the first tree that became green, and it was completely green from top to bottom. And henceforth it began to flower and bear fruit, which it had never done before. The loss of the color white and the taking on of green meant that the virginity of the person who had planted it was gone. The green it took on, and the flowers and the fruit, symbolized the blessed seed that had been sown under it, which would always be green in Lord God, that is, in good and loving thoughts toward his Creator. And the flower meant that this creature who had been engendered under this tree would be chaste and pure and clean of body. And the fruit meant that he would vigorously engage in good words and give evidence of religion and goodness in all things. The tree was green for a long time, and all those that descended from it were alike until Abel had grown up. [462] He was gracious!” toward his Creator, and loved Him so that he gave Him his tithes and the first fruits!® of the most beautiful things he had. However, Cain, his brother, did not act in this way, but took the most base and despised things he had and offered them.!9 And God rewarded generously the one who offered the beautiful things, and who did it with good heart,”° so that when he was on top of Our,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “their”). 16«After,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “because”). 17“Gracious,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “very good”). 18«First fruits,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “promises”). 1914 owever, Cain .. . them” placed here, as in Ponceau. 20“And who did it with good heart” supplied from Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail the knoll where he was accustomed to burn his offerings, as Our Lord had commanded, the smoke from his sacrifice went straight up to heaven. But Cain’s smoke spread out over all the fields and was ugly and black and rank, while that which rose from Abel’s sacrifice was white and clear and sweet smelling. When Cain saw that his brother Abel was more blessed in his sacrifice than he was, and that God received it with more pleasure than his, he was very upset, and because of it he conceived strong hatred toward his brother. He began to ponder in his heart how he could be avenged, until he said to himself that he would kill him, for otherwise he did not see how he could have vengeance. Thus Cain harbored his hatred in his heart for a long time, never showing it in any expression or manner that might make Abel notice it. This hatred was concealed until one day when Abel had gone out into the fields, far away from his father’s house. Their house was somewhat distant from the tree, where the sheep were that he tended. The day was getting hot, and the sun was beating down.?! Because he could not bear the great heat, [463] he went to sit under the tree. Overcome by a desire to sleep, he lay down under the tree and began to doze. His brother, who had planned the great perfidy, had spied on him for a long time. He followed him until he saw him lying under the tree. He came after him, thinking he would kill him without being seen. But Abel heard him come and looked up. When he saw it was his brother, he stood up to greet him, for he loved him a great deal, and he said, “Welcome, my brother.” The other retumed his greeting and had him sit down again. As he did so, Cain fell on him with a curved knife he was holding, striking him first under the breast. Thus Abel met death at the hand of his traitorous brother in the very place where he had been conceived by his father and mother’s faithful union. And just as he had been conceived on a Friday, as the True Mouth puts it, this same witness states that likewise he died on a Friday.” The death Abel met through betrayal, at the time when there were still only three men on earth, symbolized the death of the True Crucified One. Abel symbolized Him, while Cain symbolized Judas, through whom He received death. Just as Cain greeted Abel and then killed him, Judas greeted his Lord, having sought His death. Thus these two deaths indeed correspond to each other, notin level, but in symbolic meaning, for just as Cain killed Abel on [464] Friday, Judas killed Our Lord on Friday, not with his hand, but with his tongue. And Cain symbolized Judas very well in every way, for there could be no reason why Judas, who was Jesus Christ’s disciple, should hate Him. However, there was an unwarranted cause for his hatred, for he did not hate him because of any evil he had ever seen in Him, but because he saw only good in Him, for it is customary that all bad men always hate and make war on the good. If Judas, who was so perfidious and traitorous, had seen as much perfidy in Jesus Christ as he knew to be in himself, he would not have hated Him, but would have loved Him the 2lewas beating down,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “had risen”). 22Here ends the section missing from the Mans manuscript. 81 most for this very thing, since he would have seen that He was just as he felt himself to be. In the Psalter Our Lord speaks about Cain’s betrayal of Abel, through the mouth of David, the good king who said a very cruel thing, though without knowing why, for he speaks as if he were saying to Cain, “You were plotting and saying perfidious things against your brother, and you were preparing a betrayal and ambush against your mother’s son. This you did, and I was silent. Because I did not speak, you thought I was like you, but I am not.?3 Rather, I will reprimand*‘ and chastise you thoroughly.” This threat had already been carried out [465] before David guessed it, when Our Lord came to Cain and said, “Where is your brother?” And he felt guilty for his treachery, having covered his brother with leaves from the tree so that he would not be found. So when Our Lord asked him where his brother was, he said, “Lord, I do not know. Am I my brother’s keeper?” And Our Lord said to him, “What have you done? The voice of your brother Abel’s blood complains to me that you have killed him there where you stretched him out on the ground. Because you have done this, you will be cursed on earth, and the earth will be cursed in all the works you do, because it has received the blood of your brother that your hands shed on it for no reason.”26 Thus Our Lord cursed the earth, but He did not curse the trees, neither the one under which Abel had been killed, nor the others that descended from it, nor those that were created after that on earth by His will. But a marvelous thing happened to this tree, for as soon as [466] Abel had met death under it, it lost the green color and became completely red. This was in memory of the holy blood that had been shed under it. And henceforth no tree could grow from the slips taken from it; rather, all the branches died, and the plants made from them did not thrive. But the tree grew and became so marvelously beautiful that it was the most beautiful tree and the most delightful to look at that any man has ever seen since then. For a long time the tree kept this color and its beauty, as you have heard the story tell, without getting old or dried out or suffering in any way except that it never flowered or bore fruit once Abel’s blood had been shed beneath it. But the others that were descended from it flowered and bore fruit just as the nature of a tree?’ requires. And it remained that way until men had increased and multiplied on earth. All those who descended from Adam and Eve held it in great reverence and honored it greatly, and from generation to generation they told one another how the first mother had planted it and in what way. And they said this was like a witness and proof that they would yet come into their original blessed inheritance, from which the first mother had removed them. Because they hoped to recover this [467] blessed place, from which the enemy had ousted them by his ruse, they returned to this tree whenever they 23-7 am not,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “I do not dare”). 24Reprimand,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “respond’”). 25See Psalms L, 9-21. 26See Genesis IV, 9-12. 274 tree” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 82 had troubles, and the wisest took comfort in their misery, and they called it the Tree of Help?® and Comfort. As this tree grew and became more beautiful, so did all those descended from it—the green ones and the white ones. And they became so much more beautiful than all others that the people considered it to be a great wonder. They remained just as beautiful until Our Lord sent His deluge down to earth, in which the base and evil people perished so utterly that on all the earth there remained no man or woman except Noah and his household, whom Our Lord had found to be more fitting than all the others, so that through [468] them He wanted to repair the loss?9 that had occurred. And when it happened that the waters, which had been high, contrary to their custom, returned to their original state through the will of the Sovereign Master, the earth was so ravaged that since then it has not produced such good, natural, or benefic fruit as it did before. Rather, after that everything produced turned bitter, and the trees themselves that had existed before felt it so much that they lost the savor of their first fruit and clearly knew the venom and bitterness of the deluge that had covered the world. But a marvel was seen in this tree called the Tree of Life, and those descended from it, for they changed neither in beauty nor in the flavor of their fruit. Rather, they remained in the same state as they had been. Because of this, those who saw them said this was truly the [469] Tree of Life and not of Death, for when other trees nearly perished, they did not fear death. These trees remained beautiful until Solomon reigned after King David, his father. And to Solomon God granted knowledge and discretion beyond what human?? nature aspires to. He possessed great wisdom in every domain of knowledge. He knew all the properties of precious stones, the power of herbs, and the course of the firmament and the stars, so that earthly man could not teach him anything. Yet he was tricked and deceived by woman’s beauty, and thus he did so many things against God that it could be considered shameful. His wife, who was with him, did her best to trick and deceive him, but he loved her more than he could love anyone else. He protected himself as much as he could against being deceived by her, but it was of no use; she shamed and debased him every time she could,?! no matter how well he protected himself. And this should not be considered surprising, for without fail when woman puts her heart and her mind to deceive, no mortal man’s wisdom can do anything against it, and this does not begin with us, but with our original family. When Solomon saw that he could not protect himself against his wife’s trickery, he wondered how [470] this could be. He was very angry, but he dared not do anything more. Thus he says in his book called Parables, “I have gone all around the world and searched as mortal 28Help,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “Life”). 29-7 oss,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “land”), 30“1uman,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “doune,” which would give “nature gives”). 3l«against being deceived . . . every time she could” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail intelligence can, but in all these travels I could not find one good woman.”°2 He said this because he could not guard against his wife’s trickery, and he wondered how it came to be that woman was so ingenious and devoted to malice, until he began to despise woman, saying that she was not a spiritual thing, but a true enemy. One night as he lay in bed very pensive, he said sorrowfully, “Wretched and woeful man, despicable and miserable person,*? do not marvel if woman has brought you sorrow and torment. For our first?4 mother would not rest until she was thrown out of the Garden of Delight, so that she cast herself out of the place where she was [471] in absolute bliss and entered into absolute misery, which all her descendants still feel so much that they eat their bread in sorrow and misery.” A voice responded,*° “Solomon, do not hold woman in such contempt, for if it is through woman that man first suffered, in the place of this woman there will come another one who will bring man joy greater than the misery has been. Thus woman will repair woman’s misdeed, and this woman will come from your lineage.” When he heard this, he considered himself foolish for having blamed his wife so much. Then he began to exercise his wits and to seek what he could learn from the Scripture and divine secrets. Through his learning he sought until he found out about the arrival of the blessed Virgin Mary, who conceived the Son of God in her blessed vessel. He sought the truth of this so diligently that he learned truly that from this Virgin, who would be called woman, as great a good would come on earth [472] as the misery that had come from the first woman. Thus he said that one should be called mother and the other stepmother. Then he began to think each day about this blessed woman to learn whether she would be a mother and the end of his line, for he would have liked, if possible, that the end of his line be marked by such a blessed thing. And he thought about this matter so often that the divine response came to him one night when he was resting alone in his room, saying, “Solomon, the blessed Virgin will not be the end of your lineage. Rather the end will be a knight who will surpass in goodness and chivalry all those who come before him, all those who bear arms in his lifetime, and all those who come after him, just as the sun surpasses the moon in brightness and as Joshua surpasses in prowess all those who exist now.” At that time Joshua was the best knight in the world. When he heard that such a man [473] would mark the end”° of his lineage, he was very happy and said, “Oh, God, anyone who might see this blessed person, adorned with so many good graces, would be so happy!?” I won’t see Him, 32berhaps a reference to Proverbs XXX, 10, and Ecclesiastes VII, 28. 33“Where does this come from?’ While he was in this state, he heard a voice say to him, ‘Wretched man, full of misery, despicable and miserable person’” omitted here, as in Ponceau. 34«wWoman, our” omitted, as in Ponceau. 35“4 voice responded,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “the voice spoke again”). 36End,” asin Ponceau (Hucher has “goodness”). 37“Anyone who might see . .. happy” supplied from Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail for it is is too far away in time from now until then. Certainly if there were some way to tell him how I knew the truth about Him long before His birth, I would do so. But I don’t see how, for the time is two thousand years and more away.” Solomon thought for a long time about this, so much so that his wife noticed that he was thinking about something he could not get out of his mind. She was very troubled, for she feared right away that he wanted to hurt her. One night it happened when they were together that he was a little more joyful and animated than usual. When she saw®® him in such a good humor, she adjured him by the faith between them to tell her what he had thought about for so long. And Solomon, who knew her to be more ingenious in evil and deception than any man could be, thought that if any mortal heart could help in what he was thinking about, she could do so. [474] Therefore, he thought he would tell her, for he could see no harm in simply telling it. And then he revealed to her what he had thought about for so long. After he had told her everything, she replied, “Certainly, my lord, I cannot advise you about this yet, but within a short time, I believe I will advise you well.” “We shall see,” said he. The third night after that, it happened that they were together, and she said to him, “My lord, I have thought how the knight who will end your®® line will learn how you knew the truth about His birth.” “Truly,” he said, “this pleases me greatly; tell me how.” “Willingly,” she said. “Send throughout your kingdom for all the carpenters you can find. When they have all gathered, order them to make you a ship of a wood that cannot rot from water or any other thing for four thousand years. While they are preparing the ship, I will prepare the other things, as you will see.” Solomon believed what she said to him. Things were left that way that night.” The next day, as soon as day broke, Solomon sent his messengers far and wide, to seek the carpenters. So many came in such a short time that it was a wonder. And when they were all assembled before him, he ordered them to make him a [475] wooden ship so good and so tightly sealed that it would not rot after being in the water for four thousand years. They said they would do their best. They toiled and worked so hard that the ship was ready within half a year. 4! When the ship was ready,*? his wife, who had ordered this to be done, said to Solomon, “My lord, since the one you told me about will surpass in goodness and chivalry all those who have gone before him and who will come after him, it seems to me that it would be right for him to have a precious weapon to carry in remembrance of you. You 38«saw,” as in Sommer and Ponceau (Hucher has “came”). 39«vour,” as in Ponceau (Hucher transcribes “notre, 40-Things were left that way that night” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 4lqialf a year,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “a short time”). 42-When the ship was ready” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. cary our’). 83 should thus prepare it for his coming, and it should be marvelous beyond all other weapons, just as he will be marvelous beyond all other knights.” “Tell me,” said he, “what this weapon could be, and if I see that it is fitting and I have it, I will prepare it.” “I will tell you,” said she, “what weapon would suffice for him. In the temple you have made in honor of Our*® Lord is the sword of King David, your father, the richest and most marvelous sword ever forged, and the sharpest ever found or wielded by a knight’s hand. Take it and [476] remove the pommel and*‘ the hilt. Once you have removed the blade and set it aside, you who know the properties of stones and the power of trees and herbs and the nature of all earthly things, make a handle of precious stones so subtly joined that no earthly gaze after yours might. separate one from the others, so that everyone who sees it will think it is made of a single stone. After that, make a hilt so marvelous that no one has ever seen one so lovely and rich. Then, make a scabbard as wondrous*® in its own way as the sword will be. When you have done all this, I will attach the sword-belt that pleases me.” He who knew more than anyone else about the properties of stones and the power of herbs took his father’s sword, which he treasured as much as he would a reliquary, from the temple. Then he did everything she had described, except that he puta single stone in the pommel, but it was of all the colors one could find or speak of. And then he put his thought and care into making the scabbard for the sword, but the story does not tell what he made it from here, for it is not really necessary now. Then he made the rich and beautiful pommel, as the story has already told, putting great thought into it. [477] After he had fitted the sword with the handle and the scabbard, as you hear, he put the sword inside the scabbard and began to look at them and clap his hands. He saw that this equipment was so splendid that it did not seem to him that any as splendid or worthy as this had ever been prepared for a knight. Thus he said that if it was possible, he would like anyone who ever pulled the sword out of the scabbard to repent of it until the good knight for whom it was prepared put his hand on it. Then the voice that had spoken to him before came and said, “Solomon, no one will ever draw this sword without repenting of it until the one for whom you have prepared it draws it.” When Solomon heard this, he was very happy. Right away he inscribed with his own hand the letters the story has already told of. After he had done this, he wanted to attach a swordbelt that was in his opinion worthy of it. But his wife did not wish this; rather she brought one that was ugly and poor, made of hemp, and that looked so weak that it could not hold the sword up. “What's this?” said Solomon. “Do you want to put this on?” “Yes,” she said, “there will be none other in our time, but if it pleases God, there will come a time when a young woman will change it and put in place of it another so 43“Our,” asin Ponceau (Hucher has “your”). 44“And” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 45«That no one has ever seen one... . scabbard as marvelous” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 84 beautiful and so splendid that [478] it will be marvelous to see. Thus you can see in this sword the image of the two women I heard you speak about, for just like the Virgin who is to come, as you said, and repair what our first mother did wrong, likewise this maiden will repair what I have done wrong with this sword, for she will fit it with a beautiful and rich sword-belt made from the thing that she likes best on herself.” Solomon considered these words to be ingenious and wondered about where they came from. When the ship was finished and rigged out as richly as the story has told, he had a wooden bed, as beautiful and marvelous as the story has told, made in the ship.*6 He put the sword at the foot of the bed, and at the head, his crown, the one that King David had worn many a day, saying that he was leaving it to the knight because he did not see that it could be so well employed in any other place. When all this was done, the woman said that the ship was missing something. Then she took the carpenters and led them to the Tree of Life, under which Abel had been killed, and said to them, “My lords, from this red tree and these others, some of which are white and others green, you must take three spindles, one red, one white, and one green, with which the bed will be framed, as I will tell you.” They said they were very frightened about cutting into the Tree of Life, because no one had been so bold as [479] to harm it in any way. And she replied that she would have them all dishonored if they did not do everything she ordered. At once they struck it with their axes, but at first they were very frightened, for they saw!? clearly that drops of blood came out of the tree as thickly*® as from a man whose arms had been cut off. Seeing this frightened them very much, and so they wanted to leave off what they had undertaken, and they repented deeply for what they had done. But she would not allow this, rather, she pressed them so hard that they did everything she ordered. After they had brought the three spindles to the ship, planed them, and prepared them the way she had described, they put them on the sides of the bed, one on the near side, another on the far side, and the third one on top, bolted into both of the others. This had a symbolic meaning, just as the story itself will tell later on. : When they were placed thus, she said to Solomon, “Do you see these three spindles?” “Yes,” said he. “Now you may be sure, truly,” said she, “that no one will ever see them without remembering Abel’s death.” While they were speaking thus about the three [480] spindles, news came to them that those who had cut into the Tree of Life had gone blind, which grieved Solomon more than his wife. Then Solomon prepared a letter to put in the ship. At the beginning of the letter, he wrote, as the thought uppermost in his mind, “Oh, blessed knight who will be the 46“He had a wooden bed... in the ship” supplied from Ponceau. Alga,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “came”). 48Thickly,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “espressement,” “expressly”). The History of the Holy Grail end of my line, if you wish to be in peace and a wise man in all things, protect yourself from woman’s ruse, for there is nothing that can do harm like a woman.*? And if you do not believe it, neither wisdom nor prowess nor chivalric actions will protect you from being dishonored in the end. This message is sent to you by Solomon so that you may protect yourself in remembrance of him.” This was the beginning of the letter that Solomon composed for the knight who later performed such fine chivalric feats in the kingdom of Logres and brought to an end the adventures that occurred in the country called the Land Beyond and in many other countries through the power and force of the Holy Grail, just as the story will tell farther on. After that he wrote the truth about the ship, how the woman had it made, and the splendor of the sword”? [481] and the bed, and about the spindles, how the first one was white, the second one red, and the third green, without being painted. Rather, these were their natural colors, just as they had been taken from the trees. Once he had written the letter, he put it at the head of the bed underneath the crown. When he had prepared the ship in this way, he had it put into the sea®! close to shore. After that he said to his wife, “My lady, the ship is finished and completely prepared, but I do not see yet how the knight will know how I learned the truth about his coming.” And she replied, “You will be reassured about this in time. But now have two pavilions pitched on the shore in which you and I and part of our retinue may stay until we have seen what happens to this ship.” Right away he ordered tents and pavilions pitched on the shore, for he wanted to stay there until fortune had taken the ship away. And those to whom he had issued orders immediately did what was asked. That day they ate on the shore [482] joyously, and that night they slept in the pavilions. Around midnight, while they slept, it happened that Solomon saw in his sleep a man come from the heavens with a great retinue of angels carrying different instruments in their hands. He did not know how to describe what they were, and yet he saw that the one whom the angels accompanied descended into the ship and took water and went around the ship sprinkling everywhere, saying, “This ship is the symbol®> of my new house.” After that he came to the side of the ship, where he had one of the angels inscribe letters. Once written, they said this: ONLYA MADMAN WILL PASS BEYOND THIS INSCRIPTION. In his sleep Solomon saw the one who commanded this, and he was so beautiful that neither mortal heart nor mouth could describe it. He was in such wonderment from it in his sleep that he awoke. He opened his [483] eyes and looked toward the ship, where he saw the group clearly, as he had in his sleep. But when he tried to speak and call out to those before him, he was powerless to speak or move. 49«For there is nothing . .. woman” supplied from Ponceau. 50«sword,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “ship”). 5lsea,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “ship”). 52eThat night,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “until the next day”). 53«symbol,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “faith”). The History of the Holy Grail Then he heard a voice say, “Solomon, your desire is fulfilled, for the knight who will be the end of your line will enter this ship and have this sword you have prepared for him and know the truth about you. Nor will anyone ever enter if he is not such as he should be.” After these words, the group left the ship in such a way that Solomon did not know what became of them. When he was able to get up, he arose, called his followers, and went to the ship. But when he started to board it, the voice said to him, “Step back! If you enter the ship, you will perish. Let the ship go where chance will take it, and be assured truly that it will yet be seen in many strange countries, far and wide.” He stepped back and looked at the letters on the side, which said, OH MAN WHO WOULD ENTER ME, WHOEVER YOU MAY BE, TAKE CARE NOT TO ENTER UNLESS YOU ARE FULL OF FAITH, FOR THERE IS NOTHING BUT FAITH AND BELIEF IN ME. FOR THIS REASON, YOU MAY BE SURE THAT IF YOU TURN AWAY FROM YOUR BELIEF IN ANY WAY, I WILL TURN AWAY FROM YOU IN SUCH A WAY THAT YOU WILL HAVE NEITHER SUSTENANCE NOR HELP FROM ME, WHEREVER YOU MAY BE WHEN YOU ARE GUILTY OF LACK OF FAITH. When he saw this, he stepped back far from the ship, for he knew very well that he was not worthy of entering it. While he was with his household, awestruck, the wind struck the ship and quickly pushed it away from the bank, carrying it out to sea so that neither Solomon nor his wife, [484] who had built it, ever saw it again. Now the story stops speaking about this, for it has clearly told how the ship was constructed and in what way and how the spindles were of a natural color without any paint. Thus it returns to tell about Nascien, about whom it has been silent for a long time. 22, Nascien’s Lack of Faith.! Now the story says that Nascien looked for a long time at the three spindles framing? the bed to see whether he could discover what made them colored, for he found it hard to believe the colors were natural. This caused him to say something to himself that he deeply regretted afterwards. “By my faith,” he said, “I cannot express how much the marvels of this bed deceive me, for I would not have thought there would be a grain of falseness in such a great thing as this.” The moment he said this, he saw the ship open up right where it was, [485] and he found himself in the sea, where he could easily have drowned, if Our Lord had not helped him. When he realized he was in the water, in danger of dying, unless he were rescued, he was very frightened and did not know whether he was sleeping or awake. Nevertheless, he was not slow to help himself, but began at once to swim. As soon as he reached shore, he jumped up on land and looked at the ship and the words written on the side® saying that in this ship there was 1 Corresponds to Hucher II: 484-496; Sommer I: 136-141; Ponceau §224—230. 2“Framing” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. S«written on the side” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 85 nothing but faith. He realized at once that he had fallen into sin through lack of faith. Then he began to blame and condemn himself, saying, “Oh, man of little faith, lacking any sense, why were you more easily convinced to believe lies about this ship rather than the truth? Do you lose faith so easily when Our Lord has shown you part of His marvels?™ He started lamenting and grieving bitterly. He cried out to Our Lord for mercy, asking pardon for his sin of lack of belief, in a state of fearful anxiety lest Our Lord be angry with him. Nascien remained thus on the seashore, as long as the day lasted. And at night, when evening spread throughout the world and day turned dark and black, he said the prayers and orisons he knew. After praying for a good part of the night, [486] with great devotion and sincerity, for he was terrified, he lay down on the bare ground and fell asleep, not awakening until the next day. In the morning, when day brightened and? the rays of the sun began to spread across the highest mountains, Nascien awoke. He opened his eyes and looked out to sea, where he thought he would see the ship he had seen the day before, but it was nowhere in sight. This saddened him,® for looking at it would have brought him great comfort. But because there was nothing he could do about it, he bore it the best he could. He raised his hand and crossed himself and said, “True Father of Jesus Christ, who in Your pity and mercy have delivered me from the hands of Galafre, my earthly enemy; Lord, since I have escaped the hands of this enemy, do not let me fall into the power of the other enemy. But if he is such that he comes to attack me and wishes to deceive me through his evil snares, Lord, be my champion and protect me against him, so that I may keep this treasure [487] safe that You gave me to watch over, that is, my soul. And if I am so weak a shepherd, with such little foresight that I cannot keep watch completely alone, dear Lord, be my own Shepherd, and come to watch over my soul as Your sheep, so that the eternal treacherous adversary might not find me out of Your keeping. For I know very well that if he finds me alone, far from Your mother, who is called Holy Church, this enemy, who is so powerful, will be able to strangle such a poor weak sheep as I am.” While Nascien was praying the way you have heard, he looked out to sea toward the East and saw a small boat coming. In it was a very old man, who headed straight toward Nascien, approaching to within two lance-lengths of the shore, but no closer. The boat was so splendid that Nascien did not believe that in all [488] the world, on land or sea, such a splendid one could be found. On the outside it was covered with so many precious stones that Nascien did not think the richest man or prince in the world could pay for half of them. And the boat had another adornment that made Nascien marvel no less: on the edge on both sides there were some twelve arrows made completely of silver, except for the points, which were of the finest gold 4«*You should be so much the firmer in His faith!’ When he heard this, he became afraid” omitted, as in Ponceau. 5“Day brightened and” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 6«This saddened him” supplied from Ponceau. 86 that could be found and which were so sharp that it would be difficult to find any sharper ones. Nascien was in awe of all this. When Nascien saw the worthy man nearby, he noticed that the boat had stopped. Thinking it would not come any closer, he stood up, greeted the worthy man, and told him he was welcome. The worthy man returned his greeting and asked him about himself and how he had come to this foreign place, so far away from any people. “Certainly, dear sir,” said Nascien, “I’m not sure who brought me here, for it was through Our Lord’s will, and I am much better off here than in the prison of Galafre, who did me a great deal of harm all the while he held me.” “You need no longer fear Galafre,” said the worthy man, “for he has left the world as terribly as a Christian [489] who has denied his faith should.” “Oh, my lord! How do you know this?” asked Nascien. “I saw him dead today,” said the worthy man. “Dear sir,” said Nascien, “if what you say is true, and if you are a mortal man, I can’t be as far away from people as you led me to believe. Since it’s still morning, I can see clearly that you have not come from afar today, unless you travel faster than any earthly man.” “T tell you,” said the worthy man, “that I saw him dead today, and that you are far away from your country, farther than you think, and if you do not believe me about any of this, you will repent of it as much as or more’ than you did yesterday, when you spoke the words about the ship for which you found yourself immediately in the water.” When Nascien heard him remind him of the words he had spoken about the ship, which no one could have heard except God alone, he thought that Our Lord had revealed them to this man, and that He had sent him to comfort him and keep him company. Then he replied, “My lord, I believe everything you say, but tell me news about this ship you have reminded me of, if you know what became of it, or if fortune will ever bring it to a place where I might be, so that I might see it as easily as I did only recently.” “You [490] will see it even better equipped than when you saw it before,” said the worthy man, “for it grows and improves every day, and will do so as long as the world lasts.” “My lord,” said Nascien, “since you tell me it:grows every day, therefore it’s not like any other ship.” “You speak the truth,” said the worthy man. “It is not like other ships but is a sign from the High Master, who brought you here, and it should be called a symbol rather than a ship.” “Certainly, my lord,” said Nascien, “I believe you are telling the truth; that is why I beseech you, for God’s sake, to comfort me, by telling me what it means. I ask this of you in the name of charity.” “And I will tell you,” said the worthy man. “The ship you saw that was so beautiful and splendid that you had never seen anything like it, symbolizes Holy Church, which is the most beautiful and delightful house® in the world. Just as the ship had nothing but faith, as the writing on the T¢Than you think, and as much as or more than” omitted, following Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 8 “House” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail side attested, there is nothing but faith and truth in Holy Church, for she was first born from and founded on these two things. “The words prohibiting anyone from entering who is not full of faith in every way stand for Holy Scripture, which prohibits anyone from entering Holy Church unless he is first cleansed of his sins by confession and heartfelt repentance. And no matter how full of faith and belief he may be, let him not be changeable, like the [491) pennant that turns where the wind blows it. The Christian should be just like the strong tower, built sturdily on a good foundation, fearing no siege or assault by its neighbor. The Christian should hold just as firmly to the virtues of Holy Church, so that the devil, who watches day and night to snatch man away from good thoughts and works, happens by chance to approach him, he may find him strong, holding firm, and well established on the good rock called Jesus Christ. “Just as ships were first built so that one might cross the water without danger and come ashore safely, in the same way Holy Church was built to sustain the Christian in this world, which is symbolized by water, so that he may not perish while he wanders in this earthly life, which is poor, sorrowful, and full of suffering. By the ship you should understand Holy Church, and by the sea, the world. And just as the ship carries man on the sea without danger and bears him on the water, thus Holy Church bears her servant among the filth and sins of the world, [492] so that he may not be sullied, debased, or stained with mortal sin. Holy Church makes her good servant, her good minister, rise above all sins, clean and purged of all baseness, just as gold that is refined seven times emerges pure above all other metals, and just as the sun appears in splendor above all the stars. “Now that I have told you what the ship symbolizes and what you should understand by it, I will tell you what the bed inside the ship symbolizes. The bed, which was so splendid and well adorned with marvelous and excellent things, symbolizes the holy table where the Son of God is consecrated every day, when the wine changes into blood and the bread into true flesh through the high and holy words commemorated there by the mouth of the blessed person who undertakes this office. By the bed you should understand the Holy Cross, where the Son of God, in [493] His graciousness, allowed Himself to suffer, in order to redeem the human race from eternal sorrow, for by sinning mortally, day after day, more and more, humanity had fallen into the darkness of hell. You should understand the bed as the sign of solace and rest; in this way the bed should be compared, though unequally, to the cross, as a similar thing. In the same way that, after the fatigue of work, every earthly man seeks rest in a bed, likewise you should understand that after the fatigue and travail of the great anguish of hell, the human race took rest and solace in the generous gift the Son of God made of Himself, on the True Cross, on the very day He suffered death in order to remove sinners from the sorrowful prison. “I have explained the symbolism of the ship and the bed you saw inside. Now I will tell you what the three spindles symbolize, for it is not without deep meaning that the bed was enclosed by the three spindles I speak of, just as The History of the Holy Grail you yourself saw them, one as white as snow, the second as red as a drop of blood, and the last as green as an emerald. So I will tell you what this means. “By the white spindle enclosing the bed, you should understand that both before and afterwards virginity was truly and perfectly kept in the flesh covering the Son of God. As long as He dwelled among us as a mortal man, virginity was kept in Him® so perfectly that when He appeared in the blessed Virgin, neither as He left nor entered was virginity ever corrupted [494] or harmed. Rather, He entered and left so perfectly, as if through a closed door, that it was never harmed or damaged. “By the spindle whose natural color was red, you should understand charity, which was so great and marvelous in the Son of God that He delivered His body over to death and suffering in order to redeem man from mortal bondage. By the high gift He made of Himself when He, who was life without root or death’s stain, delivered the mortal flesh covering Him over to death, you may understand that the source of charity and pity was housed in Him. “By the spindle that was green like an emerald, you should understand patience. Patience is symbolized by the emerald, which is green in all seasons. And this stone rightly symbolizes this quality, for just as it is always green,!° likewise you can see that patience is always verdant and forceful so that it cannot be moved either by adversity or misfortune once it is well rooted in the Christian’s heart. Similarly, he in whom it is housed achieves victory, for you know very well that one cannot vanquish one’s enemy so well as by forbearance. “The bed was encompassed and enclosed by these three things, the first of which is called virginity, the second charity, and the third patience. And well it should be, since it is the symbol of the True Cross, where the Son of God was struck with the anguish of death. It is clear that He did not lack these three things, for it is well known and truth attests that the three virtues—virginity, charity, and patience—kept Him [495] company during the anguish He suffered. Thus endowed with these three qualities, He vanquished our death and brought life back to the world.” While the worthy man related in this way the meaning of the ship and the objects within it, Nascien was so comforted by listening to him, and he found the words so sweet, that he fell asleep on the shore, content in his heart with their sweetness. As he thus fell asleep, it seemed to him that the worthy man was still telling him what he had begun to say. And when the man from the boat saw that Nascien had fallen asleep, he departed and went away; in a short time he was so far away from shore that he could not be seen near or far. After the worthy man had left the rock, Nascien, who had fallen asleep on shore, continued to sleep. As he slept, it seemed to him that a large and marvelous serpent approached; menacingly, it attacked, nearly wounding him in the left side. He defended himself vigorously, but in the end it was of no avail until a little worm of seemingly small 9“In the flesh covering the Son of God... . was kept in Him” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 10“and this stone . . . is always green” supplied from Ponceau. 87 power came to help him. As soon as the serpent saw the little worm come to Nascien’s aid, it dared not stay, but fled far away. This vision came to Nascien in his sleep, troubling him so much that he awoke and opened his eyes, [496] thinking he was still fighting the serpent. Once awake, remembering that he had fallen asleep while the worthy man from the boat was telling him the good words,!! he was so grief-stricken that he said to himself that he was truly a wretched man, lacking in sense; if he had any good in him, sleep would never have taken away what the worthy man had begun with him. Now the story stops speaking about him and returns to Celidoine, his son, to tell this next part of the story, which belongs here. 23. Celidoine Converts King Label.} In this part the story says that after the nine hands had carried Celidoine out of Galafre’s domain, in a short time, as it was learned, he was as far away from that country as one can go in two days travel. And he was left, as it pleased the High Master, on the seashore six days travel from the island where his father was—not exactly in the same area, but in another.” At that time he was a young child, only ten years old.? Finding himself in such a foreign place, surrounded by a wild forest on one side and high and marvelous rocks on the other—something he was not used to seeing unless he was [497] with many other people—he was very frightened. Then he began to lament deeply. Meanwhile, the weather began to change. It got dark, and the weather became so terrible that it was marvelous to behold. The wind began to blow, and it began to rain and thunder so loudly that it seemed as if the entire world were about to end. The child, who saw such a marvelous storm and such big, frightening waves at sea that anyone there would fear death, was scared that the big waves would reach him. So he left the shore, heading toward an opening in the rocks. He went inside, so frightened that he did not know what to do. All the while he looked out to sea, as far as he could see. He was intent on this because not far away he saw two ships being driven down the sea by the storm. The men inside were crying out to the captains, “We must put to shore, or we will all die; no one will escape!” While they were crying out in this way, the two ships managed to arrive safely at the rock where Celidoine was. Once they had landed, [498] an old sailor, who knew the different countries and foreign lands better than all the others, told them, weeping, “My lords, how unlucky we are! Though we have escaped the danger of the sea, where we feared* death, it has been our misfortune to come to a place where there is nothing except lions and serpents and corrected to plural following Ponceau and Sommer; “good” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 1Corresponds to Hucher II: 496-533, Sommer I: 141-158; Ponceau §231-249. 2“But in another” supplied from Sommer and Ponceau. 5This contradicts the age given in Chapter 18, where Celidoine is described as being seven years old. 4“Of the sea, where we feared” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 88 wild beasts, which will quickly devour us as soon as they see us. “Dear sir,” said one of those to whom he had spoken, “there is no need to be afraid, for you can see very well that there are five hundred knights here who can take a stand against a great horde of all the wild beasts from this land. So we needn’t fear, for it seems to me that if we are attacked by strange wild beasts, we will defend ourselves well.” While the sailor was speaking, Celidoine came out of the rock and headed toward the men on the shore, thinking they were Christians just as he was. However, they were not, they were pagans, born in the kingdom of Persia, and they were going to war in Syria, against King Fanoyel, who had killed the king of [499] Persia’s brother after finding him lying dishonorably with his wife. Among them was the king of Persia, who was called Label, and he was a young man and a good knight, but extremely cruel. No man hated Christians as mortally as he did. After their arrival, having seen that the weather had cleared up toward evening, King Label ordered his pavilion pitched amidst the rocks, for he wished to lie down in it. And the man to whom he had given this order said he would do so shortly. Once the men had left® the ship and its provisions, Celidoine, who had descended from the rock, came and greeted them and asked who they were. The latter, wondering about him and where he had come from, replied that they were’ from Persia. They seized him at once and brought him before King Label. Seeing such a beautiful, richly clothed child, he assumed he was nobly born. He welcomed him graciously and had him sit down next to him so he could inquire about his situation, for he was eager to know him. He began to ask him where he was from, and the child, who knew more for his age than any other child, told him immediately the truth about his lineage and family, and what land he had to govern. And he recounted how [500] his family had recently converted to the New Law—Christianity—and that all their land had become Christian. “Thus I myself am a Christian, my lord,” said he, “and I received baptism from the hand of Josephus himself, the sovereign bishop of the Christians, whom Our Lord Jesus Christ consecrated with His blessed hand.” When Label heard this, he was more sorrowful than anyone ever was, for he knew King Evalach well, and he should indeed, for Evalach himself had made him a knight.® Thus he said to Celidoine, “Child, I have known your family? for a long time. That is why the news that they have turned to the evil law and faith and that they want to undergo sorrow and unhappiness in this world distresses me deeply. Since you are such a handsome child and can yet come to great honor, if wickedness does not lead you 5«Five,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher transcribes “where”). Corrected to plural, as in Ponceau. The latter... they were” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 8The referents in this sentence are unclear; it could also be interpreted to mean that Label knighted Evalach. 9“Family,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “father”). The History of the Holy Grail astray, and since you belong to me somewhat, I will keep you with me and instruct you in order to reconvert you from this folly!® that you have entered upon. Now tell me what adventure brought you to this rock, in such a wild place, so far away from any people that no one comes here except wretches who by chance escape the perils of the ” Ss€a. Celidoine recounted how he and his father had been prisoners in Galafre’s house; how his father had escaped with the help of Our Lord; and how, after his father’s escape, Galafre had had him carried up to the battlements of the tower in order to throw him down. [501] “He did such a cruel thing that I, who was an innocent and guileless child, would have died from the fall from the tower; however, Jesus Christ, who does not abandon His ministers, but comes to help them when they need it, came to help me and carried me to this rock. I don’t know if Iam near or far from my country, but thanks be to Him, who helped me thus.” When King Label heard this, he smiled maliciously and said to the men with him, “My word, what a marvel! This child already knows how to lie!” “My lord,” said a knight before him, “such is the custom of the Christians. You will never find such great liars as they are, and they always want to establish and affirm their lie just as if it were the ultimate truth.” “Don’t worry,” said the king. “We will easily get this one to return from the folly he has entered upon.” That night King Label and some of his knights slept in the pavilion he had had pitched on the seashore. Others slept in the ships, while the rest were armed with lances and swords and hauberks to keep watch over the king all night, so that if wild beasts happened to come out of the forest, they would not be able to harm the king or those sleeping in the tents. The king had Celidoine honored and served in every possible way, and at night he had him lie near him as splendidly as if he had fathered him. Once the child was asleep, the king did not go to bed right away but asked his men what he could do with this child. “For I want him to abjure Christianity and return to our faith,” he said, “and I want to give him my daughter as his wife. Do you know [502] why I want this so much? I know very well that he is descended on both sides from such good knights that he cannot help but be a good knight, if nature does not fail him.!! Because of this hope, if it happened that he lived longer than I and if my daughter were his wife, I would leave him all my land and all my kingdom after my death.” “My lord,” said his men, “it shall be as you wish.”!2 After the king had gone to bed and the watch was! turned over to those with this duty, the king fell asleep. At once it seemed to him that he was in a large, wide, beautiful green field. In this field there was a new earthen pot full of clods of earth. On the outside, the pot was surrounded by 10Folly,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “faith”). NThat he cannot help... fail him” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. amy lord. ..wish’” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 13\founted and” omitted, as in Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail flowers that grew out of it just as branches and leaves grow naturally from a tree. The king looked at the pot, amazed at the flowers he saw growing out of it. And then he saw a large serpent come alongside the pot, spitting fire and flames. It immediately destroyed the pot and the flowers and whatever was inside, so that in a short time everything the king had seen returned to nothing. In the morning, when the king awoke, [503] the men who had kept watch during the night came to him and said that at daybreak they had captured, by means of various snares, the largest and most marvelous lion they had ever seen anywhere. Upon hearing this news, the king ordered them to put the lion in a cage; !4 he thought he might take it with him to the land where he was headed. Then the king had Celidoine awakened, for he was still sleeping, having stayed awake that night thinking about his father. Once the child was dressed and ready, the king had him come before him and sit at his feet. Then the king called for all the wisest men in his retinue. And when they were assembled in his presence, he said to them, “My lords, last night there came to me in my sleep a marvelous vision. I will never be happy until I know the truth of it and what it means. Therefore, I have sent for you, for I want you to tell me what you think may happen to me.” Then he told them his dream just as it had come to him while he slept, and he beseeched them to tell him what it meant. The latter began to think; after a long time they replied that they did not understand anything about it for certain. “I swear,” said the king, “this distresses me, for J know that such a vision always has great significance.” “Indeed,” they said, “we won’t say any more, for we don’t want to make you believe something we don’t really know.” And he said that he would be ask no more, since nothing more was to be known. When the child, who was sitting !> at the king’s feet, heard the dream [504] the king had related to his advisors and saw that no one could say anything certain about it, he stood up right away and spoke to the king loudly enough that everyone heard him well. “King Label, since the men you have asked to advise you cannot do so, I will advise you, just as the Great Master, to whom I am subject, has taught me. In your dream you saw a beautiful, verdant field, and in this field there was a pot surrounded with flowers and filled with clumps of earth. Next, you saw a serpent burn the pot and the flowers and everything inside. I will tell you what this means. I have not learned it by using my knowledge, for I am still too small a child and too young to know such great things, but you may be sure that the Holy Spirit, which shows its great secrets to its ministers and servants, has revealed it to me in its sweet pity. Thus I will show it to you clearly, if you wish to listen. “The verdant field you saw symbolizes the world in which we live. That is, it pleases all who are in it, and they take delight and are happy here, for they are sinners who lie in great mortal sin and who do wicked and filthy things. l4epy means of various snares... .cage” supplied from Ponceau. 15“was sitting” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 89 To them the world is so pleasing that they think they'll never die but will always live and be at full strength and that their unhappy belly will always have whatever it desires. [505] But he who looks according to the truth can see clearly that the world is, rather, like the field, which in the morning is verdant and full of flowers, but in the evening when the sun’s heat has stayed a bit, is wilted and dead and dry. Man's body is just like this when his soul has left. By this interpretation that I have given you, you can understand what the field symbolizes. “Next you should understand!® the meaning of the pot, which is a weak, evil thing, made of such poor material that it can immediately be broken. What the potter made out of the alluvium of bad earth symbolizes man, who is a poor thing, born from such poor seed, as fragile and weak as the pot that is easily broken. Man is as fragile, for he exists awhile, and then he is gone. The pot you saw in your dream symbolizes you, King Label. “But you will hear marvels about the flowers that surrounded it. Now consider the truth about flowers. Neither you nor I ever saw a flower!” that does not fade and whose beauty does not disappear in a short time, with the sole exception of the flower called the Virgin Mary. But the beauty of this flower was never marred or impaired, for when all women are by nature deflowered and violated, that is, in conceiving and giving birth, this blessed lady preserved the flower so nobly that the whiteness of virginity was never impaired or marred. This flower, whose verdant beauty lasts forever, you did not see in your dream, for you saw flowers that faded in a little heat. [506] “All around you are the flowers that fade in a little heat, and you know what they are called. One is called beauty, the second prowess, and the third courtesy and other virtues you have heard about many times, which make some men appear more gracious and worthy than others. You are certainly as endowed with them as an unbeliever can be, for you are handsome to the enemy, whom you have served all the days of your life, and not to God. You are a most valorous, courteous, and good knight; along with that you have so many qualities that you are the most gracious unbeliever I know. “Now that I have showed you,” said the child, “what the pot and the flowers around it symbolize, I will tell you what the clumps of earth mean.!8 The earth piled up inside the pot symbolizes the great sorrow of mortal sins that unhappy man piles up each day inside himself, more and more, by erring against his Creator, when he does not want to make himself better despite any advice or words that might be said to him. As soon as you left your mother’s womb, you won this treasure and this pile, for ever since you were born you have done nothing in word or deed that was not against your Creator’s will. Because you have constantly sinned and piled up inside yourself evil upon evil, and sin upon sin, in 16*You should understand” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. MNeither you nor I ever saw a flower” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 18«And the flowers. .. . mean” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 90 your dream the pot must appear full of earth, for [507] you are truly filled with that. “Now that I have described what the piled-up earth symbolizes, I will tell you what you should understand by the serpent. The serpent symbolizes death, which is such cruel and terrible company to the soul that as soon as it comes to see the soul, it takes away everything it has—the delight, solace, and joy! of the world. And if it does not find the soul endowed with good qualities, which lead man to the joy of the heavens—that joy that never ends—he is thrown down into the dark house called hell. “Now you can see, through the interpretation of your dream that I have given you, just as the High Master taught me, that you are not to be esteemed in all your baseness, any more than the pot full of earth. And in order that you may believe me better, tonight I will tell you something you did, not long ago, for you think that no one knows about it except yourself. But this is not true, for the One from whom nothing can be concealed knows it. And He has told me, you may be truly sure of this.” When the king heard this, he was astounded and turned red with shame. “Well,” he said, “what did I do that I think no one knows but myself?” Then Celidoine said to him, “I will tell you, but only you and I must be there. However, first I want to tell you something in the presence of your nobles. It is a message to you from the High Master, the One who knows everything that is to come. The serpent you saw in your dream symbolizes the moment of death, which has come for you.” “Death!” said the king. “Will I die then?” [508] “Yes, truly,” replied Celidoine, “in only four days from today you will have left this world. Now think carefully about the decision you must make regarding yourself, and I will offer you good signs, which will make you believe me more.” Then he drew him aside, away from his nobles, and said to him, “King, the High Master says you should become a Christian and convert to the New Law, by these signs: on the first day of May you killed your sister because she did not wish to let you lie with her. And when you saw that she would not do your will, you cut off her head and threw her body and then her head into the sea. You committed this murder without question, so secretly that no one knows about it except Him who sees all and from whom no secret can be kept. And He made it known and revealed it to me, may He be thanked.” When the king heard this news, he replied, “Child, you have told me wondrous things. Either you are not an earthly man, or you are wiser than any mortal man could be, for I know of no one who could explain my dream as clearly as you have, nor did I think any man knew about what I did with my sister.” Then he ordered his household to make up his bed, so he could lie down, as he was feeling a little unwell. They did {509] what he ordered. And he commanded his nobles to take care of the child and to seek anything he requested. They said they would do so. And the king, who was very disturbed and overwhelmed by the news the child had brought him, lay down in his bed. He ordered his chamberlains not to let anyone approach him anymore, no 19«Solace, and joy” supplied from Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail matter how close a family member or acquaintance. And they said no one would; they had everyone leave the pavilion and hurried to close it up completely so that the light would not hurt the king. The king went to bed all alone. When he was about to go to sleep, he began to think very intently about what the child had told him. As he thought, he began to weep bitterly,2° lamenting more than you will ever see and calling himself unhappy, lost, and alone. He said to himself, “Poor, unhappy wretch, with very little sense and deprived of anything good, now you will die just like the poorest man on earth! What will become of you when your soul has left the body? Where will you go? Will you take your crown and scepter with you? Will you have such a domain where you will go as you have on this earth? [510] “Oh, poor, unhappy, lost king, now for the first ime you really know that you are poor and miserable. Oh, wretched king, poor in every way at this moment called death, neither friends nor relatives, nor anyone you know can help you, for you won’t find anyone who can tell you where you will go when you leave this earth, nor whether you will be poor or rich, comfortable or miserable. Oh, king, deprived of any help, you who will now leave the great games and festivities you have had on this earth to go somewhere, not knowing whether it will be in joy or in sorrow; now consider on your own and according to reason if you can, which one you are more likely to find on your road when you leave this earth: joy or sorrow. You have enjoyed more joy in this world?! than any man of your age. But they say, and wise men testify to it, that the joy of this world turns to sorrow, and that all this joy must inevitably come to an end, and that end is called sorrow and chagrin. Therefore, I can see by myself that my joy turns to sorrow. “Oh, wretched king, now*2 you are poor within yourself, for you will find sorrow when you leave this world. Yet, unless someone wiser than you tells you, you do not know, nor can you see, whether this sorrow will have an end or be eternal. Oh, king, you who have come to the end of your life and found the beginning of your sorrow, if only you could?> somehow find again the One who created everything and to whom even the most hidden things are revealed and who knows everything that is to come, He would tell you the truth about the sorrow [511] you will find, whether it will end or last forever.” Amidst these thoughts and words, grieving more deeply than anyone in the world, the king fell asleep, crying so much that his whole face was wet with tears. Once he had fallen asleep, it seemed to him that he entered a highway. This road was large and wide and trodden by so many people that it was a wonder. But it was so dolorous and terrible that everyone who stepped onto it was captured, carried off, and imprisoned, thus losing both their lives and their wealth. After setting out on the road, he saw next to him a man of very great beauty who told him 20About what the child. . .. weep bitterly” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 21Tn this world” supplied from Ponceau. 22Now,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “and”). aah only you could,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “think [how to]”). The History of the Holy Grail he would keep him company until he had traversed the road. Thus they went along together, the king following the man. The king was very much afraid as he traveled, for he saw that the road was surrounded on all sides by robbers and thieves who did nothing but watch to see if they could get their hands on him. After he had gone along this way for a good piece, he noticed that the person who had protected him from the thieves had disappeared. Then he found a narrow path, the most beautiful and delightful in the world, full of bushes bearing fruit and verdant on all sides. After entering it, he heard a voice say to him, “Come [512] and wash,?4 people of all faiths, and go eat in the High City, for the tables are set and the sweet foods prepared. This message comes from the One who knows everything, who holds this court.” When the king, who desired so much to meet the One who knew everything, in order to ask him if his sorrow would ever end, heard that He was to hold court, he thought he would go. He set out on the road, wandering until he came to the highest mountain he had ever seen. On this mountain was the most beautiful spring he had ever seen, where everyone who was to eat in the High City was washing. The king did not go to the spring or cleanse himself, but set out to follow the others. When he reached the gates of the High City, everyone who had washed went in and came to the great joy and the great wedding feast those inside were celebrating. The king wanted to go inside with all the others, but it was not permitted, and he could not. Indeed, the man guarding the gate said to him, “Because you did not care to wash at the spring, you will not enter here, for no one enters unless he has cleansed himself first.” The king, who was terribly saddened by these words, looked inside through the opening in the gate and saw his sister, whom he had killed. She was at the large [513] table where the other people were seated, and she had a wreath of flowers on her head. She was so beautiful that it seemed to the king, as he looked at her, that she was now a hundred times more beautiful than ever before. And when she saw him looking at her, she said to him, “Earthen vessel, full of dirt clods, go cleanse yourself and wash. Then you will eat with us amidst this great joy where you see us.” Realizing there was nothing else he could do, the king left and turned back to the road. He had not gone far when people seized him so violently that he was afraid he was going to die. He asked them why they were laying their hands on him. “Because,” said they, “you are ours, and we will put you where we wish.” Then they led him quickly away, dragging him by the feet and hair, to a house in a wild and ugly valley. This house was so hideous and frightful to look at that even the boldest man in the world would be frightened if he saw it. This house was so black and hideous and so full of weeping and crying that upon seeing it in his dream, the king was filled with sorrow and fear. [514] What this meant was that those who had seized him in his sleep wanted to throw him inside with the others, who were there in great numbers. He was so afraid that he 24Wash,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “eat”). 91 awoke with a start, and as he watched to make sure he was not thrown in, he cried out in his fear, “I am dead.” He said it so loudly that all the lords about his pavilion heard him and were afraid for him. They quickly entered the pavilion and found him lamenting in his bed more loudly than you will ever hear, which worried them, for they were accustomed to seeing him happier and more joyful than anyone else. The man among them who knew him best came to him and said, “My lord, what’s the matter?” Realizing that what had frightened him had been a dream, the king said to those around him, “I saw the greatest marvels a mortal king ever saw, in my opinion, and I will never be completely happy until I know the whole truth about them. Now bring me Celidoine, who told me the meaning of my other dream, and if he can interpret this one as well as the other, I will do anything he orders.” They went at once to the child, who was sleeping in the pavilion, just as one sleeps sometimes on long summer days, around the hour [515] of nones. They awoke him and told him to come quickly, for the king had sent for him. The child got up immediately and came before the king, who was still lamenting. But as soon as he saw the child, he was comforted. He had Celidoine sit down before him and said, “Wise and provident teacher, advise me about what I will tell you; advise this unhappy king, this poor person, and teach me what I will ask you.” “King,” said Celidoine, “in so much as I tell you good things and teach you—not through my knowledge, but because the High Master has revealed it to me in His graciousness—so much will you be shamed and destroyed, if you do not put into action the words He sends you through His small person. This very Prophet and High?° Lord whom you saw led so vilely to His death through the city of Jerusalem a long time ago, and who you yourself said did not deserve death, as did Pilate, your relative—thanks be to this sweet Lord, this piteous One called Jesus Christ, who has revealed so many of His secrets to me that I know clearly what you saw in your sleep—He tells you through me that if you wish to enter the High [516] City you saw in your sleep, first you must do what I will counsel and teach you. And if you refuse, He promises to give you the dangerous, dark house, which is full of tears and cries.” Upon hearing this, the king fell to his knees before the child and said, weeping and fearful, “Good and loyal servant of your New Law, wondrously endowed with flowers, leaves, and fruit, I recognize these words you speak to me, for you are so highly endowed with the grace of Jesus Christ that I am completely ready to do whatever you command, once you have explained the marvels I saw in my dream.” “T will explain them to you,” said the child, “so that you will see the meaning clearly. And I will tell you just as it happened, so that you may believe me better; nor could any man explain it to you unless Our Lord had revealed it to him, for you haven’t yet told your dream to any man. The wide road you saw in your dream, where so many people have trod, symbolizes the Old Law, where such great multitudes and so many people have passed, as you have “High,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “handsome”). 92 heard from all those who were like [517] masters and pastors. There were not many who understood it well, so that they saw only the outer covering where they should have seen the marrow.*® Therefore, they abandoned themselves to every mortal sin and iniquity and, as a result, fell into such sorrowful bondage and deep misery that the enemy—that is, the devil—carried them away alive, in flesh and bone, straight to hell, the good as well as the bad. These devils about whom I speak, who formerly fell from the heavens because of their pride, and who were so powerful before the Passion of Jesus Christ that they took everyone, good and bad, in common judgment, are symbolized by the robbers and thieves who, along the side of the road, kept watch to capture the passersby, just as you saw in your dream. By the road you saw, you should understand the Old Law; and by those who kept watch,2’ the devils who are always on the lookout to surprise and deceive man in order to cast him from the blessed heritage from which they were formerly cast because of their pride. “The handsome man who kept you company and took you out of the frightful road was Jesus Christ. Because you took pity on Him when you saw Him in distress, He took pity on you, protecting you in your sorrowful life so carefully that the enemy had no power to put his hands on you. Because you pitied Him when you saw Him?® at such a time—even though you did not know what pity was—He returned goodness for [518] goodness, for ever since then He has always looked upon you with such pity that never, in this filthy and wicked life you have led, did He allow you to perish or be surprised by the devil; instead He has protected you as you wish and delivered you from the great bondage of hell. “Now I have shown you who the man was who kept you company in the wide road that was full of thieves and robbers. And there is yet another reason why this wide road is called so large and wide, and I will tell you. You know very well that once a man boards a ship where there is no captain to guide it, nor any oar, rudder, or? mast to sail, as soon as he is far from shore and he is thrown about and buffeted by the winds that torment and oppose him in many ways, since he is in the middle of the wide sea, there is no one who can deliver him from this danger, if Our Lord Himself does not do so. This is how you must understand the road of sin, for as soon as the Christian leaves the road of his Creator, he has broken his ties and finds no one to keep him from doing whatever he desires. And then he is incited and encouraged to sin, both openly and secretly; then he has permission and license to do as he wishes; then [519] he finds his road wide, so that nothing turns him aside, and he does absolutely everything his unhappy flesh desires and everything the devil advises. This road is indeed wide and terrible. King Label, you know very 26+S6 that they saw only... marrow” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 27The Old Law... watch” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 284 distress, He took pity on you... . when you saw Him” supplied from Ponceau. 29Rudder, or,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “to guide”). The History of the Holy Grail well that you have been on this road for a long time, but now you have come to the point that He who can deliver you—and He is the only one who can—will do so at this time, if you wish. “Now I will tell you what the other road symbolizes, the one that was verdant and full of trees. The verdant road symbolizes the New Law, which gets stronger, better, livelier, and greener every day. The fact that it was narrow means that those who set out on it do not have permission to walk at their will. Rather, they must not leave the commandments of Holy Church. And do you know what the commandments are? They are such that no son of Holy Church should err against his Creator, sin mortally, or be lustful. Rather, he should live according to God and truth; he should not stumble into sin by various thoughts but follow the straight road and the straight path that lead man in the company of the angels. And he should go along just like a straight line that does not turn for anything that may happen. And truth commands everyone who wishes to do well to act in this way. [520] “The trees along this road symbolize the apostles and prelates of Holy Church, who preach the truth of the Gospel every day throughout the entire world. The voice that called the people of every faith symbolizes Jesus Christ’s great mercy, the great sweetness that calls sinners and the just to Him, promising to give them sweet and good foods. “By the spring you saw on the mountain, you should understand Jesus Christ, the High Master and High Lord, who through His good life and through the miracles and visible prodigies He worked as long as He was among us in this world as a mortal man, appears taller and higher than any other, as the great mountains appear higher than the middle lands. For this reason, therefore, what is called the holy water of baptism cannot exist without Jesus Christ, nor does Jesus Christ exist without it. In the middle of the mountain you saw the spring, that is, you saw Jesus Christ in the middle of the holy water of baptism. “By the High City that was so beautiful and gay and festive and joyful, you should understand Paradise, the blessed High City above, where the angels and Jesus Christ’s blessed servants lead a joyful, festive, gay existence, and [521] will do so without end. The fact that you were told you would not enter, because you had not washed at the spring, means that you cannot be Jesus Christ’s servant or a son of Holy Church until you have been washed and purified in the holy water of baptism. “Not long ago in a dream you saw some of these very things I am speaking about. And I will tell you what the dream was, so that you may believe me better. It seemed to you that in a wild and uncultivated heath you saw a large and marvelous serpent; though it could not see, it flew until it reached the Red Sea, where it bathed itself in the water. But as it came out, you marveled as you looked, for you saw clearly that it had changed into a white pigeon. “You saw all this in your dream, King Label, and you never revealed it to any man because you didn’t think anyone could tell you the meaning, but I will.3° I'll tell you 30«y will,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has ‘you will”). The History of the Holy Grail exactly what [522] the High Master has revealed to me. By the wild, uncultivated heath, you should understand the evil works and disloyal acts in which you persisted from the very moment you left your mother’s womb. By the serpent you should understand yourself, for you are undoubtedly a true serpent and true enemy, since you did nothing, or very little, that pleased Our Lord. The fact that it could not see anything means that you were blind, for if you really saw, you would not have remained in sin as long as you have. And the fact that the serpent flew to the Red Sea means that you will fly, that is, you will enter into the holy and blessed water called baptism and be Jesus Christ’s heir and son, just like the others who have come to holy baptism. “By the Red Sea, which Our Lord parted for the sons of Israel, you should understand baptism, where Jesus Christ’s servants are purified and taken out of the hands of the eternal enemies, just as the sons of Israel were delivered from the hands of the Egyptians by the Red Sea. By the red of the sea, you should understand the blessed blood, that came out of the blessed side of the Prophet?! I am speaking about. “Just as the sons of Israel were nourished and sustained by the manna Our Lord sent in the desert until they reached the Promised Land, likewise the sons of Jesus Christ, the servants of Holy Church, are sustained and satisfied, from [523] day to day in this life—which is therefore called a desert—by the grace of Our Lord, by the holy food He will give them until they come to the Promised Land. That is, they will come to the joy of heaven, which will never end, and this is the joy that is promised to them. The fact that the serpent changed into the form of a dove stands for the change that will take place in you, if you are baptized, for in this holy ablution, you will be changed from an enemy into a friend of Jesus Christ—from a serf into a free man, for then®2 you will be freed from serfdom and from the bonds of the deadly deceiver. “Now I have revealed to you, King Label, the dream you never revealed to any mortal man, and you know that the One who showed it to me knows all about your affairs. Now I will tell you what the dark house you saw in your other dream symbolizes. This dark house, which is full of tears and cries, [524] symbolizes hell, where traitorous unbelievers stay and where they will be cast down on Judgment Day. On this fearsome day*? you will be lodged in the frightening, hideous dwelling you marveled at, unless on this earth you do something to cause you to be delivered from it and placed in the other.”*4 “Can one arrive in the High City where I saw the great joy without being baptized?” asked the king. “Certainly not,” said Celidoine. “What!” said the king. “Did I really see my sister rejoicing as much as the others?” 3 Slepy the red of the sea... Prophet,” as in Sommer and Ponceau (Hucher has a garbled passage here). 32“Then,” as in Sommer and Ponceau (Hucher has “il loet,” which has no meaning here). 33“ay,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “place”). 34«without receiving baptism, no one can arrive there” omitted, as in Ponceau and Sommer. 93 “Y’ll tell you,” said Celidoine. “You may be sure, truly, that your sister died a Christian. She received baptism from the hand of Seraphe himself, the hermit who lives in a forest called Naube. This forest used to be inhabited wondrously by serpents who killed people, but for five years none has been seen there. And do you know when she was [525] baptized? On the day you fought King Galien. On that day the vermin left the forest, because it was then that the worthy man came to live there.” “Certainly,” said the king, “you have interpreted my dream marvelously, and marvelous is the Lord who has revealed it to you. Surely, if He were not more powerful and knowledgeable than any other lord, He could not know this, nor could He have revealed it to you or any other. Therefore, I put myself completely in His command and am ready to do everything you advise.” “King,” said Celidoine, “now I will tell you what to do. It has been revealed to me by the High Master, whose servant I am, that nearby, in this forest, lives a worthy hermit who leads a very saintly life and who is a priest. Let us go to him, and you will have him baptize you and wash in the holy water I spoke to you about, so that purged and clean, you may enter the great wedding feast and the High City called Paradise whenever the Great Master comes to summon you.” “Certainly,” said the king, “I am [526] completely ready to do this.” Then the king asked those around him, “My lords, what do you think about what he has said to me? Are you prepared to do as I will? I assure you that I will never be happy until I am baptized.” But they said they would not get involved in this, nor abandon their religion or the faith they held from their fathers. “My lords,” said Celidoine, “leave things as they are then, for if you were converted by force, it would be of little value to you. You will remain the enemy's servants—people full of poor sense and bad judgment. And the king will leave as Jesus Christ’s son and heir. I can truly tell you that Our Lord, in His great mercy, has removed the sheep from among the wolves*° without their strangling him.” They asked at once who were the wolves. “You are the wolves,” said the king, “and I am the sheep.” Then Celidoine had King Label undress and remove all his garments and put on a poor and humble robe, telling him that he did not want him to come before the worthy man in pride, but with signs of humility and patience. And the king did exactly what he ordered. Then they left the pavilions and went into the forest, where they wandered together until night fell upon them in a great valley. And yet they had gone so far before nightfall that they came by chance, or because Our Lord was [527] guiding them, straight to the hermitage where the worthy man had been living for quite some time. They called at the door, and the hermit, who was not asleep, opened the door at once, wondering”© who these people were and what they 35a mong the wolves,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “from the wolf, which was with them”), 36«4¢ once, wondering,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “wondering at once”). 94 were seeking in this place so far from any people, for sometimes he spent an entire month or more without seeing a man or a woman. Once the hermit heard Celidoine speak and recognized him as a Christian, he was so overjoyed that words could hardly express it. He embraced him and kissed him many times and said, “Dear son, you who will yet be a pillar and vessel of true knowledge, what need has brought you to these parts?” He told him at once why they had come. When the worthy man heard this, he was overjoyed and said he would gladly do as they asked as soon as day came.?” That night they spoke about many things, and the worthy man taught King Label a great deal about the Christian faith and the commandments of Holy Church. Finally the king said to him, “My lord, for God’s sake, [528] tell me the truth about a vision that came to me not long ago, if you are certain of it.” “Tell me,” said the worthy man, “and I will tell you what Our Lord has taught me about it.” “My lord,” he said, “it seemed to me that I was summoned to trial before a very rich man, charges having been brought against me by I know not whom. When it was time to go to the trial, I summoned all my friends and those I had served to come help me, but all of them failed me except three. One of the three lent me a mantle to put on, so that no one would recognize me. The second led me to a house such as I had never seen before and left me inside. And the third came with me before the rich man and presented a written charter that acquitted me of all the charges brought by the rich man, so that my peace was made with the man before whom I was accused. My lord, such was the vision that came to me not long ago; now I beseech you to tell me the meaning if you know it.” “Certainly,” said the worthy man, “willingly. The mantle that was lent to you, King Label, symbolizes the poor clothing and last garment given to a man to wear when he is put into the ground. We call this last mantle and garment a shroud; [529] it should be called mortal clothing. Often this garment is given more for those who remain than for the one who is put into the ground. The second friend, who led you to the house you did not know, symbolizes the relatives of the one who has passed away, who take the body of the dead person to the grave. The grave should rightly be called an unknown house, like none anyone has ever seen. King Label, the third friend, who kept you company in your need and showed the charter acquitting you of all the charges the rich man had brought against you, stands for the good works that man does in this earthly world as long as he lives here. The good things that man does, as long as he is alive, are*® just like the good law clerk who boldly defends his friend’s cause and brings it to a successful issue. The son, the daughter, and the other relatives leave the one whom they considered a friend in the grave and no longer keep him company. “Now he must come before the rich [530] man, before the presence of the High Judge. What will he do? Who will 37«and said... Sommer. day came” supplied from Ponceau and 38“Are” supplied from Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail accompany him? Who will answer for him about everything he had on earth, everything he knew,®9 and everything he could do? He won't bring anything before this rich man except a charter where he has written whatever he did, good or bad. If there is more good than evil, the good will raise him up and deliver him from all the things that will be asked of him; and if there is more evil than good, the evil, which always weighs man down and brings him to earth, will pull him down, and he will tumble into the dark house of hell. King Label, now I have told you the meaning of your dream, as I believe it to be. Now tell me if it seems to you that I have told the truth.” “Certainly,” said the king, “I don’t think there is any man on earth who could have told me better, unless the One called Jesus Christ Himself did so. Now there is no one on earth, if he heard it as I have, who would not be worth more all the days of his life. And there is no other God than the One you worship, for He alone knows the truth about everything, and in my opinion no one else knows anything unless it is revealed to him by the [531] power of this High Lord.” “Certainly,” said the hermit, “this is the truth.” That night the three of them spoke for a long time about things pertaining to the holy faith. The worthy man preached to the king throughout the night, and he recounted the lives of the worthy men who, because of Jesus Christ’s death, had borne so many sorrows and troubles that mortal man could hardly tell the number. And the king wept the whole time he preached, so much did the sweet words he related please him. The next day, as soon as the worthy man had sung matins, he had a hollowed-out stone prepared and cleaned and brought into his little chapel and filled with water. Then he had the king undress and step into it, and he baptized him and gave him all the sacraments of Holy Church, as befits a Christian. But his name was not changed because it seemed beautiful to him. After the king was baptized, the hermit called the others who had come with him and asked them if they wished to do as the king had done. And they said they would never change their faith but would be like their fathers. “I will suffer it,” said the worthy man. Then the king put on a white robe that the worthy man had prepared for him. Once he was dressed, he said to [532] Celidoine, “Dear friend, you have threatened me with the body’s death. Now I no longer care when I may die, for I know that I have become so much better that mortal man could never express it. It seems to me that I am in that very city where I saw the feast and great joy, where I was not permitted to enter because I had not washed at the spring.” And then he said to those who had come with him, “My lords, you who have kept me company in my evil life, since you do not wish to keep me company in the one where I am now, which is full of good and truth, I release you from my service; henceforth I will consider you to be my enemies rather than my officers. Leave this place, and I will never again enter any place where I know you to be.” 39K new,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “had”). The History of the Holy Grail Upon hearing this, they were as grief-stricken as possible and said that they had lost everything when their lord turned to the Christian faith. Thus they left, discussing among themselves what to do, for they did* not want to leave their lord in this way among those who had deceived him. “What use is it to implore him?” asked one of them. [533] “You can be sure, truly, that he will not abandon the faith he has accepted, whatever anyone might do, but we should make the one who advised him to do this pay dearly for what he has taken from us.” Then they returned to the hermitage and seized Celidoine, in spite of the king. He tried to stop them as best he could, and he would have done more, but Celidoine said to him, “King Label, don’t worry about what they do to me. Stay here with this worthy man, who will give you advice to go to your Creator. If your officers take me away, Iam not afraid, for He whose service I have entered will protect and defend me from all danger.” At Celidoine’s advice the king remained at the hermitage, and the next day he passed away from the world through the will of the Sovereign Master and went to his Creator. Since then Our Lord has worked many beautiful miracles for his sake, which the story is silent about, because this material does not at all belong to this book, but to the one that tells the story of the king of Persia. 24. Celidoine’s Adventures at Sea.! Now the the Story of the Holy Grail says here that after King Label’s men had seized Celidoine, they took him among the rocks [534] to their pavilions. Once the news had spread through the army that the king had converted and become a Christian, then you would have seen great sorrow and weeping on the part of one and all, as if each one saw his whole family dead before him. And when they realized they could do nothing else, they said to each other that since they had in their power the one who had caused them this sorrow, they would take their revenge on him. Some of them thought they should kill Celidoine, while others said he was still too young a child and that they should be avenged? some other way. And then they discussed among themselves different torments and means of causing the child’s death, but they could not agree on any one. This continued until one of the king’s relatives stood up and said, “I will tell you how we can be avenged without laying a hand on him, and with greater honor than if we were to kill him. Take a small boat, of which we have several, in addition to our barks. Put him inside all alone without a rudder or anything else, and have him put out to sea. If he doesn’t perish before the next day, I will never believe that a man who is a Christian can die.” “If you approve,” said someone [535] else, “you can cause his death in a better way yet, and we will be more sure 40Corrected to plural, as in Ponceau. 1 Corresponds to Hucher II: 533-539 and III: 1-10; Sommer I: 158-164; Ponceau §250-255. 2“Some of them... they should be avenged” supplied from Ponceau. 9 of it: let’s put the lion we captured the day before yesterday with him. As soon as it’s in the boat, it won’t need food, for it will devour him, and thus we will be avenged.” They all accepted this suggestion. They seized Celidoine and put him in the boat, and the lion with him. When Celidoine saw himself with this fierce and frightening beast, he made the sign of the holy cross over his face and commended himself to Our Lord. Then he turned to those who had put him there and said, “Cursed people, enemies of Jesus Christ, do you think you will cause my death like this? I will escape if it pleases my Savior. But you will perish as soon as you set out to sea, and you can be very sure that you will never return to the kingdom of Persia, which the king had you leave. You will suffer a violent death in the sea where you have put me to die; you will be drowned and tortured, and you will enter the torments of hell in the dark house, where all sorrow and misery dwell. King Label will not enter this house, [536] for he has delivered himself from it; rather, he will enter the sovereign house and the joy called Paradise. And do you know when this will be? It will be tomorrow, for you can be sure that tomorrow he will leave this earth.” Thereupon the wind struck the little boat, and it was soon taken out to sea, so far from shore that the men who had put him in the boat? could not see him. For three days the child drifted this way in the company of the lion, which never touched or harmed him, either because it was frightened and saw itself in danger, or because Our Lord's mercy worked in it. On the fourth day, in the middle of the sea, Celidoine came upon the beautiful and splendid ship in which the sword lay that Nascien had looked at so long. It happened that the little boat came alongside the ship. When the child, who knew several languages, saw the writing on the side and realized what it meant, he entered the ship right away, leaving the lion in the little boat. Once he was inside the ship and had found the beautiful, sumptuous bed and the crown and the marvelous spindles, he looked at them gladly, having never [537] seen anything that pleased him so much, and he was aware of nothing else until night fell. When he saw the darkness of night spreading throughout the world, he returned to the ship’s side, but he saw neither the boat nor the lion he had left, which grieved him, for the silent animal would have given him great comfort if he could have seen it. He looked in every direction as far as he could,’ but he could not see what he sought. And when he realized that he would see nothing more, he returned to the middle of the ship and lay down on a wooden pallet, since he did not dare get into the bed, and immediately fell asleep from fatigue and exhaustion. All night long the child slept in this way. The next day, when day broke, he arose” and went to the side of the ship. Seeing that he had arrived before an island, he looked above shore and saw someone lying there asleep. Realizing 3“Perished so that they never again [saw him]” omitted, as in Ponceau. 4“He looked in every direction as far as he could” supplied from Ponceau. 5«And when he was awake” omitted, as in Sommer and Ponceau. 96 that it was a man, he left the ship and went toward him. [538] When he came up next to him and looked at him well, he recognized Nascien, his father, which caused him such great joy that no greater could be told. He awoke him gently, and the latter started, as if he were frightened, and opened his eyes. When he saw the child, he jumped up quickly, threw his arms around his neck, and kissed him over and over. Embracing him and weeping over him with joy, he said, “Dear son, sweet creature, who brought you to this island, which is so far away from people and Christian homes?” He showed him the ship and replied that he had come in it; when Nascien saw it, he said he had seen the ship before. Father and son rejoiced heartily over each other, and each asked the other about himself, until Nascien asked the child how he had escaped from Galafre’s prison. And he recounted how that had happened and how he had been left among the rocks in the sea, where King Label arrived with his men, during the storm at sea that brought them there. Then he described King Label’s dream and its meaning, and how King Label received the faith [539] through the proof Our Lord gave him in his sleep. After that he described all the adventures that had happened to him since he last saw his father. And when he had heard this news, Nascien blessed his Creator and wept tenderly over how He had brought everything to such perfection. Then they left the island and came to the sea and boarded the ship, where they remained until the hour of tierce. And then it happened that the wind rose furiously, and a storm came across the sea, so great and horrible that anyone who saw it would be frightened. The wind, which had stiffened cruelly, struck the ship full abreast and carried it away from the island in so little time that Nascien, who was at the ship’s side, looking at the heavy sea, did not see land anywhere. He thanked God and worshiped Him for whatever He might send and said the prayers and orisons he knew. [III: 1]® This storm lasted three days. Their lives were constantly in danger, and all they did was wait for the moment when the ship would capsize. On the fourth night, as day was about to break, the wind died down and they could see land again, and the sea, which had been so furious and cruel, became calm and peaceful. This made those in [2] the ship happier than they had been, and reassured them. When day had come, with beautiful, clear weather, they looked ahead and saw a small island where there was a castle that looked very beautiful. But they did not know in what land or country this island might be, which frightened them somewhat, for they were afraid of falling into evil hands. The ship arrived at the shore directly before the castle, and they went to the gate and listened. Inside, a blow rang out very loudly, so that it could be heard from some distance away. “My lord,” said Celidoine to his father, “now you can be sure there are people there.” “Truly,” said Nascien. ®Henceforth, all page numbers refer to Hucher, volume III. The History of the Holy Grail As he said this, they saw the largest and most marvelous giant in the world—larger than Nascien had ever heard of in all the days of his life—coming out of the castle. Upon seeing the ship’s occupants, the giant cried out, “You will regret having come [3] to my island without my leave! You must die!” When Nascien saw the enormous, awful monster, he did not know what to do, for he had neither lance nor shield nor helmet, nor any arm with which he might defend himself. He looked all around, in greater distress and anguish than anyone ever was. Realizing that he would not find anything with which he might defend himself”? and fearing for his life, he ran to the rich sword and pulled it out of the scabbard. After doing so, he looked at it a long time, finding it to be so splendid and beautiful in appearance that he had never seen an arm he prized so much. Because of the great goodness he believed it possessed, he raised it on high and began to brandish it. As he did so—I do not know if this was because of the poor quality of the sword, or because of Our Lord’s anger at Nascien for drawing the sword, which appeared to be so good and beautiful—it broke in two near the hilt, which remained in Nascien’s hand, while the blade fell to the ground. This adventure frightened him even more, so he stood still, lost in thought [4] and troubled. When he had come out of his reverie, he said, “By God, this is the greatest marvel I have seen in a long time.” Then he put the handle of the sword back on the bed and said that he would put himself completely under God’s protection—his own life and his son’s—against the monster that came so impetuously toward him. At once he jumped out of the ship, saying, “Dear Father, Jesus Christ, be my shield and defense against this enemy.” Then he looked down and saw a sharp, honed sword that had been left there by chance by men from the tower.8 Very happy, he seized it at once and turned immediately to the monster, striking him so forcefully and with such great strength that he pierced him right through the ribs so that the sword-tip appeared on the other side. Feeling himself struck so violently, the monster did not have strength enough to remain standing but fell to the ground, overcome with the anguish of death. He fainted, and when he came to, he let out a loud and terrifying cry. When Nascien saw that he need no longer fear him, he still did not go to the castle, thinking there were unbelievers, but returned to the ship. As soon as he had boarded it, the wind struck it, and it went away so quickly that in a short time they had lost sight of the castle and the island. And when Nascien saw that he had escaped the giant, he went to the sword and began to look at it, saying to himself, so that Celidoine [5] could hear him clearly, “Ah, sword, you are the thing I prized most except for the Holy Vessel called the Grail. But I have wrongly praised you.? Now, it seems to me that you have so failed me in my need that I wonder what this can mean.” 7He looked all around .. . himself” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 8“Tower,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “court”). “And rightly blamed you” omitted, following Ponceau and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail “My lord,” said Celidoine, “this is not a marvel, nor is it the poor quality of the sword, but it is because of some sin with which you are stained or because of some sign from Our Lord.” And he replied that this could well be. As they were speaking about this, they were looking across the sea. Seeing a ship coming straight toward them, Celidoine said to his father, “My lord, here’s a ship coming to us. We are sure to have news; may God grant that it be good.” “So be it,” said Nascien. As they spoke, the ship had approached them enough so that they could recognize one another. Nascien came to the side of his ship and looked at the prow of the other. There he saw King Mordrain, who was sitting very pensive, awaiting whatever adventure God would send him. When Nascien recognized him, he cried out, “My lord, may God be with you.” At once the king came out of his reverie and greeted Nascien. He was so joyful that he [6] could barely say a word. He leapt into Nascien’s ship, which was right beside his, threw his arms around his neck, and kissed him more than a hundred times, saying, “My dear friend, how have you fared since I last saw you, and what adventure has brought you here?” Nascien, who was as happy as could be about finding him, recounted the difficulties and travails he had suffered since he had left him: how he was put in Galafre’s prison because the people of the land accused him of killing the king; how he remained there for several days, but at last was delivered through Jesus Christ’s power and pity and was carried in a cloud to Western parts, far from any people and habitable land, to an island so ugly and hideous that he had never seen any place! so [7] frightening. He never learned what the island was called, and yet he remembered very well that it shook and turned every day and every night. Then he told him how the ship he was in had come; how he had entered it; and how it opened up because of a single word he said, so that he all but drowned. Then he recounted the meaning of the ship and how he had been so pleased by the words spoken by a worthy man who had come to comfort him that he fell asleep to the sweetness of the words. After that he related that, since the worthy man had told him the meaning of the ship and he had fallen asleep because of the sweet words, he had not seen the worthy man or the ship he had come on. The king marveled at the wondrous and strange words he recounted and at the island that he said turned. Next Nascien related in order everything else that had happened to him. After he had recounted everything, the king asked him which one of these things he considered the most marvelous. “Certainly,” said Nascien, “the breaking of the sword, for it did not break because it was poorly made, but was a sign from Our Lord.” “Indeed,” said the [8] king, “this is certainly possible.” Then he went to see the sword and move it. After he had looked at it for a long time, he said, “Certainly, sword, 10“any place,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “anyone”). 97 you are marvelous to see and look at, for you are more beautiful than any other.” Then the king took the hilt in one hand and the blade in the other and brought them together. As he joined them, there occurred a wonderful adventure: the steel of the one immediately took hold of the other, and they held so firmly together that the sword was never again unjoined. Upon seeing this, he said to Nascien, “By my faith, the power of Jesus Christ is miraculous, when He so easily breaks and welds this sword, for as you can see, it is rejoined as easily as it was broken.” Then he put it back in the scabbard from which Nascien had taken it. After having done this, they heard a noise as loud as thunder, which stunned them. And then a voice came down, saying to them, “Christians, leave the ship, for you are falling into sin.” As soon as the king heard these words, he leapt out of the ship into his own, as did Celidoine. But it happened that as Nascien, who was a little slower!! than the others, left the ship and grabbed the other one to get in, a flaming sword came down and struck him in the left shoulder, making a very large wound. He fell face forward into the ship. And then he heard someone speaking to him, [9] but he did not know who, saying, “This is the vengeance for having drawn the sword, which you were unworthy of. Take care not to offend your Creator again.” The king heard the voice distinctly, and Nascien did also, but he was so wounded by the blow that he fell to the ground as if he were dead. The king ran to raise him up and take him in his lap, weeping bitterly for fear that he was mortally wounded. And Celidoine did likewise. Nascien lay for a long time in a faint without saying a word. When his strength returned and he could speak, seeing the king crying for him, he said, “Oh, my lord, what are you doing? You should not cry but rejoice, for now you can be sure that Our Lord holds me dear for some reason, since He punishes me and makes my sin known. I should thank and worship Him as a Father, for now I see indeed that he punishes me like a son.” Nascien spoke these words when he was wounded. He never showed that anything bothered him but, like a man full of patience and humility, suffered the anguish and pain of the wound as long as it lasted. They were in the ship this way for four days. But at this point the story leaves off [10] speaking of them and returns to the messengers that the queen sent throughout the land to seek her brother Nascien, for she did not know where he was. 25. Messengers Set out to Seek Nascien.! Now the story says that after the five messengers, who were mounted on horseback, left their lady, Queen Sarrasinte,? they rode through many a country for a long time, l«siower,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “taller”). ICorresponds to Hucher III: 10-29; Sommer I: 164-170; Ponceau §256—265. 2“After” supplied from Ponceau. 3See Chapter 18. 98 sometimes in one direction and sometimes in the other, as chance led them. Everywhere they went they asked for news of Nascien, but they never found anyone who could give them information, and that frightened them. When they had long been in foreign countries, in pagan as well as other lands, it seemed to them that they would not hear news of Nascien, either near or far, and that they had left their country for naught, for they would not find what they were seeking. One night it happened that they were lodged at the home of a pagan vavasor, a very worthy man in his religion. In the evening after they had eaten, their host asked them where they were from and where [11] they were going. They said they were from Sarras and were seeking their lord, who was called Nascien and who had disappeared through the most marvelous adventure in the world. “What!” he exclaimed. “You are Christians?” They replied that this was true. “And how is it,” he asked, “that you were so bold as to hurry straight into the land of the Saracens, knowing very well that they hate you mortally, since you oppose their faith and belief?” “Dear sir,” said one of them, “distress and anguish to find what we are seeking made us forge ahead, for we don’t know if our lord is among pagans or Christians. That is why we go into pagan lands as well as Christian, to see if God will lead us where we can find him.” “It was great folly to come among us without leave,” said the host, “for I believe you will repent of it before you depart.” And they replied that they did not know whether that would be the case. That night the messengers were sumptuously served, and they had a great variety of spices, for there were many in that land, which was very well endowed with all commodities everywhere. And if someone should come forward? to ask what country they were in, I would answer that they were in Egypt in a city called Tosqueham. In this very city was born the forebear of the holy lady called Saint Mary the Egyptian. That night [12] after their host had put the messengers to bed in a hall by themselves and they had fallen asleep, the youngest one had a vision. It seemed to him that Joseph of Arimathea came before him and asked, “What are you seeking?” And he responded, saying, “Good sir, I am seeking Nascien, my lord, who disappeared through the most marvelous adventure in the world,” and he recounted how. Joseph asked him, “Do you think you will find him in this country?” And he replied, “My lord, I don’t know where I might find him; that is why I am seeking him throughout all the lands where people live.” “You will not find him in this land,” said Joseph, “for he is not here. Come with me, and I will show him to you.” Then Joseph led the way, with the youth following, until they came to a mountain—the largest and highest in the world. Once they were on the mountain, he saw a place 4“Someone should come forward,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “if there were a soul”). The History of the Holy Grail so marvelous and so high that he® could see all the people in the world who lived on earth, and all the seas where boats could navigate. Joseph asked him, “What do you see?” “My lord, I see all the lands where mortal people live and all the waters where boats can go.” And Joseph showed him, far away, a ship in the Greek sea, saying, “Do you see that ship?” “My lord,” he replied, “I see it [13] clearly.” “Now you may be sure,” said he, “that your lord is in this ship with company he loves well.” Then they parted, and Joseph left so abruptly that the messenger did not see which way he went. In the morning after they were up and before they departed, the young man said to his companions, “Last night a very beautiful vision came to me in my sleep.” They asked what it was, and he told them. When they heard it, they said this was a lovely adventure and that Our Lord had not forgotten them since Joseph, their minister, came to tell them where they could find their lord. “What do you suggest we do about this?” asked the youth who had had the vision. The others said the only thing to do was to go to the sea as quickly as they could and rent a ship, board it, and sail back and forth across the sea until God granted that they find the ship in which their lord Nascien was. The five of them agreed on this. They went to their host and took leave of him, and he told them in private, “My lords, I advise you not to make yourselves known wherever you may go, for I tell you truly that if you are recognized as Christians in this land where Christians are hated more mortally [14] than in any other place, you will not escape alive.” And they said they would hide their identity as best they could. Thus the messengers left Tosqueham. Once they were beyond the city, they headed straight toward the sea as fast as they could, riding all day in great anguish and travail, for it was so outrageously hot in this land that some people had to go completely nude during the month of August, which is hotter and more torrid than other months. The day they left Tosqueham the heat was so intense and blazing that because of it, one of the five companions died, either from heat stroke or thirst, and he was buried in the main city of Egypt, the city called Alexandria. Two days later the messengers set out again and rode until they reached the sea, where they found a ship that had recently landed. In it there were some one hundred eighty men who had been killed. They boarded to find out what had happened; in one section of the ship, under a plank, they found a young lady hiding. They pulled her out of her hiding place and beseeched her to tell them about the death of these men—why they were killed and how. “If [15] you promise,” she said, “that I will not be killed, I will tell you the truth about it.” And they said she need have no fear and that they would do nothing that would displease her. “Then I'll tell you what you have asked. Be assured truly that those who lie dead here were from the city of Label, and were men of King Label, who was my father. Some time ago King Melian said he would go to Syria to see SIN place so marvelous and so high that he,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “a high place on this hill”). The History of the Holy Grail a son who lives there and governs part of the land.® After he put to sea with a large retinue and naval force, the king of Tarsus, who had hated him’ mortally for a long time, learned that he was traveling by sea to the kingdom of Syria. He sent for as many knights and men-at-arms as he could assemble, boarded his ships, and attacked my father, who was sailing before a castle that sits on the sea, and who went to meet him with all his men. “Thus they met in battle at sea. And the melee began between our men and the king of Tarsus. In a short time the killing was so great that I saw more than? a thousand men die on both sides, all of whom were considered worthy men and good knights. But the men from Tarsus, who were more accustomed to bearing arms and suffering pain and who outnumbered our forces, attacked our men so fiercely from every direction that my father [16] lost nearly all his men. He himself would have been killed, but he got in a little boat with some knights—I’m not sure how many—and set off; since then I have heard no news of him. All those who remained on the ship were killed, and many were drowned in the sea. And they would have killed me, but because they saw I was a maiden and a weak thing, they did not deign to touch me but left me with my relatives and the men they had killed. Now I have told you the truth about what you asked me.” They said that this had been a serious battle and that they believed everything she had told them, for the ship still showed clear true signs of it. Then they discussed what to do, for they had this sea-faring ship as booty, and there was no one to dispute it. ‘T’ll tell you what we can do,” said one of them. “Because those who lie dead here are created in our semblance, though they may not be Christians, we should have pity on them, and it seems to me we should not allow bears or lions or any other wild beasts to eat their flesh. Let us send for people nearby so that they may be buried. And once we have emptied the ship, let us seek a knowledgeable captain who can take us where God will lead us.” They all agreed [17] to this and said that it was a good thing to do. Then they went where they thought they would find people; after doing so, they promised them enough so that before the day was over, many came to the ship to help. And they gave them a great deal of gold and silver. They worked so hard that before the day was over, they had buried everyone from the ship. Then they placed a large, marvelous stone there and had Greek letters chiseled into it that said,!® once they were done, HERE LIE THE MEN FROM LABEL WHO WERE KILLED BY THE PEOPLE OF TARSUS, THEY WERE BURIED HERE OUT OF PITY FOR THEIR HUMAN LIKENESS BY THE MESSENGERS WHO WERE SEEKING THEIR LORD, NASCIEN. Nascien’s messengers—the men seeking him—had this inscription placed where they had buried the men from Label, so that those who saw it might know the truth. After doing this, they asked the young lady what she planned to do. 6“Of the land” supplied from Ponceau. 7 Corrected to singular, as in Ponceau. 8“At sea” supplied from Ponceau. 9“More than” supplied from Ponceau. 10“Greek letters” and “that said” supplied from Ponceau. 9 “I don’t know,” she said, “for Iam far from my county, among foreign people who do not know me at all, and who would not do anything for [18] me. But advise me generously, if you can, for I certainly don’t know what to do.” Then she began to weep very softly. Seeing this, they took great pity on her. Then they conferred among themselves and said that it would be good to take her with them until they found their lord. Then they would make her a Christian. This seemed like a good decision to them. So they all agreed upon it and told the girl they would take her with them if she wished, in such a way that she would not be shamed or dishonored as long as they could defend her. When she heard these words, she fell at their feet and said she would put herself completely under their protection. Then they all did their best to find a man who knew how to sail the ship. But they found no one, which made them very unhappy. That evening they furnished the ship with everything they needed, such as food. And when night came they lay down to sleep in the ship. The sail was still set, having never been struck [19] since the ship’s arrival. Around midnight, therefore, it happened that the wind rose, great and marvelous and strong, and drove the ship away from shore, so that when daybreak came and they looked around, believing themselves to be still at shore, they did not see land anywhere. Rather, they saw that they were at high sea. Then they were very frightened, for they saw they were amidst huge, very high waves, without a captain or helmsman, and the sea was not calm, but whipped up by the cruel and violent wind that was blowing from all sides. The wind struck the sails full on, and the ship ploughed through the waves as quickly as a small falcon chasing its prey before it. When they saw themselves in such danger that they were only awaiting the hour when they would perish at sea, and they knew that they could not escape without Our Lord’s mercy, they knelt down in the ship and prayed to Our Lord for mercy—that in His pity, He might look upon them in this danger into which they had fallen, so that they might not die or perish, but be taken to a safe port. [20] For three days and three nights the messengers were in such a state that they neither ate nor drank. During this tume they had sailed so far across the sea, as a result of the good strong wind they had had, that they said among themselves, in the midst of the danger they were in, that they must not be very far from Egypt. And indeed they were not, for the ship had run along as if all the winds in the world were chasing it across the sea. On the fourth day at the hour of prime, an awful and grievous ordeal happened to them: their ship headed straight for a very high, large, rocky island. They began to fret, for the wind was carrying them at full sail in that direction. So it happened that the ship struck the rock so hard that it broke up into four pieces, and two of the four messengers perished. The other two escaped, while the girl who was with them was thrown into the sea. And when she saw those who had escaped and were out of danger, she began to cry out to them tearfully for mercy, and to pray very softly that for the sake of God and the holy faith they held, they would come to help her. Then one of them looked at her, [21] and taking great pity, jumped at once 100 into the water. He crossed himself and commended himself to Our Lord, and then he swam to the young woman and brought her straight back to shore with great difficulty, for he suffered a great deal before returning. When the youth reached shore with the girl, she thanked Our Lord sweetly, with all her heart, for saving her from death, which had been so near. In this way two of the messengers who had left their country to seek Nascien perished. And when those who remained with King Label’s daughter saw that they had lost all their food and the supplies to sustain them, they were very frightened, for [22] they were in a foreign place far away from people, and on a rock where they would never find any food for sale, even if they had all the gold in the world. And it was no wonder they were frightened, for they saw they were in such a foreign place that they thought they would never escape alive, if Our Lord did not succor them by His worthy commandment. Therefore, the two put themselves under Our Lord’s protection and cried out tearfully for mercy, saying again and again, “For pity’s sake, dear Lord God, look upon us in mercy so that we may not fall into despair or mortal sin through the enemy’s ruse or trick. Dear Lord, if you [23] send us temptation to test us, in Your sweet pity grant us the strength to bear it so that the troubles the body undergoes in this life will not be counted as evil, Lord, but so that the souls will be seated in eternal glory when they leave our bodies.” Both messengers repeatedly prayed in such words, and the young lady wept very tenderly and cursed Fortune for having led her from bad to worse, so it seemed. The messengers comforted her greatly and told her not to fear, for “Our Lord,” said they, “will help us soon.” She asked them the truth about their faith, and they told her what they had learned from the mouth of Joseph of Arimathea and the other prelates of Holy [24] Church. And they explained to her that the Lord of the faith they held was very powerful,!! “for He always helps His servants and His friends and those who have faith in Him, wherever they may be, as long as they serve him with good and true hearts, as well as with their mouths, as Holy Scripture commands.” “Indeed,” said the girl, “since He is like that and is as powerful as you say, I promise right now, with a good and true heart and with my mouth, that if He comes to help and succor us in this danger, so that I can escape to live a healthy life, I will hold to and truly invoke His law, and I will believe in Him henceforth, just as His ministers advise me. “Young lady,” they said, “then you can be sure that He will soon send us [25] help, much sooner than if you had not made this promise.” In this way the three of them waited together, filled with fear, for they were not used to suffering such great troubles, difficulties, or afflictions as they had found at sea. In the evening, when night was near, they looked up at the rocks where there was an ancient wall of a house that had been built long ago through great pride. It had been long since knocked down, and yet a good part remained, so that five or six people could certainly sit in its shelter and rest. They headed there, saying that in any case they would be 1] powerful,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “fearful”. The History of the Holy Grail more comfortable in the shade of this wall than on the shore where they had been all day. So they set out in that direction, walking [26] until] they reached the wall, after deep night had already fallen. They remained there all night, alone and lost and not knowing what to do, for they were sorely afraid that Our Lord Jesus Christ might forget them. Thus they slept and rested very little that night, for all night long they never stopped thinking about the fact that they could only be saved by the grace of Our Lord. And they prayed to Him very tenderly to come to see them and help them. The next day, as soon as day broke and they had said their prayers, asking that Our Lord in His sweet pity might comfort them, they stood up quickly and said they would go see what was within the walls. So they climbed up the rock until they came to an entrance. It was a door of red marble [27] that had been so splendid and pleasing that it would be difficult to make its equal in beauty!2 or splendor. They entered and looked all around; they realized that it had once been such a beautiful, sumptuous lodging, as if the most powerful! man in the world had made it his home, for there were pillars of marble worked very richly on the outside, encrusted with gold and azure and silver, with such mastery that it seemed almost a work of enchantment. At the far end! of this house, in a vaulted arch, was the richest, most beautiful and pleasing bed they had ever seen in their lives, for the four bedposts were of pure refined gold worked richly and well with precious stones. And all the other parts were of ivory made so richly!® and subtly that many who saw it might consider it [28] a dream. Above the bed there was a splendid tombstone worked so marvelously that it was a wonder to see. On the large end of the stone there were letters written in Greek that said, HERE LIES HIPPOCRATES, THE SOVEREIGN OF PHYSICIANS, WHO DIED THROUGH HIS WIFE’S TRICKERY, AND WHO WAS BROUGHT HERE BY ANTHONY, THE KING OF PERSIA. After having read these words, the messengers spoke about them for a long time together, saying that Hippocrates was a very wise man whom they had often heard about. They looked at the house from one end to the other and saw so many beautiful things—all of which had fallen into ruin—that they said that this had once been a very rich manor, one of the most beautiful in the world, since no earthly man could acquire even the great worldly splendor that remained there [29] unless he was extremely rich. But now the story leaves off speaking about them for a while, in order to tell the true story about this house that Hippocrates had built as his manor: how and in what way it was constructed and decorated so richly; who the person was who built it and why; and how he who once had been such a great lord and was so rich fell into ruin. 12Reauty,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “goodness”). 13“Powerful” supplied from Ponceau. Mefar end,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “chiel,” perhaps a misreading for “chief,” “far end”). 15“And all the other parts .. . made so richly” supplied from Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail 26. The Story of Hippocrates: His Powers, His Trouble with Women, and His Downfall. Now the story says it is true—and the Chronicle of the Philosophers attests to it—that Hippocrates was the foremost practitioner of the art of medicine, of all the men who were dominant in his time and who had worked long and diligently at this science. Because of something he did in Rome his knowledge was recognized and tested, and since then he has been [30] held in great esteem by philosophers and called paramount? doctor. And I will tell you how this happened. It is proven truth that in the time of the good emperor Augustus Caesar, Hippocrates came to Rome. At the moment he entered the city, it happened that he found great sorrow there, on all sides, as if everyone saw his child dead before him. He was astounded when he saw everyone mourning so deeply, so he asked a child he met to tell him the reason for this grief. The child replied, “We are grieving because the emperor’s nephew, who was healthy last night, is now dead. He was such a beautiful child and so valorous that all Rome is diminished by his death. This is the reason for our sorrow.” “Where is the body?” asked Hippocrates. “My lord,” said the [31] child, “it is in our emperor’s hall.” After hearing this, Hippocrates left the child and headed for the palace, thinking that if he could arrive in time, before the soul had left, he had learned enough to bring him back to health through his medicine. Upon arriving, he pushed through all the people until he came to the body. They were all so intent on their grief that no one attempted to keep him away. When he came to the body, he began to iuspect that part where he might learn whether the child was dead. Thus it happened that as soon as he had put his hands on the body, he knew the soul was still in it. Then he opened the mouth and put inside it a liquor made from herbs of such great power and strength that the child immediately got up [32] as healthy and well as ever. When the emperor saw this, he ran to Hippocrates to embrace him and welcome him, and the others did likewise. As a reward for his service, the emperor offered him whatever he requested, if it was something he could give. The emperor asked him his name, and he said it was Hippocrates. “I know very well,” said the emperor, “by the fact that you have the power to bring a dead man to life, that you are the wisest clerk and the best philosopher who has ever existed. I will therefore do you such honor that it will be talked about forever.” Then he had a golden statue made, as tall as a man and as similar as one could make it to Hippocrates’s form. After that he had a figure made [33] in the shape of his nephew, and he had them placed on top of the highest 1 Corresponds to Hucher IH: 29-73; Sommer I: 171-182; Ponceau §266-282. 2«Christian” omitted, as in Ponceau. 101 tower of Rome, so that everyone who came would see them clearly. Above these two statues he had a vaulted arch made, artfully worked in silver and gold, so that it would never rain on the statues. Underneath Hippocrates, the emperor had letters made that said, THIS IS HIPPOCRATES, THE PARAMOUNT DOCTOR OF THE PHILOSOPHERS, WHO THROUGH HIS WISDOM BROUGHT FROM DEATH TO LIFE THE NEPHEW OF AUGUSTUS CAESAR, THE EMPEROR OF ROME, THE VERY ONE WHOSE FIGURE IS BESIDE HIM. When the inscription was done, the emperor said he never wanted the two statues moved from where they had been placed, and this was accorded willingly. After this Hippocrates was very well served in Rome by the emperor® as well as [34] others, especially those who had seen what he had done for the emperor’s nephew. He took care of the people in that country and did so much good that he restored to health anyone who fell ill. He did so much in so little time that the poor, who were quite ignorant, called him a demi-God, while others* who were more learned, called him the paramount of the wise, because of the great wisdom they found in him. Because of this, his statue was honored as greatly as if it were the statue of one of their gods. They held this statue in such honor that it would never have been moved from its position, if it were not for” an adventure that happened, and I will tell you what it was. At the time that Hippocrates was in Rome and the Romans honored [35] and revered him as much as the story tells you, it happened that a lady born in Gaul came to the emperor. She was so beautiful that anyone who saw her would say she was of noble lineage and would consider her to be the most beautiful woman on earth. And she was as elegantly dressed as she would be if the emperor were to take her as his wife. When the emperor saw her beauty and lovely clothes, he asked who her people were and was told she was of noble birth. He immediately placed her in one of his households, gave her ladies and young women to keep her company, and ordered that she be served as well and as splendidly as the nobility of her lineage demanded. It was done as he [36] ordered, and she was made as comfortable as she could wish. After she had been in Rome for two months and had seen the statues on top of the tower, she asked the people what they meant. They told her, and when she heard it, she began to smile and said that he who could make a dead man live again had not yet been born. “I say,” she said, “that those who made these statues in memory of what you told me were foolish. No matter how wise you may consider him, I tell you that if I could spend one day with him, I would make him seem crazy and foolish, for he certainly 3Corrected to singular, as in Ponceau. 4“Others,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “the elders”). 5“That it would never... if it were not for” supplied from Ponceau. Gary say,’ she said ... foolish,” as in Sommer (Hucher has “T say,’ she said, ‘that they were made to commemorate what you told me). 102 lies when he praises himself by saying he can make a man return from death to life, and I won’t believe him, whatever he may say.” These words were spoken by the lady about Hippocrates, and they were repeated before the emperor and known [37] up and down the land, until Hippocrates learned about them. He was indignant and said to the emperor that he would never be content until he saw the woman who considered him crazy. “You shall see her,” said the emperor “When, my lord?” asked Hippocrates. “Tomorrow at the hour of prime, in the temple,” replied the emperor.’ That night Hippocrates thought a good deal about what the lady had said about him. The next day at the hour of prime Hippocrates waited until the lady arrived, with a large retinue of ladies and young women. When she went to the altar, she asked which one was Hippocrates, and was told enough so that she recognized him easily. She began to look at him more than any of the others. He was a rather young and handsome man, and he noticed that she was looking at him. She was [38] more wondrously beautiful than any woman he had ever seen, so he fell at once into foolish thoughts about her, for he had never loved a woman. He turned toward her to see her better and began to look at her. The more he looked, the more he was seduced, and he became so absorbed in thinking about her that he could not stop. After the lady left the temple, he went to his lodging and found himself so ill that he lay down at once. And so Hippocrates fell in love with the lady. But because he could not see her or have her when he wished and was too ashamed to dare to request it of the emperor, he went to bed sick, and was so ill that the other masters who knew medicine said they thought surely he [39] would die, though they did not know what illness he had. The emperor, noblemen, and knights came to see him, and after that the ladies and young women. When he saw the one for whom he was so sick, whom he loved so passionately that he was as good as dead, he decided to tell her everything openly. Then he had all the others withdraw except her for whom he suffered. At once he confessed he loved her so much that he would die if she did not grant him her love. When she who was intent on deceiving Hippocrates, if she could,® heard that he loved her in such a way, she replied at once in order to trouble him more, “Certainly, if your great wisdom were to perish because of such a woman as I, it would be too great a shame. As far as I’m [40] concerned, you can be sure I would not want this, nor would I allow it in any way. I would rather do everything you wish to prevent it. But even if I loved you as much as you say you love me—I don’t know whether you say it in mockery or in truth—I still would not know how I could proceed, for you know very well that I cannot come to you, 7“When, my lord?’.... replied the emperor,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “[You shall see her] when you wish,’ said the emperor. And Hippocrates replied, ‘Tomorrow at the hour of prime.’”). 8«who was intent... if she could,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “who had deceived Hippocrates”). The History of the Holy Grail since I am so closely watched that no one could come to me without the emperor’s knowledge, unless there were a great ruse. That is why I don’t know what to advise you, though on my part, I would gladly consent? to you rather than have you die for me, for your death would be a very great loss and sorrow, not only for you but for the people whom you often help.” [41] When Hippocrates heard the lady say that she would gladly do as he wished, if she could, he believed she was sincere. But she was not, for her only desire was to deceive him and cause him shame in the people’s eyes. What is to be said about this? There is no trick that woman would not devise in order to achieve what she desires, nor was there ever a man so wise that a woman could not deceive him, once she put her mind to it. Solomon, who was the wisest of the fathers, was unable to protect himself from a woman and was deceived. Samson the Strong died because of a woman, and Absalom, the most handsome man in the world, was destroyed by one. Why should Hippocrates, who was not so wise, not be deceived by one? I will tell you how this happened.!° The very day the lady spoke to him, he found himself so restored from his sickness that he arose and went to court to see the ladies and young women. When they saw him [42] arrive, they rejoiced a great deal over him and received him very well. But the lady rejoiced over him more than anyone else.!! Hippocrates climbed to the top of the tower until he reached the battlements alongside of which he saw a long, thick rope. As soon as the lady saw it, before he said a word, she thought at once of a great trick by which it seemed to her she could deceive Hippocrates. And then she said to him, “Master, do you see this rope?” “Yes,” he said, “very well.” “Do you know its purpose?” “No,” he replied, “not unless you tell me.” “And I will tell you,” she said. “Gatus, the son of the king of Babylon, is imprisoned in this tower, and when he is to eat, his food is not brought through the door. [43] Instead, below there is a wooden vessel in which it is placed and then pulled up by this rope. Now I will explain, dear master, why I am telling you this. If you can see that it is to your advantage, and want me to do as you wish, and you want to come up here secretly once night has fallen, !? I will throw down one of the ends of this rope to you, and I will hold the other end up here. You should attach your end as best you can to the vessel; once you have done so and are inside it, a cousin of mine and I will easily pull you up. Then you will be able to speak to me in secret, for there won't be a soul to prevent us from doing as we wish. And when day!8 approaches, we will easily lower you. Thus you will be able to speak to me quite often [44] without anyone noticing it, as long as you take good care when you arrive that no one sees you.” 9“Consent,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “advise”). 10-7 will tell you how this happened” supplied from Ponceau. 1 The text lacks a transition here. 12Once night has fallen” supplied from Ponceau. 13«Day,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “the king”). The History of the Holy Grail Hippocrates suspected no evil when he heard this, for he did not believe she would ever wish to deceive him. He replied that he was very happy about this idea and would be ready as soon as night came. She said to him, “Come then as soon as the emperor has gone to bed,” and he said he would come without fail. He left at once, bidding good-bye to all the ladies he found there. He returned to his lodging overjoyed because he thought he had arranged things very well. Just as you have heard, the young lady had led him to understand that the vessel was used to lift [45] food to the son of the king of Babylon, who was imprisoned there. But she was lying about this, for the emperor’s son was not imprisoned there, nor was the vessel used to bear food. It served another purpose, which was very shameful, for when a man was sentenced to death, he was immediately put in the vessel and pulled up on high by this very rope, until he was nearly as high as the battlements, where he was left without being moved for a day and a night, until the Romans and people from all around had seen him. Once he had been there long enough to serve this purpose, he was lowered and was then beaten throughout the city. Thus the vessel was commonly called the Vessel of Judgment. Nor was anyone ever put in it for [46] any reason, unless he had been convicted of thievery or murder or some other base crime. That day Hippocrates ate at the emperor’s table, where no one ate unless he was a very noble man or a very good clerk. There he was served and highly honored by the emperor. In the evening, after night had fallen and those who were there wanted to send him to his lodging, he said he would not leave that evening, leading them to understand he was unwell. Then he had his bed made in a room near the tower. After they had gone to bed and he thought everyone was asleep, he opened a window in the room. As soon as he was dressed, he went out and found that the young woman had already come to the battlements of the tower, where she was waiting, having thrown down part of the rope. This made him very happy; he took [47] the rope and attached it firmly to the vessel, got in, and made a sign to the young woman to pull him up. Right away she began to pull the rope, along with her cousin, to whom she had revealed what she wanted to do—how she wanted to deceive Hippocrates because he made himself out to be a philosopher. When he had reached the top, near the battlements, the lady took the rope and attached it to an iron ring inside the tower, so that the vessel could move neither back and forth nor up and down. And she said, “Lord Hippocrates, you who state you are a philosopher, now we shall see what your philosophy can do for you and how you will use it, for if it does not free you, you will remain there.” When Hippocrates saw that she had thus deceived him, he was more [48] grief-stricken than anyone ever was, and if he had not thought that it would be known by others, he would have let himself fall to the ground. The lady left at once with her cousin to go to bed, having done this thing so cleverly that no one had seen her either going or coming. All night long Hippocrates remained in the vessel, sorrowful and chagrined about the fact that the lady had 103 thus deceived him. The next day it happened that the emperor arose so early to go hunting that before day broke he and all his men were already in the forest, leaving no one in the palace.!4 In the morning, when the Romans arose and left their dwellings, they looked at the tower and saw there was a man in the wooden vessel. They immediately thought that it was one of the criminals of Rome who had been caught and sentenced to death. They looked until they recognized Hippocrates. And when they discovered [49] that it was truly he, they were astonished. “Now what can he have done?” they asked. “You can be very sure that he has committed a worse offense than any other man; otherwise, the emperor would not have had him placed in the Vessel of Judgment.” That day they repeatedly asked why he had been put in such a place. But he was so grief-stricken and ashamed that he did not dare look at them, nor did he have the courage to respond. And they truly believed that the emperor himself had had him put there and that Hippocrates had committed such a crime that he had been sentenced to death by the court’s common assent, for if they had not thought this, he would not have remained there so long. All day long Hippocrates stayed in this way in the vessel that was only used to hold criminals. All the Romans went to see him and [50] look at him more than they would any other man who was put there, because he was so close to the emperor and considered to be so wise. Those in the tower were not bold enough to remove him, for they truly believed the emperor had had him placed there. Thus he remained there all day. In the evening, when the emperor returned from the forest and dismounted, he saw that the vessel contained! a man. He asked who it was and for what misdeed he had been put there. “My lord,” said those with him, “that is Hippocrates, the philosopher whom you have honored so much and whom you used to love so much.” “What has he done wrong?” asked the emperor. “My lord, we don’t know.” “Who put him there?” said the emperor. “My lord, we don’t know,” they replied. “Have him removed at once,” said the [51] emperor. “If the philosophers put him there without my leave, I will make them repent it.” Those to whom he had given orders went immediately to the tower and lowered the vessel; they removed Hippocrates and brought him before the emperor. Once he had come, the emperor asked who had put him there. And he said he did not know who did it. “No?” said the emperor. “You know nothing about it?” “My lord,” said he, “no.” “When were you put there?” asked the emperor. “My lord, I don’t know.” The emperor did not know what to think about this, so he said no more, nor did Hippocrates. Then everyone was silent about it, once the emperor had ordered it. Meso early” and “before day broke....in the palace” supplied from Ponceau. 66, 15«Contained,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “vis,” “alive”?). 104 When the young woman who had done this saw that he would do nothing further, she and her cousin acted as if nothing had happened. Then secretly she had [52] painted on a silver table two ladies pulling a man in a wooden vessel up to the top of a tower.!® She had the figure made to look as much like Hippocrates as she could and the other figures made to resemble the ladies who had done this deed. The table was beautiful and splendid, and after it had been painted just as you have heard, the lady had it placed during the night in front of the two statues that the emperor had had placed on high in honor of Hippocrates. In the morning when the emperor arose, he looked at the table and asked Hippocrates, who was before him, what this could mean. “My lord,” said Hippocrates, “you can clearly see my shame and [53} dishonor there.” “Since your shame and dishonor can be seen there,” said the emperor, “it will no longer be there, and I want it removed.” The lady who had done this was with the emperor at that moment. When she heard this, she said, “Certainly, my lord, it can be removed if you wish, but it is more just that it be before the gaze and view of the Romans than these other images, because what the statues bear witness to never really happened, and I know very well that Hippocrates, whom you consider to be a philosopher, cannot bring a dead man to life. In these images that are painted on the table, there is nothing but truth, for the thing is portrayed just as it happened. Ask Hippocrates himself if this is true or not.” He did so. “Yes, my lord,” Hippocrates replied. [54] “And she has done and said so much that if you do not have these statues you had made for love of me removed, I will leave you and depart from Rome.” “Is this true?” asked the emperor. “My lord, yes, truly, if you do not have them removed, I will leave you utterly.” Then the emperor had the table removed and the statues pulled down that would never have been taken down if it had not been for the young lady's cleverness. Thus Hippocrates lived in Rome for a very long time and was greatly honored by the emperor and the Romans. At the time when he was held in such esteem, it happened that a knight who was a very worthy man and well known by the Romans came to Rome to see the emperor, with whom he was acquainted. After he had dismounted and eaten, the emperor asked him where he came from, and he said [55] from Jerusalem and that he had been in the land of Galilee. “What news do you bring?” he asked. ‘I bring,” said he, “the most amazing news you have ever heard about a man of that country.” “What man is that?” said the emperor. “My lord, He is a poor man, but he has such great power that anyone who did not see it could scarcely relate it, for He makes the blind see clearly and the deaf hear and the lame walk straight.” 16and the man was made in the semblance of a clerk. There they left him, without showing it was they who had put him there. And when the lady saw this” omitted, as in Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail “I can do all this too,” said Hippocrates, who was listening to these words. “Indeed,” said the knight, “you can do this?” “Yes,” he replied.!7 “He can do even more, for He makes the mute speak and gives understanding to those who never had any.” “You have not yet told me anything,” said Hippocrates, “that I cannot do also.” “I [56]} will tell you,” he said, “such a thing that I saw Him do that you could not do also, no matter what might happen. I say that He brought Lazarus back from death to life, and it is said he had been buried three days and three nights and more. And he rose from the sepulcher healthy and well as soon as this man called him, for it was done solely by the power of His word.” “In God's name,” said Hippocrates, “if He can do this, He can do more than any man I have ever heard about.” “I saw Him do it,” said the knight, “just as I have described it to you.” “What do they call Him?” asked the emperor. “My lord,” the knight replied, “He is called Jesus of Nazareth, and everyone in the country who knows Him considers Him to be a prophet.” “By my faith,” said Hippocrates, “since He is as powerful as you [57] say, I won’t rest until I have been to the land of Galilee. Once I am there and have found Him, if He knows more than I do, I want to be His minister, and if I know more than He, I want Him to be mine.” This was the occasion of Hippocrates’s departure from Rome, in order to test his learning against Him who was the source of knowledge, that is, Jesus Christ Himself, who at that time was performing many wonderful miracles and so many prodigies among the Jews that it was inevitable that the renown of such great authority spread throughout the whole world. Hippocrates left Rome accompanied by a large retinue and traveled until he and those who were with him came to the sea. At the port!8 they found Anthony, the king of Persia, with a large company of knights, [58] who were grieving so much for King Anthony’s son, whom they believed to be dead, that you will never see such great SOITTOW. When Hippocrates saw this, he asked a young man who was in the king of Persia’s service, “Friend, for whom are these people grieving so? Tell me, may God protect you.” “My lord,” he said, “they are grieving for Dardendes, the son of the king of Persia.” “And what is wrong with this Dardendes?” asked Hippocrates. “My lord, he died two days ago, and the people of the country loved him so much that they are still watching over the body, and they will continue to do so today and tomorrow, it seems to me.” Upon hearing this, Hippocrates dismounted at once from his mule and went where he thought the body was. After arriving and finding the king grieving, [59] he did leThese words. ... ’Yes,’ he replied,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “Hippocrates then said, ‘Indeed, good sir, can the man you speak of do this?’”). 18pory,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “bridge”. The History of the Holy Grail not turn toward him, but went straight toward the body. Once there, he looked it over from head to toe. Not finding any sign of life in it, he believed the boy really was dead. But he had a little color in his face and lips, which showed!9 that he still had life in his body. Then Hippocrates returned to one of his servants and asked for a little wool. The latter gave it to him right away, and he took a clump and put it before the young man’s nostrils. In this way he knew at once the truth about his state, for the boy's breathing was so weak that it could not be seen by a man’s eyes as he inhaled and exhaled. But Hippocrates saw the clump of wool? move slightly, and then he knew that the soul had not yet left the body and that the boy was still alive. Then Hippocrates took a good balm [60] that he thought would help, opened the mouth, and put it inside. Very shortly after this, the young man let out such a loud cry that all those near him heard it. Then they all gathered around him, and Hippocrates said to the king, “King, if you will give me the first boon I ask of you, whatever it may be, I promise that by tomorrow?! I will make your son completely healthy.” The king swore on his faith and everything he held from his gods that he would give him whatever he might ask for, if he had it, to make his son healthy. And Hippocrates said he would make him healthy and well by the next evening. The king swore on his gods and on his faith that he would give him everything he would ask for. And Hippocrates [61] set out to cure the youth in such a way that he was completely healthy and well the next day before the hour of nones, so that all the people said immediately that Hippocrates had made him retum from death to life. And they said among themselves that Hippocrates should not be called a mortal man but equal to22 God, since he performed such miracles. Thus Hippocrates became acquainted with the king of Persia.2> He remained with him in this way an entire week until the desire came over the king to go see one of his daughters, who was the wife of the king of Sur. This king lived on an island in the sea called the Island of Giants, because formerly the largest and most marvelous giant in the world had lived there. This giant was killed by Hercules the Strong, who was a relative of Samson the Strong. [62] King Anthony set out to sea with his men, taking Hippocrates with him. When they were on the Island of Giants, which was five days journey long and two days wide, with a very honorable and splendid city called Corinth and several castles, the king of Sur came to meet King Anthony, receiving him with great honor. And when he met Hippocrates and heard about the great marvel that was told about him, he offered to give him anything he requested if he would remain with him part of the time. The latter said he would remain under the conditions stated. Thus Hippocrates remained with the king of Sur, who had a twelve-year-old daughter, the most beautiful creature known in any land. Hippocrates, who saw her often, fell so 19«Which showed” supplied from Ponceau. 20The clump of wool” supplied from Ponceau. 21«py tomorrow,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “in a month”). 22“Fqual to,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “related to”). 23“Persia,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “Greece”). 105 much in love with her that he did not [63} know what to do. Then he went to King Anthony and the king of Sur; once he had brought them together, he said, “Each of you owes me as a reward whatever I wish to request.” And they replied, “Ask; we are ready to grant it if we can. Then he said to the king of Sur, “I ask for your daughter as my wife. And I ask you,” he said to King Anthony, “to cause me to have this, in order to keep your vow. The two kings were astounded by this request, and they discussed what they should do. “Upon my word,” said the king of Sur, “I would never do such a dishonorable thing as to break my vow toward master Hippocrates for the sake of my daughter.” “I advise you to give her to him,” said King Anthony, “because if you don't, I will give her to him in order to keep my vow, even if I have to kidnap her [64] from you.” In the way you have heard, Hippocrates-obtained the daughter of the king of Sur. The wedding was big and splendid. This was not considered a great marvel, for at that time all clerks had wives, even those who were called philosophers because of the wisdom they had sought on earth, and they were as honored and as high in rank as if they were crowned kings of a large realm. Hippocrates sent far and wide for all his relatives, including all those who were the richest. When they had come to him, he asked*4 his close family members where he might best live, someplace at sea, on a beautiful and delightful island. Finally a sailor®® who was his relative told him about an island in the Western parts and said that if he could [65] live on this island, he would be better off than anywhere else, for in all seasons the climate was more temperate than any place known. Hippocrates was very powerful and possessed a great many riches, which he had loaded onto barks and ships. Then he left the king of Sur, taking his wife and his relatives with him to the island that he had learned about. After arriving there safely, without losing anything at sea, he sent for carpenters and had a strong and well-situated castle built on the island. When it was completed, he had a house made inside for his dwelling—the most beautiful and splendid ever made by man, for the front doors were of gold and silver worked with precious, rich, miraculous stones, while the pillars supporting the house inside were of [66] marble, but the marble could not be seen, for the pillars were entirely covered*® with gold and silver. Wonders could be recounted to you about the beds he had made to sleep in because of the miraculous stones he put here so that no matter how sick anyone might be when he lay down, he was immediately cured. What more can I tell you? Hippocrates made this house so beautiful and so splendid that no mortal man could make one like it. And because he feared that his wife might trick him with poison or venom, he made a cup so marvelous that any poison in the world lost its power once it was inside it, as a result one could drink whatever was in it with assurance. Hippocrates 244A sked,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “ordered”). 25«sailor,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “man”). 26«Covered,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “worked”). 106 made so many beautiful things on the island that it took on his name. Because of him, it was called Hippocrates Island, and its name will never be [67] changed. His wife, who was very proud because of her noble lineage and who deeply regretted the fact that he had taken her as his wife, hated him so mortally that she would gladly seek his death if she could. She prepared venom from snakes and other poisonous animals. Because she was afraid the poison might not cause a man’s death, she put some on a piece of bread and gave it to a dog to eat. The dog died as soon as he had tasted it. When she saw that the poison had such power, she gave some to Hippocrates in order to kill him. She had it brought to him in the evening and placed on the table, but she was disappointed in this, for she did not know the truth about the cup. After she had put the poison in it, Hippocrates took it and drank [68] without its ever causing him any harm. When she saw this, she was astounded. Then she took the cup and began to look at it long and hard. And Hippocrates, who did not suspect anything, asked her why she was looking at it. “I am looking at it,” said she, “because it’s very beautiful and splendid.” “Certainly, my lady,” said he, “you may consider it so splendid that no man in the world could acquire it, for it has such great power that if you filled it full of poison, the poison would lose its strength so that you could drink it with assurance without hurting yourself.” When she heard the power of the cup described, she knew?’ for certain that this was how he had escaped death, which upset her. Then she thought that as long as he had this vessel, he would have no reason to fear her, so she watched for a moment when he was not there. At once she took the [69] cup and threw it into the sea, with the result that after that Hippocrates was never able to have such a good and marvelous one. Hippocrates was distressed by this and often asked his household who had taken it from the house, but he never could find out the truth about it. One day, the desire came over him to go see the king of Persia, for he was one of his dearest friends in the world. So he had a ship prepared, and he boarded with his wife and part of? his household, while his other relatives remained in his dwelling. After setting out to sea, he traveled until he came where the king of Persia was staying, in a castle called Mastic. When the king learned of his arrival, he came to greet him, receiving him joyfully, and he retained him for a long time with him, for he held him [70] as dear as if he were a close relative. One day it happened that Hippocrates was leaning out a window with his wife. In the courtyard below they saw a wild sow in rut. Hippocrates pointed the animal out to his wife and said to her, “My lady, do you see that animal?” “My lord,” she said, “yes, I see it well. Why do you ask?” “I asked,” he replied, “because it would be a dangerous and deadly thing to eat of it now when it is in such great heat. Anyone who ate of it today would die.” “Is this true?” she asked. 27K new,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “felt”). 28-Part of” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail “Yes, it is true,” he said.2? Upon hearing this, she arose from next to him and went to her cook and said to him, “Come here.” The latter said, “Gladly, my lady.” “Do you see that animal?” she asked, and she showed him the sow. “Yes, indeed, I see it well,” [71] he said. “Go now and kill it for me,” she said, “for I wish to eat some of it tonight. Do not fail to obtain it for me.” The cook followed her orders immediately. He went to the animal and killed it, carried it away, and started cooking it. When it was cooked, the lady had the water in which it was cooked thrown into a dung heap so that it could not be recovered in any way. In the evening, she had the animal’s head brought to the table and gave some of it to Hippocrates to eat. As soon as he had eaten of it, he caught his breath and said, “My lady, this flesh will kill me if I do not have some of the water in which it was cooked.” She pretended to know nothing about this matter and called the cook and said to him, “Bring me some of the water in which the meat was cooked.” “My lady,” he said, “we have thrown it out.” And Hippocrates said, “Take me where you threw it.” The latter took him [72] to a dung heap. Realizing he could not recover any of it, Hippocrates said to his wife, “My lady, you have truly killed me. No one can protect himself from woman’s guile.” And then he said to the king, who was before him, “My lord, I beseech you, as soon as I have died, to have me taken to my home, where my relatives are.” The king willingly granted this. Hippocrates died at once in the way I have told you, and the king had the body taken where his relatives were, accompanying it until it arrived. They buried it that day and had an inscription put on the tomb, just as the story has described. Hippocrates’s family remained there and multiplied, for the place was splendid and beautiful, the land fertile, and the climate temperate.>° But the king of Babylon, whom chance brought there, destroyed everything and ravaged Hippocrates’s house, [73] for he hated him mortally. In the way I have told you, the house was first built, as splendid and beautiful as I have recounted. Then it was devastated, as I will tell you,?! but this is not the place, for the story stops speaking about it, since it has spoken enough about it, and returns to the messengers you have heard about. 2%A different version of this story is supplied by Hucher in the notes; this version provides additional dialogue here explaining that the only thing that could save anyone who ate this animal would be to drink some of the water in which it was cooked. 30And the climate temperate” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 31Despite this announcement, nothing more is told about this. The History of the Holy Grail 27. The Messengers Are Tested and Reunited with Nascien.! The story says here that after the two messengers and the young lady who was with them had looked at Hippocrates’s house for a long time and discovered through the writing on the tomb how the wise philosopher Hippocrates had met his death through his wife’s guile, they began to discuss it among themselves. They said this had been a great loss and that there is a devilish and very redoubtable thing in woman, for a man’s wisdom can never protect him against her guile. Once they had looked the house over, [74] deploring and regretting the loss of such a beautiful place, which had been destroyed and devastated, they climbed to the very top of the rock. It was after noon, and they began to look out to sea to discover whether they might perhaps see a ship or galley, for the fact that no one came there worried them the most. In this way they waited all day on top of the rock, more frightened than anyone had ever been, for nowhere did they see salvation or any way to leave the rock—this deserted land where they were. When night? came, so dark and black that they could barely see one another, they returned to the wall of the house and hid beneath it. With night so black and dark and nothing to comfort them (for [75] they were far from any people or inhabitable land, with no food to sustain their bodies), they were so frightened that they had no hope for their lives, but believed they would surely die there if the grace of the Holy Spirit did not comfort and succor them soon. The girl, who was young and tender and had not learned to suffer hardship, fretted to those with her and complained about her discomfort, saying, “My lords, how will you take care of me? The wretchedness I’ve suffered since you first saw me has brought me to the point of death, since I cannot find any help, either from you or anyone else. For love of the One you serve, please find some way to relieve my hunger; otherwise I will now die among you, for I am more miserable [76] than I have ever been. This should not surprise® you, dear lords, for it’s been three days and three nights since I last ate.” When they heard this, they did not know what to say except, “My lady, stop complaining, for it won’t do any good, but with a good heart and mouth call on Him who, in all troubles and dangers, helps those who call on Him from their hearts.” “I don’t know when this help will come,” she answered. There is no man on earth whose will I would not do utterly, if he delivered me from this danger, for I’m on the verge of death here, with no aid. That is why I'm asking for help from those who can help me, either through God or any other. I assure you truly, I am so miserable that I cannot endure any more.” [77] As she said this, they looked far out to sea and saw in the midst of the water a great and marvelous flame 1Corresponds to Hucher III: 73-103; Sommer I: 182-196; Ponceau §283-297. 2When night,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “And a cloud”). 3“Or anger” omitted, as in Ponceau. 107 whipping up the sea and making a storm all around it. And it seemed as if all the inhabitants of hell were there. “Look!” said one of the messengers. “Do you see what I see? It seems to me that the entire sea is on fire and that it’s burning, especially right where I see the flame.”4 “In God’s name,” said the other messenger, “I don’t agree at all. I think it’s a ship with many people inside. It also seems to me it’s approaching and that it is moving rapidly.” “My word,” said the girl, “God willing, we will soon hear news; may God grant that it be good.” While they were talking, the flame had come so close [78] to them that it had reached the foot of the rock, stopping right where they had arrived. “Let's go down, my lords,” said the young woman, “and see what this can be, for doubtless it is what we have been speaking of all along.” They went down the rock; when they reached the flame they had sighted, it had gone out, so they no longer saw it. At the foot of the rock they found an old, ruined ship. Inside there was a huge man, terrifying to see, for he was bigger than any man they had ever seen. He was as black as ink, and his eyes were red and inflamed. When he saw the girl and the youths with her, he greeted them. They looked at him by the light of the moon, which had already risen,> and returned his greeting, but they were very frightened by his terrifying, [79] ugly appearance. He asked them, “Dear lords, who brought you here, so far from people?” The girl replied that Fortune, who was perverse and contrary to them, had brought them there, without any goods or food, so that they would die of hunger if a ship did not rescue them. “By my faith,” said the man, “I came to deliver you from this danger;® I will take you at once, if you wish, and if you will do homage to me.” When the young men heard he wanted them to be his liegemen, they asked him, “My lord, who are you, who requests this of us? For we won't do homage to you or any other person until we know him.” “I am,” he said, “a man who lives far from this kingdom and this realm, and yet my domain encompasses so much of the land and sea that most people serve me and consider me their lord. My power and knowledge are so wonderful that there is no man in the world whose power extends as far as mine. I am so powerful that as soon as anything is done in the world, I know about it. [80] Now you have heard what I can do.” “In faith, my lord,” said the youths, “if what you say is true, there is no man in the world as powerful as you, with the sole exception of Our Lord Jesus Christ. No one can compare to Him in power or knowledge.’ But now please tell us your name and how we may know you better.” 4“The flame” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 5“Looked at him... risen,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “already frightened by his head, which he had raised, they returned his greeting... ”). 6«By my faith .. . danger” supplied from Ponceau. ™Knowledge,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “mouvoir,” “the ability to put into motion”?). 108 “Indeed,” he said, “I will certainly tell you my name, and I won’t lie. I am called the Wise Serpent.” Upon hearing this, they replied, “My word, this is a marvelous name; we have never heard of one more wonderful.” Then he said to the girl, “My lady, I came here for your sake, to take you away from this danger you are in. If you will do homage to me, I am ready to deliver you and take you to safety in my ship.” She replied, “In faith, my lord, why should I hide from you the fact that your name and your gaze fill my heart with such dread and fear that nothing could convince me to go with you? Though I have been and am still in danger [81] of dying on this rock, leaving with you would cause me greater trouble than I have had so far. So I tell you I will stay, and you will go where you wish, for I won’t accompany you, so help me God.” When he heard the young lady’s response, he said spitefully, “Ah, foolish, contemptible, ignorant woman, you certainly love your trouble more than your good! Truly, you are woman, for you seek your destruction and refuse your salvation. Since you do not like my company, I will depart and leave you here, where you will die of hunger and misery, for it is certain you will never find a soul in the world who will come to comfort you. You will regret that you did not do what I ask. But this regret will come too late. “And you,” said he, “dear lords, who are seeking help, will you let yourselves perish as this poor thing is doing, for whose salvation I came and who now only wishes her death? What a shame it would be for you to lose the pleasures of this world [82] so early in life. You have reached the point between life and death. If you remain here, you will die of hunger and misery, and your bodies will not be buried or placed in a sepulcher, but the wild birds will eat their fill of your flesh.” “My lord,” said they, “you have promised us such great things that we believe you can deliver us from the peril we are now in and that you came here in order to do so. We also believe that you are a very rich and powerful man, but our will power leads us to think that we would rather die here than leave with you, for your gaze alone makes us so afraid that we have nearly lost our bodies’ strength and our hearing and sight. We are so overwhelmed by your.words® that we don’t believe there can be a trace of life left in us. Rather, we truly believe that you are man’s death. Therefore, we refuse your company utterly. So you may leave when it pleases you, and [83] we will await the mercy of Our Lord, who does not forget His servants, but comes to help them, wherever they may be.” When the man heard that they would do no more and that they would not do anything he asked, he put out to sea without another word. At once the wind struck the ship, driving it from the rock. And when it had gone a short distance, those watching from the rock saw that in the sea and all around the ship a storm arose, so great and marvelous that the entire sea seemed to be rolling. And if there had been tall flames all around it before, now they were even taller, so tall and marvelous that the entire sea S«By your words,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “our words to you”). The History of the Holy Grail appeared to be on fire. And they heard such ugly and terrifying voices in the sea, as if they came directly from hell. They dreaded and feared this and would have been even more terrified if it had not been for the sign of the cross they made, which gave them great comfort and hope of [84] returning yet to joy. When they had completely lost sight of the ship, they climbed up above the sea to the walls of Hippocrates’s house. There they sat and began to speak among themselves about the man who wanted to take them off the rock. “By my faith,” said the girl, “I have never seen a man whom I have been so afraid of as him, and you can be sure that I have completely forgotten my hunger because of him.” One of the others said he did not believe this was a man like any other human, but a devil who had come in this way to deceive and shame them and to lead them away from the true faith. After they had spoken about this for a long time, they fell asleep, completely tired and exhausted. And once they were asleep, they were so weak from not having eaten that they did not awaken until the sun began to shine? on their heads, which were uncovered. The sun was hot and torrid, as it is around Saint John’s feast.!9 They awoke from their sleep as soon as they felt the great heat. Once they [85] were awake, they commended themselves to Our Lord and began to pray to the King of Kings, weeping and crying, that in His great sweetness and His sweet pity, He come to comfort and visit them in this place where they feared they would die. After their prayers they waited there until the hour of prime, when they saw a small boat land at the foot of the rock, with a man inside. “Look!” said the messengers. “A man has landed. If it pleases God, we will now hear some news that will comfort us. Then they descended the rock; upon reaching the small boat, they saw that it was an old man inside, and yet he was handsome in his old age. They greeted him, and as soon as they approached, he returned their greeting and asked what they were doing there and who had brought them to such an isolated place, so far from any people. They replied that chance, which is very perverse and [86] cruel, had brought them there, with so few goods or supplies to sustain them that they did not see how they could escape alive, if Our Lord Himself did not help them in His sweet mercy. When the worthy man heard this, he replied, “In faith, if you continue this way, holding to this faith as you have stated it, hope will free you. Always keep such hope and trust that He will deliver you, and I tell you truly that He will deliver you soon, for He does not forget those who place their hope in Him.” “Ah, my lord,” said the young lady, “you speak the truth, but He is taking a long time, and we are longing for His help. We are about to die, for we have no sustenance through which we can live a single day.” 9“Shine,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “ausier,” “exert [itself]”?). 10une 15. The History of the Holy Grail “Don’t be afraid,” said the worthy man, “for you will not be forgotten if you do not forget Him who does not forget anyone.” “Dear lord,” said one of the youths, “for God’s sake, explain to us something we want to ask you.” “Tell me what it is,” he said. “My lord, around midnight, [87] a man came to beseech us to leave this rock and go away with him. He told us he had come to us for our earthly salvation, to free us from the peril of death; that his power stretched throughout all regions, on land and sea; and that his name was the Wise Serpent. He was the ugliest man we had ever seen, either on land or sea. For God’s sake, if you know him, tell us who he is, for we would really like to know.” “I know indeed how to answer this,” said he. “You may be sure that this is the one who is always intent on deceiving man and turning him away from the straight road. He works with all his power to this purpose so that he leads those who were created!! in the semblance of the High Master to perdition of the body and the soul. My lords, this was truly the enemy who came to visit you last night, to make you perish. You can be sure that if you had agreed to accompany him, he would have drowned you in the sea, for where he was seemed to be a ship, but it was not; rather, it was another devil he was riding, whom he caused you to see in the form of a ship so that you would board it. But if you had boarded, you would not have been safe, for [88] his word is so disloyal that as soon as he felt your weight, he would have dropped you in the sea. And so you would have perished. Mistreating you thus, he would have taken you away and placed you in the cruel travails and miseries of hell. Now I have told you who he is, so if he comes to visit you again, you may watch out for him so that he cannot deceive you.” “My lord,” said one of the young men, “for God's sake, if you know the answer to what I am going to ask, tell me.” “Gladly,” said he. “Ask me what you wish.” “My lord, for God's sake, will we ever leave this rock? Will the One who will deliver us come?” “Yes,” he replied, “you will leave. He won't delay long if only you can defend your body from the enemy’s first assault. The only thing you need to leave is hope in Him in whom you believe, and He will deliver you if He finds you to be good and loyal servants.” As soon as he had said this, he disappeared so that they did not know what became of him or his little boat, any more than if both had fallen into an abyss. [89] But such great sweetness remained among them once he had departed that if all the spices in the world had been there, they would seem nothing to you, compared with this good odor. Those who remained on shore spoke among themselves, saying, “In faith, this worthy man has greatly calmed and comforted us by his words.” ‘I tell you,” said the young lady, “that I am so completely filled from his visit that I don’t believe there is any food in the world that could have satisfied me!2 so “Created,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “crucified”). 12Me,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “us”). 109 quickly, for as soon as he began to look at us, my thirst and hunger were satiated, and all my misery has left me. That is why I truly believe, dear lords, that this was the one called Jesus Christ or one of His ministers.” They said!3 they did not know what to believe except that they thought Jesus Christ had indeed sent him to comfort them in this adventure “that Fortune has sent us. What can we say?” they asked. “However much we were discomforted last night by the one who wished to take us away, it has been offset by the way we have been reassured by the sight of this man. Thanks be to God, he came at a good time, for after our great fear, comfort has returned to us.” All day they spoke this way, saying that things had turned out well for them in that the worthy man had comforted them so. They remained thus on the shore until evening. When night came, [90] as it pleased the Savior of the world, they climbed the rock and returned to the house where they were accustomed to rest, and the three of them huddled there until midnight. Around midnight, it happened that the young men had fallen asleep, but as chance would have it, the maiden was not asleep, for she was thinking intently about herself, because she saw no salvation anywhere. As she was thinking in this way, she listened and heard such a great and terrifying cry that she was overcome with fear. It seemed to her that the one who had cried out was nearby. Then she stood up and went to the highest part of the rock to see what this could be, for she thought it was certainly a man or a woman who had caused her such fear. When she reached the summit, she saw a great light on the seashore at the foot of the rock. So she went to the two young men, woke them, and said, “I bring news, good sirs. At the foot of this rock there is a very great light; let’s go see what it is.” They arose at once, saying they would be glad to go. They descended the rock, and when they reached the shore, they found a very beautiful and elegant ship, seemingly surrounded with burning candles and torches, and it was full of every sort of riches that one could imagine. On board there was a young lady, the loveliest one could find, or that you have ever seen, and dressed so splendidly that you would marvel at seeing her. When they saw her, they greeted her; and she returned their greeting, asking them what they were doing there. They said they were waiting [91] until an adventure came that would deliver them. “For heaven’s sake,” said the woman from the ship, “it will be quite an adventure!‘ if you ever escape healthy and alive, for no one will ever come to seek you so far away, and the person who might know you are here is not yet born. And yet, because you have been created in human form, I take pity on you, so I will take you with me and let you board my ship. I will lead you to safety, if you do what I ask. And do not believe that I will ask anything of you other than what other people do for me.” 13They said” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 14«For heaven’s sake .. . adventure” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 710 They said they would gladly do what she commanded, as long as it was reasonable. “I will tell you what I ask of you,” said she. “But first, I will tell you that I am from Athens. The city is mine and all the people thereabout, and my hold is so firm over many other places that I don’t believe there is any man richer than I in the world. Besides this, I know so many things about the world that nothing is done without my knowing right away that it has been done. If anyone is joyful and content, I know it. And so when I see people in danger of death and running the risk of losing their lives, I succor them at once, if they have no help, as long as they agree to give themselves up to me and believe my advice and do homage to me. And if they resist, I leave them at once, and they will never have my help, no matter how noble or powerful they may be; rather, I will seek to hurt them as best I can. [92] I have told you this so that if you wish to do homage to me, as the others have, I will receive you in my ship and take you safely to a place where you will enjoy all the bodily comforts and joys possible in the world.” When they heard her promise such a great thing, they immediately began to look at one another and ask what they should do. “My word,” said one of the youths, “if she were of our faith and all we had to do was do homage to her, [would recommend that we put in with her and let her take us in her ship.!° But if she is of another faith than ours and we do homage to her, she would make us abandon our religion as soon as we have done homage, and this is the thing we should resist the most.” The others agreed that what he had said was right. Then they asked the woman from the ship, “My lady, tell us what faith you hold and what we must do if we become your men.” “T will certainly tell you all this,” said she. “You can be sure that I am the richest and most powerful pagan you have ever seen. I will take you with me as soon as you have done homage to me.” “By my faith,” said the messengers, “since you are not of our religion, and you are not a Christian, we won’t pay homage to you, for [93] even though we could help ourselves by keeping company with a man or woman who is opposed to us, any good that might come of it would cause us one thousand times as much trouble in the end.” , “What!” she exclaimed. “Will you let me leave like this? Certainly, if I depart without taking you with me, you will never find anyone who will come to see you again, for you are too far away from people. And so you will die here of hunger and misery.” The messengers said they would rather die!® than keep her company or do anything that might cause the High Master to become angry with them, “for when it pleases Him, He will deliver us at once from this peril and lead us to safety.” When she heard them speak in this manner, she did not delay to reply, “Wretched, unhappy people, consider why you make such an effort to hold to the Christian faith. See what good comes to you from it! Ever since you 15“But we don’t know what faith she holds” omitted, as in Ponceau. 16“The messengers . . . die” supplied from Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail abandoned your original faith, you have not been in comfort one day, but always in difficulty and suffering.” “We should not be blamed for this,” said one of the youths, “for Jesus Christ is an example of suffering for us. He has taught us to suffer. He showed this to us clearly when He came to earth as a mortal man, for He did not stay here without difficulty or suffering, but underwent so much that through His suffering He conquered death and brought our life back to the world. Therefore, anyone!’ who wishes to be Jesus Christ’s servant will never desire anything other than to undergo and suffer troubles, so that the misery of this world turns to joy, delight, and comfort that [94] will never end. For this reason, my lady,” said the youth,!® “we should be more intent on the travail of this world than on its comforts, for thus we will follow our Master.” When the lady heard this, she replied very angrily, “Wretched people, since you would rather suffer than be comforted, I will go away and leave you on this rock, with the result that never, as long as you live, will you be seen again. Rather, you will die here of hunger and misery, and the birds of the air will eat you.” She set out to sea at once without saying another word. And they remained on shore and watched as long as they could see her. When they had lost sight of her, they went to where Hippocrates’s house had been, and all three lay down next to one another and slept until dawn the next day. And when the hour of prime came and they had awakened, they got up. Commending themselves to Our Lord, they knelt facing the East. They beat their breasts in penitence and prayed to the High Master in His great mercy to come to help and comfort them in this peril and not to forget them, but help them as a father should help his son, and deliver them at His pleasure, and give them eternal life. After praying, they began to look far out to sea in the direction where the sun set. It seemed to them that they saw a small object in the sea, but it was so far away that they could not discern what it was. However, before the hour of tierce had come, the object had approached enough that they knew it was a small boat. And [95] by chance it happened to come to the foot of the rock where ships landed. They descended at once, hurrying to get there to see what was inside the boat. When they reached the shore, they saw!® that inside was a man who seemed very old, and with him was a large and marvelous lion, the same one that had been put with Celidoine, and it was the very same small boat. Upon seeing this, they began to look at one another, for they were more astonished about the fact that the lion, which seemed large and cruel, had not long ago devoured the man, than about anything they had seen for a while. The man asked them what had brought them to such an isolated place, so far from people. And they replied that chance had brought them there, and that they would be delivered when it pleased Our Lord Jesus Christ, for they did not see how they would leave otherwise. 17“anyone,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “we”), 18Corrected to singular following Ponceau. 19 aw,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “were”). The History of the Holy Grail “By my faith,” said the worthy man, “if you wish to enter this boat, I will get out and leave it to you for love of this Lord. I believe that, with God’s help, this boat will take you where you will find Nascien and King Mordrain, for whom you left your country.” When they heard this, they were overcome with happiness and said, “Oh, my lord, it seems to us that you know us and our masters well. For God’s sake, tell us who you are, and tell us if you know whether our masters are safe and sound.” “I am,” said he, “a different sort of man from what you think. I tell you truly that the king, Nascien, and his son Celidoine are together in a ship at sea in Western parts. [96] If you want to go to see them, you must enter this ship, which will take you where you will find them faster than you think.” “My lord,” said the young men, “do you advise us to do this? You seem to us to be a very worthy man, and we believe you would not advise something that was not good.” “I advise it in good faith,” he replied. “Since it pleases you, then we will embark,” they said. “And we will not be put off by this large and marvelous animal. But it seems to us that it would be folly for you to stay on this wild and isolated rock rather than coming with us, for once we have left, I don’t think anyone will ever come to these parts to look for you. "20 “I want you to enter this boat and leave me on this rock,” said he. “Do not marvel, my lords, if I do you such a kindness, for be assured that long ago I did a much greater kindness than this for man. Now enter in my place, and I will remain on the rock for you. And do not fear at all for me. Then he left the ship, and they boarded, along with the girl. And the worthy man said to her, “Young lady, if you have lost an earthly king, who was your father, do what you should to have as your father the King of the heavens, who is the King of Kings, and deliver yourself from the bondage and serfdom you are still in, that is, the power of the enemy.” And she said that she would do so, if God led her to a true port of salvation. After these words, the wind struck the little boat, and in a short time it was driven far from the rock so that they were out of sight of land. In this way the small boat raced all day and [97] all night long, faster than any bird could fly. And it continued the next day and night. On the third day, at the hour of prime, they looked out across the sea and saw a ship coming; it was the very one?! carrying King Mordrain and Nascien. When they were near enough to recognize one another, they exchanged greetings, wishing one another joy and good luck. As soon as the small boat was close enough to the large ship that they could reach one another, they hurried to embrace. The young men and woman boarded the large ship, and the small boat with the lion in it turned away as quickly as if all the winds in the world were chasing it, so that in a short time they had lost it from sight and did not know whether it was nearby or far away. 20eyoy,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “us”). 2l-The very one” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 111 Once they had embraced and rejoiced over one another, Nascien asked how they had left their country. And they recounted how they had been shipwrecked and had landed on a rock where they found Hippocrates’s tomb. On that rock they would surely have died, so they believed, but a man whom they did not know came to see them and remained on the rock in their place, and had them board a small boat. “And he said that what he was doing for us was not such a great kindness as what he had once done for man”; so they should not be surprised. He said that their lords were safe and sound, “and he told us that we would find all three together.” “In truth,” said Nascien, “the worthy man was quite right in what he told you,” and it has worked out well for you and for us, for we would soon have departed and gone far away from one another. However, He who [98] commands all things—that is, the High Lord—has reunited us. For, thanks be to Him, He has protected us and delivered us from all dangers.” Then they began to ask the girl who she was, what land she was from, and what®? adventure had brought her with them. And she recounted everything to them word for word, how it happened and from what people she was descended, just as the story has told. After she had told them what they asked, Nascien asked the messengers for news of his sister and his wife. The messengers said they had left them safe and sound in their country, but they were very afraid and frightened for them because they had had no news. “Oh, God,” said the king, “my heart would be comforted so much if I knew in what part of the sea we are and how near our country.” “My lord,” said Nascien, “it is not fitting to talk about this now. When God wishes, we will be certain of it, and if it pleases Him, we will yet come to our land safe and sound. It is completely up to Him, so we should pray to none but Him.” Thus Our Lord gathered together His servants, whom He had so wondrously separated and distanced from one another. They were together in this way for two nights. On the third night the moon had risen, beautiful and clear, and the sea was calm and serene and very peaceful, though earlier they had had a good strong wind. Around midnight they saw before them a castle called Baruch, which belonged to one of Mordrain’s sons and which was at the head of his land near the sea. When they had come close enough to the castle to be sure it was Baruch, they blessed the King of the heavens and gave [99] thanks to Him for having delivered them safely from all dangers and brought them back to the land they so desired to see. As they approached the port, so that all they needed to do was land, they began to look around and saw a man coming after them dressed in a white robe, in a habit like a priest. This man was coming across the sea on foot®4 as if it were flat ground, as fast as any bird could fly. When he had come so close to the ship that they could hear what he said, he greeted them on behalf of the High Master. Very 22eYou,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “us”). 23“And what” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 24¢On foot” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. R12 frightened, they returned his greeting. They were fearful and in dread because they were afraid this was the enemy, who had come in such dress in order to take them away from the true faith and the straight road of truth. He said to them, “My Lords, be not afraid; I have not come for your harm but for your good.” Then he said to Nascien, “You were wounded because you deserved it. The Great Master has sent me to heal you. Come to me, and you will be healed.” When Nascien heard this, he came quickly to the side of the ship and knelt before the one who had promised to heal him. The latter raised his hand and made the sign of the holy cross, then said, “Nascien, arise; you are healed.” And he stood up, as healthy and sound as he had ever been. When he realized he was healed through the sign of the cross made by this worthy man, he knelt before him and said, “Oh, my lord, holy man, God’s person, tell me for holy charity’s sake, where you are from and how you can walk on top of this water without sinking.” “Nascien,” [100] said the worthy man, “I will tell you. I want you to know that I am Hermoine,”® in whose honor you founded a church in your capital city. The High Master has sent me to you to heal you and to forbid you to break His commandment again if you wish to enjoy His love, for I assure you that worse can happen to you in the future than this. And be assured in truth that just as I can walk easily on this water and go” my straight way without sinking, Joseph of Arimathea and his son Josephus, the first bishop of the Christians, will cross the sea tonight, with Jesus Christ’s other people, just as I did, without oars and without a ship, and they will arrive directly in Great Britain, for it pleases the Great Master that by this lineage the land shall be populated and increased.” While they were speaking, they saw a smal] boat coming across the sea, running toward them as quickly as if all the winds in the world were driving it. It came on so fast that it struck the ship head on, so that those who saw it thought it would be smashed to pieces. Inside there was no one. The worthy man came to Celidoine and said, “Dear son, board this boat, and go where chance takes you. The One who delivered you from the hands of Galafre tells you to do this.” As soon as the worthy man had given the order, the child left the large ship and entered the small boat, commending his father and the others in the ship to God. The small boat immediately left again, so quickly that in a very short time they had lost it from sight. And the worthy man, who [101] saw that Nascien was frightened, said to him, “Nascien, do not worry about your son or be afraid. I assure you that in time you will see him clearly, safe and sound, in the land God has promised you and your lineage. Go now to your country, to your wife and your people. As soon as you are summoned to follow your son, don’t be slow; be quick, for you can be sure that this will be Our Lord’s commandment.” After these words, the worthy man disappeared, so that they never knew what became of him or where he went. Then they landed before the gate of the castle, so close that 251ermoine,” as in Sommer (Hucher has “Emgines”). 26-Fasily and” omitted, as in Ponceau and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail those inside could have heard them if they had not been sleeping. At once King Mordrain began to cry out to those in the castle, “Open up! Open up!” They immediately jumped up, went to the battlements, and asked who wanted to enter. And the king said enough to them that they recognized him and knew he was their lord. Thus they descended quickly, lit candles and torches, and received the king and those with him as joyfully as if he were God Himself. That night they rejoiced over the king and honored him as best they could, for they loved him dearly. And before day broke, several messengers set out to recount throughout the land the arrival of the king and Nascien. Upon hearing this news and learning that King Mordrain had arrived safe and sound, the lords of the country hurried to the castle where he was. They féted their lord as much as possible. Thus everyone in the country came to the castle, [102] assembling there within a week. After that the queen, the king’s wife, came to the castle. She was so happy to see her husband and her brother that no greater joy could be told or recounted. As soon as Nascien was rested, having heard that his wife had left his land to seek him, he sent his messengers far and wide to bring her back. It happened that she was found in the kingdom of Meochide. She was overjoyed when she learned that her husband had returned safe and sound and returned at once. Upon arriving in King Mordrain’s land, she found the king and her husband in the city2? of Sarras. She joined them, happier than any woman could ever be, but when she did not see Celidoine, her child, a great part of her joy disappeared. And yet, at the urging of her husband and the king, she took some comfort, once they had told her the marvels that had happened to him. The very day that Nascien’s wife came to Sarras, King Label’s daughter became a Christian and received baptism from the hand of Petrone, the blessed holy man who was a relative of Joseph of Arimathea. In honor of Mordrain’s wife, she was called Sarrasinte. She later became a holy woman and Celidoine’s wife, as is attested by this very chronicle,”° as well as by my lord Robert of Boron, who translated it from Latin into French, after Our Lord first gave it to this holy [103] hermit.2? The two ladies marveled and considered it a great and beautiful adventure that things had turned out so well in every way and that it had pleased Our Lord to deliver their husbands from the numerous temptations they had so often experienced, which they had recounted.?9 However, they®! were never proud or arrogant because of these adventures, but were more humble than before, and with heads lowered, they thanked Our Lord for having helped them so. 27«City,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “land”). 2Bsee Chapter 33. °Robert de Boron was the author of the verse Roman du Graal or Joseph d’Arimathie. The attribution of the translation of this text to him is undoubtedly meant to lend authority to it. 30«Recounted,” as in Ponceau. 311¢ is unclear whether “they” refers to the two women, the men, or the two couples. The History of the Holy Grail 28. Nascien Departs for Britain; His Adventures on Land and Sea.! Nascien and his wife sent far and wide for news of Joseph of Arimathea and his followers, thinking Celidoine was with them. But at this point they heard nothing, despite the efforts of the men they sent.* It grieved them, and several times when they were together they said that Joseph® should come visit them or request words of comfort that might make them more hopeful and content. They were downcast and silent all the time, waiting to see whether God might send them news of their child. They went about day and night with such sad faces that Nascien became withdrawn, completely losing his desire to eat or drink, day or night. He was intent only on praying to Our Lord, in His sweet pity, to make some sign that he knew where Josephus and Celidoine were; “and, dear Lord God, I pray to you not to let me die except where they will pass away and in the very land that our household is to multiply and increase.” His wife Flegetine had told him the dream she had had: how she was told she should go to the land that would be increased by her household.‘ [104] Nascien made this prayer day and night. He made it so many times that one winter night as he slept, a great light descended into the room where he lay, and a voice said to him so loudly that he marveled at it, “Nascien, arise, and go straight to the sea, where you will find a ship. Enter it, and do not be afraid of anything you see, for you can be sure it will take you where? you will hear news about what you are seeking.” That is what it said. When the brightness had ceased and the voice had left off speaking, Nascien rose from his bed and thanked Our Lord for deigning to send him after Celidoine to populate the land that was full of unbelievers. Then he dressed and got ready and went to the stable, where he took a good strong horse. He managed to lead it out of the stable so quietly that no one noticed it. Once he was beyond the gate, he mounted and set out on his way toward the sea as directly as he could. At the time he left the castle it was very cold, and it was snowing so hard that the ground was completely covered with snow, so that he would not have known how to hold to his path if it had not been for the moon, which was shining clearly and serenely. Thus Nascien left the castle, never to return. All night long he rode as straight as possible toward the sea, in order to leave his land and reach the sea. The next day, when his wife awoke and did not find her husband beside her, she began at once to grieve so bitterly that everyone gathered to ask what they could do. They agreed to go seek him far and wide throughout the counuy, for they believed he could not yet be very far away. 1 Corresponds to Hucher III: 103-123; Sommer I: 196-207; Ponceau §298-311. 2“Of Joseph of Arimathea...they sent” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 2 “Joseph,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “Josephus”). 4See Chapter 19. 5You will find a ship. ... where” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. Ii} Thus, [105] most of them wanted to set out. They mounted their best horses, saying they would go after him, and if they found him, they would bring him back whether he wished or not. They left right away, each one taking a different path, since they were familiar with the false turns that existed. One of them looked at the ground ahead; seeing the hoof prints of Nascien’s horse, he followed the trail. The man who did this was called Nabor. He was a tall, strong knight, who had been a slave in captivity for a long time. Nascien, through his graciousness, had bought him from the king of the Indies because Nabor said he was the son of a king. But he was not; rather, he was the son of a vile peasant, descended from a bad line and bad seed. This knight was aged, for he was seventy years old, and he was the most evil in the world. Having set out to follow the track of the hoof-prints, Nabor rode for a long time in order to take advantage of the daylight. He rode a strong and fast horse that carried him so swiftly that he was soon more than seventy leagues away from Bellic.® He had ridden so rapidly all along that he knew he had not lost the hoof-prints he was following. When it was the hour of vespers, at the foot of a mountain he encountered a Saracen who could well have been over a hundred years old. Realizing he was an unbeliever, he did not greet him but asked him directly whether he had met anywhere a knight riding alone. The man replied, “My lord, I have not seen anyone on horseback today except a knight I just saw fighting Faran the Giant on a mountain. I don’t know for sure whether this was a knight or a man-at-arms, but [106] I do know that the giant is from the Foreign Port.” When Nabor heard this, he thought it was indeed Nascien who was fighting the giant, so he left the Saracen at once and started up the knoll as rapidly as he could make the horse go. When he arrived at the summit, he saw the cruel and terrible melee between the two. It had already reached the point where Nascien, who was weaker than the giant, was so exhausted and drained that he could not stand up. He had fallen on his face, and the giant lay on top of him, so exhausted that he did not have strength enough to hurt him. Thus, one was underneath and the other on top, waiting only to catch their breath in order to begin the fight again.” Though Nabor was bold, when he recognized his lord underneath such a monster, he became frightened and drew his sword. But first he dismounted and tied his horse to an olive tree. Then he went quickly toward the melee. When the giant saw him coming with his sword drawn, he tried to jump up but could not, for Nascien, who recognized Nabor, held the giant with all his strength. And Nabor, who had his full energy, struck the giant in the head with all his strength, so hard and straight that he cleaved him down to the teeth. The giant fell flat on the ground, in the throes of death. And Nascien jumped up quickly, happy about this adventure and the rescue that God had sent at such an opportune moment. The text has “Lambis,” a variant of Bellic. “Which would have lasted a long time, had it not been for Jesus Christ’s grace” omitted, as in Ponceau. 114 When Nabor saw his lord safe and sound, he [107] said, “My lord, you have been delivered from death, thanks be to God, who led me here at such an opportune moment that I delivered you from this enemy. Now I want to beg you, in return for this service I’ve done, to return to the place you left last night. Truly, you can be sure that otherwise your people will never be joyful or at peace. Especially my lady, your wife, is grieving so much and so bitterly that joy will never enter her heart until she sees you again. Therefore, I beseech you, for God’s sake and mercy’s sake, to return. Otherwise you will cause us to die of misery.” “Nabor, my dear friend,” said Nascien, “I assure you in truth that I will not return until I have seen the One I have left you for. Do not beseech me, for prayers are of no use.” “No, my lorde” said Nabor. “You won’t return for me or anyone else?” “Certainly not,” Nascien replied. “By my faith,” said Nabor, “when I left my companions, who are seeking you just as I am, I promised to do all I could to bring you back if I found you anywhere and if I had the strength. [108] Now that I have found you, I will take you back whether you wish it or not.” “In fact, Nabor,” said Nascien,”you will not have the strength, if it pleases God.” “T will,” said Nabor, “for I would rather fight you than not bring you back.” “What!” he exclaimed. “You are my liegeman, and yet you will fight me? This cannot be!” “Indeed,” Nabor replied, “I must fight if you refuse to return peacefully, for I won’t break my oath in order to let you do as you wish.” “By my faith,” said Nascien, “the battle wouldn’t be equal between us, for you’re fresh and just arrived, while I’m tired and exhausted; and you’re armed, while I’m completely unarmed. And even if I wanted to fight, you shouldn’t allow it, for you are my liegeman, and I am your lord, and I made you a knight with my own hand. Therefore, you shouldn't lay your hands on me, no matter what might happen, unless I were to commit an offense? that made you fear death.” “What can I say?” said Nabor. “You must return, whether you want to or not.” : “Certainly,” said Nascien, “I won’t, God willing, in spite of all your strength. Go back, and I will go where adventure takes me.” Then he set out on his way, heading quickly toward the sea. But Nabor leapt to block him and, taking him by the arm,!® said he would go no farther, if he had the strength to stop him. “No?” said Nascien. “Will you hold me by force and prevent me from seeing the thing in the world I love the most? By my faith, this cannot be!” 8«That is why I’m telling you not to beseech me. But retum and greet my lady and all my friends and tell them that I will retum when it pleases Our Lord, and that they should not be discomfited because of me.” When Nabor heard this, he was very upset and said” omitted, as in Ponceau and Sommer. 9“Commit an offense,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “use force”). 10Corrected to singular, as in Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail Then Nascien tried with all his strength to pull his arm free, but he was so exhausted from fighting the giant that he was powerless against [109] the man holding him. And Nabor, who was cruel and traitorous and descended from an evil lineage, pulled so hard that he nearly broke his arm and neck. He made Nascien fall to the ground so hard that his forehead and nose were scraped and blood poured out of his mouth. He was so stunned from the fall that he lay on the ground in a faint. Nabor did not take pity, for he was all toughness and treachery. When he saw Nascien regain consciousness, he cried out that he would kill him immediately if he did not return without further resistance. And Nascien, who was deeply anxious about two things—that Nabor was mistreating him and that he wished to make him return, which would keep him from accomplishing the commandments of Our Lord, his High Master—answered, “Kill me if you want, for I certainly won’t return at this time.” “In truth,” said Nabor, “by refusing, you bring grief to your men and your family, who will never be joyful until you return! May God help me if I don’t kill you right away unless you return with me.” “Kill me,” said Nascien. “I pardon you for my death.” Nabor raised his sword and braced to strike him in the head. When Nascien saw the blow coming, he raised his hands toward the heavens and said, “Dear Father, Jesus Christ, be my shield and defense against this enemy.” As soon as he had said this, Nabor fell dead before him, holding his sword in his hand. This adventure made Nascien both happy and sad: happy that he had escaped,!! but sad that the knight had died in such a way that Nascien thought his soul was surely lost. Then he looked toward the sea and saw [110] a great number of men coming on horseback straight toward him. He looked all around to see where he might hide, for he was very much afraid that if they recognized him, they would make him return. But seeing nowhere to hide, he fretted until they came upon him. As soon as they saw him, they were overcome with joy, for they were his men. They held land from!2 one of his castellans, who was Nascien’s liegeman. This man was present, and he had recently become a Christian for love of Nascien.!3 When they saw each other, they rejoiced as much as if they were brothers who loved one another dearly. My lord of Karrabel!4 asked Nascien how the knight who lay on the ground had died. Nascien drew him aside and told him what had happened—how Nabor wanted to kill him, “but Our Lord, in His sweet pity, did not allow it. Rather, He took such vengeance upon him as you can see. It certainly grieves me,” said he, “that he is dead, but since it pleased Our Lord, nothing can be done to make it otherwise. We must keep the commandment and will of Our Lord.” “Happy that he had escaped” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 1244im and from” omitted, as in Ponceau and Sommer. 13«This man was present ... Nascien” supplied from Ponceau. 14«Karrabel,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “Darrabel”). The History of the Holy Grail “By my faith,” said the lord of Karrabel, “this vengeance was just, and it seems right to me that he died so badly, for a man can never commit a greater act of disloyalty than wanting to kill you, his lord.” As he spoke these words, a voice came among them that said, “Oh, man of Karrabel, enemy of Jesus Christ, false and treacherous Christian, why do you judge a man, you who committed a more traitorous act than he last night when you killed [111] your father in order to inherit his land? God will wreak such great vengeance!5 that it will be talked about forever after.” As soon as the voice had spoken these words, they saw that!® the weather had changed, and it became so dark that they could barely see one another. And a thunderbolt so terrifying flashed among them that they were all stunned. Not one of them who was there could remain standing; rather, they all lay!” as if they had died. When they got up again, they found the lord of Karrabel dead from the thunderbolt that had struck him. He was completely burned and charred and stank so terribly that it was overwhelming to smell the stench that came from him. They were frightened by this and did not know what to say except that they began to lament bitterly, crying out so loudly that they could have been heard a half league away. As they grieved,!§ a man dressed in the white robes of a religious appeared. When he saw Nascien, who was especially sad because he knew the dead man better than any of the others, he asked what had happened, and Nascien told him the truth, just as it had occurred. “By my faith,” said the worthy man, “I have never heard of a greater marvel. May it please God to have mercy on their souls.”!9 “My lord, for God’s sake,” said Nascien, “advise us what to do. Should we put them in holy ground or somewhere else?” “T will tel! you what to do,” said the worthy man. “We can certainly see that this [112] is the vengeance of God Himself; therefore, we should want everyone to know what happened, since one and all should take this as an example. I therefore advise not to move them but to bury them here, and on each tombstone let us put an inscription about how they died, so that those who see them might remember it. This is the best advice I can give.” Nascien said it would be done as he advised. Then he called those with them and said, “Dear lords, this is how it is. I have stayed too long, it seems to me, and I must go. Bury these bodies, one on either side of the road, and the giant in the middle. When they are buried, go to my castle Bellic, and tell the Duchess Flegetine to come here and have three towers built, one above each tomb, so that this will be remembered by us and our descendants, and all those who will come after us, and cannot be forgotten.” 15«God will wreak .. . vengeance,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “As soon as the voice had spoken, God wreaked such vengeance”). 16-The voice” omitted, as in Ponceau and Sommer. 171 ay,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “saw”). 18«as bitterly and loudly as you have heard” omitted, as in Ponceau and Sommer. 19That is, the souls of both Nabor and the lord of Karrabel. 115 They said they would gladly do this. Tearfully, they buried the bodies at once, remaining there all night. As soon as night fell, Nascien mounted the best horse there and departed at once. And he told them everything about the giant that the story does not tell here, for it will speak of it elsewhere. ”° Once Nascien had mounted, he left the knoll as quickly as he could push the horse and went as far away from his county as he could. He rode so fast that early in the morning he came to the sea. Upon arriving, he [113] found the good ship where he had once seen the good sword and the splendid bed with the three spindles. Before it, at the entry, was a young lady, the most beautiful and elegantly dressed he had ever seen. When she saw Nascien, she stood up to greet him, saying, “Welcome, Jesus Christ’s servant, the best of the Christian knights! Ah, noble man,” said she, “by the faith you owe the Lord whose religion you hold, I beseech you to grant me a boon that will hardly cost you a thing.” “Gladly,” he replied, “if it is something that I can or might give without harming myself.” “You can indeed,” she said, “if you are such a knight as I believe you to be.” “Tell me what it is,” he said. “Gladly,” she replied. “I request that you carry me into this ship, for I cannot enter as I wish because I am tired and worn out from the traveling I have done.” He said he would do this willingly, if he could. So, taking her in his arms, he came to the water’s edge. But when he tried to board the ship, he could not, for it kept moving away as he approached. When he saw this, he put the young woman down, so astounded that he did not know what he should do. He raised his hand and made the sign of the cross on his forehead. Then he looked and saw that the lady had changed into the form of the devil, which in fact she was. He began to cross himself over and over, saying to the one he saw before him, “Ah, mortal traitor, how marvelously you sought to trick me by coming to me in a woman’s shape! [114] This trick will never work, may it please God, nor will it allow you to take me from the way of Holy Church.” Then he commended himself to Jesus Christ and immediately boarded the ship. Once aboard, he looked at the shore and saw nothing but his horse. But all around he heard such ugly, hideous, terrifying voices that they seemed to come from the very mouth of hell, and doubtless they did. When he heard these devils and realized they were enemies who were watching in order to capture him, he commended himself to Our Lord and said the prayers he knew. After a while he fell asleep, for he needed sleep, having suffered all night long and the day before. As soon as he had fallen asleep, a vision came to him: it seemed to him that a man dressed in a red robe came before him and admonished him to do well. Nascien asked him who he was, and he said he was*! a man who knew whatever one did and part of what was to come. Nascien asked him if he knew where his son was, and he said he was in the land that was promised to them. 20See Chapter 33. 2l“And he said he was” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 116 “Dear lord,” said Nascien, “who is in his company?” He replied that there were a great many people with him who were rejoicing over him and who considered him to be their lord. Nascien asked him about Joseph? Josephus, and the relatives who had left Sarras. The worthy man replied, “They have crossed the sea without a ship and without oars and are in the land that was promised to their descendants and you.” “Dear lord,” said Nascien, “since you know part of what is to come, you can certainly tell me, if it [115] pleases you, if I will ever return to my country.” And he replied, “Neither you nor this ship will ever be seen in your country except in dreams. Rather, you will remain in the land I told you about. And this ship will be nearby until the time when the last man in your lineage enters it to come to Sarras with the holy vessel called the Holy Grail. Before this time this ship will not leave this country I am speaking of, and this time is so distant that it is more than three hundred years away.” “Oh, my lord,” said Nascien, “who will be the last man in my lineage? I would gladly know it if possible, as well as what kind of man he will be, since such a long time is yet to pass.” And the worthy man replied, “You will not know it now; you will learn it very soon, but I want you to know this much: he will be a worthy man in God's and the world’s eyes, and the best knight who will exist in his time.” Thereupon the worthy man went away without saying anything more. And Nascien remained asleep, and he slept and rested for a long time, for he had tired himself out and suffered for a long time. After the worthy man whom he had seen in his sleep had departed, he seemed to return as Nascien slept, bringing him a letter, which he put in his hand, saying, “Here is the noble branch of your lineage, not the one from which you are descended, but the one that will henceforth descend from you.” Then he left. At once Celidoine came before him, bringing with him, one after the other, nine male persons, all in the guise of kings, except the eighth. This one had changed into the form of an ugly, evil dog that devoured [116] what he had vomited from his belly. The one who appeared in the form of a dog was more untiring and unflagging than any other, and yet he was so weak in the loins that it was a marvel he could stand up. The first one fell at Celidoine’s feet; after him the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, and then the eighth did so. But the ninth,? who came to him after all the others, changed his form and returned in the shape of a lion, with no crown. And when he passed away from the world, it seemed to Nascien that everyone in the world gathered around him, lamenting his loss and mourning him. This vision came to Nascien as he slept in the ship at sea. When he awoke, around the hour of nones, he found in his hand the letter that the worthy man had given him in his sleep. Then he did not consider what he had seen in his dream to be an illusion or a trick, but was as joyful and 22“Joseph” supplied from Ponceau. 23-The eighth. ... ninth,” as in Sommer (Hucher has “the ninth did so. The eighth one”). The History of the Holy Grail happy as anyone can be because of the sign Our Lord had given him. He thanked Him with all his heart, for he knew it was through his Creator’s will that he happened to see these things. He opened the letter right away and discovered all the wondrous things that were written there, some in Hebrew and others in Latin. And it said clearly, “Nascien is the first and Celidoine the second of the ministers*4 and knights of Jesus Christ. The first of Celidoine’s issue will be a king and a good knight, and his name will be Narpus.2” The one after him will bear [117] the name Nascien. The third will be called Alan the Fat; he will be a good, religious knight and will wear a crown. The fourth will have the name Isaiah, and the fifth, Jonah, and he will be a valiant and bold knight and will glorify Holy Church. The sixth will bear the name Lancelot and will be crowned on earth and in the heavens, for pity and charity will be housed in him. The seventh will have the name Ban. And the one who issues from him will be the eighth and will be named Lancelot. He will be the one who will endure suffering such as none other before or after him. He will truly be a dog, since in the end, from him will issue the ninth, which will be a turbid river, thick like mud at the beginning; clear and pure in the middle; while at the end it will be a hundred times clearer and purer than at the beginning. And it will be so sweet to drink that one can barely get one’s fill of it. In it I will bathe myself completely. He*® will bear the name Galahad.2” He will surpass in goodness and chivalry all those who come before him and after him. He will put an end to the adventures that will happen on earth where chance and his will lead him.” This is what was written in the letter Nascien found in his hand. Once he had seen his lineage from the beginning to the end, and he knew that this worthy man called Galahad would be full of all goodness and chivalry and that he would mark the end of his lineage, he began to weep with joy and to thank Our Lord for this sign He had given him, which should please and inspire him. As long as daylight lasted, Nascien looked at the writing; he could not keep from looking at it, [118] for it pleased him so much that he could turn his eyes only in that direction. He would not have been so happy if the entire world had been placed in his hand as he was by the prophecy he saw before him, for he knew truly that it would happen just as it was written there. When he could no longer see or make out the letters because of the dark, black night that had joined with the day, he put the letter in his bosom against his chest and began to clasp it to himself just as a mother sometimes clasps her child, in pity and love. And then he began to say the prayers and orisons he knew to Our Lord, and he prayed to Him, in His sweet pity, to keep him in His service and watch over him as a father should watch over his son, whom He should place in the true faith and belief. 4 : ; : 24“and companions” omitted, as in Ponceau and Sommer. 25«Narpus,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “Varpus”). 26-will be a crowned king” omitted, as in Sommer. 2’This announcement regarding Galahad’s birth will be fulfilled in the Lancelot; see Chapter 149. The History of the Holy Grail After this prayer he went to the ship’s side and leaned on it.28 When he had been there for a long time, looking out to sea, he fell into deep, anxious thoughts. For he began to consider why the eighth one in his lineage would be changed into the form of a dog.2? And he began to think about why the ninth one appeared as a lion and asa river that was so cloudy and thick at the beginning and so marvelous and so sweet to drink at the end. He thought so intently about this that he neither slept nor rested, but remained at the ship’s edge all night long. And after he had stayed there so long that day appeared to the world, he raised his hands toward the heavens and said, “Dear Lord Father, Jesus Christ, in Your pity, assure me about what I have longed to know, and [119] show me, Lord, why this one has the shape of a dog, and why this river is so turbid at the beginning, and so marvelous and so sweet to drink at the end. Lord, I have never desired to know anything as much as this. In your mercy, set?® me straight, for otherwise, I will never be content.” After this prayer he took up the letter again, opened it, and began to look at it. What he saw pleased him so much that he had no desire to eat or do anything other than look at it constantly. At the hour of nones he looked toward the East and saw a ship running very fast in his direction. Once it had approached so close that it was alongside his own ship, he came to the side to see what was in it. He looked up and down, but he saw no living thing. Because he did not believe that it could be entirely empty, he left his own boat and boarded the other one, searching high and low until he found, next to the rudder, a man who seemed very old and who had fallen asleep there. Approaching, he woke him up.2! The man opened his eyes and asked what he wanted. “Dear lord,” said Nascien, “I wanted to know if you were sleeping.” “I was not sleeping,” said the worthy man. “But whether I was asleep or awake, what concern is it of yours? This is not the first time you have bothered me, and yet I certainly pardon you this misdeed.” “Dear lord,” said Nascien, “when did I harm you? Certainly, I believe it only because you say so. Whether I knew it or not, if I have harmed you, I will make it up to you in the way you [120] wish, if I can.” The worthy man said he considered himself well repaid by this offer. He had Nascien sit down next to him and began to question him about himself. And he told him the truth. After he had answered everything the worthy man asked, Nascien began to ask him about himself and what country he was from. “I am,” said the worthy man, “from a country where you have never been, and where you will never go as long as you live. Therefore, it can scarcely matter to you if I don’t 287 eaned on it,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “lay on it”). 29«while at another time he had the shape of a lion” omitted, as in Sommer. 30Verb corrected to second person singular, as in Ponceau. 31t1e woke him up,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “he woke up”). 117 tell you. But what are you doing with this letter you are holding in your hand?” “T like to look at it,” said Nascien, “for just looking at it brings me such great delight and pleasure that as long as I keep it in mind, I have no desire to drink or eat. But it would please me even more if I knew the truth about two things I see there and cannot understand.” Then he told what they were and how he was in such great torment that he could not stop dwelling on them. The worthy man looked at him and said, “Nascien, isn’t it folly to make oneself better than one should in his Lord’s eyes, and isn’t he false who wishes to draw closer to the secrets of his Lord than he should?” “My lord,” Nascien replied, “truly, he is false.” “By my faith,” said the worthy man, “I’m saying it for your sake, you who are so naive that when the High Master, in His graciousness, showed you some of the things that are to come in your lineage, that is not enough for you. You want to know even more and inquire about things*? that a mortal heart cannot know or discover, unless it is through the grace of the Holy Spirit. At this time Our Lord has [121] been so gracious as to tell you what no mortal man can know now, except you alone. And you want to seek yet more! Do you believe that He who gave you this power is pleased? Now take care that it never happens that you seek the secret things of Our Lord more than you should,>? for you can be sure that through this you could win His hatred.” When Nascien heard the worthy man’s words, he knew very well that he spoke only the truth. So he felt very guilty and sinful because of what he sought, and he said, “Certainly, one should not be surprised if I sought this, for I am an ignorant sinner and did not know what I was requesting.*4 You know very well that a sinner seeks to accomplish his will more than to follow God or reason; therefore, do not be surprised.” “Do you want to know the meaning of the eighth one in your lineage, who appears in the form of a dog, and the ninth one, who is symbolized by a river, looking as cloudy and thick as mud at the beginning and changing miraculously at the end?” asked the worthy man. “My lord,” said Nascien, “if I knew this, I believe that all my desires would be accomplished.” “And I will tell you,” said the worthy man. “Now listen! The ones who appeared to you in the semblance of a lion will be virtuous and strong, filled with the grace of Our Lord. They will be loyal, worthy men, the pillars and foundations of faith. Because they will lead noble lives, they will be symbolized by the lion for many reasons,”” for just as the lion lords it over all the other animals and makes them subject to him, in the same way the worthy man has the sinner sent away. The worthy man is strong, so that he does not easily fall into mortal sin; [122] if he falls into it by some misadventure, he loses the hope he has always placed in Jesus Christ’s love. However, by the grace of the Holy 32Mfore than” omitted, as in Ponceau and Sommer. 33More than you should” supplied from Ponceau. 34“For I am an ignorant sinner .. . requesting” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 35In the actual vision only one appears as a lion. 118 Spirit that rises in him, he gets up again, stronger and more vigorous than he used to be. The sinner does not do this; rather, he always lets himself fall farther and farther into sin so that there is no way he can get up again. “The fact that the eighth one appears in the form of a dog means that the eighth descendant of this branch will be vile and filthy. Rightfully does he appear in the form of a dog, for just as the dog, after fasting, runs immediately to food and eats it without savoring it, the sinner does likewise when he fasts from good works; that is, when he does no good, sooner or later he takes up sin and devours it. And once he has swallowed it, he has savored nothing,* for if he savored it and smelled the great bitterness enveloped in it, he would no longer have courage enough to taste or approach it, since he would then know what evil and sorrow can happen to man by sinning mortally. That is why I say that the eighth will be a sinner. Therefore, he appears in the form of a dog, while the others appear in the semblance of a lion. Now I have shown you why they appear as lions and he appears as a dog. “Now I will tell you why the ninth one in your lineage, who resembles a river, appears as cloudy and as thick as mud at the beginning and clearer than any other at the end. The turbid, thick appearance at the beginning signifies that he was conceived and engendered in mortal sin by the eighth, who will be hot and lustful. And his birth will be concealed because he will be engendered, not by a mother who is married or according to the commandment of Holy Church, but vilely, as in fornication and in other morta] sin. That is why the river appears muddy and thick. {123] But in the middle of his life he will begin to reign. Then the river will become rapid and fast-running; that is to say, then he will be so full of great knighthood and prowess that he will surpass all others and his entire lineage in earthly prowess and bodily goodness, for he will be a virgin all the days of his life, and his end will be more marvelous than that of any mortal knight of his time. None will be seen again like him, for he will be more gracious toward God and the world than any others, and yet he will pass away before the one from whom he will be descended. Now I[ have told you what you were so eager to know.” As soon as he had said this, he disappeared so that Nascien did not know what became of him. And when Nascien saw that he had left, he thanked God sincerely for letting him know the meaning of the thing that astounded him so. But the story leaves off speaking about him here and turns back to speak of Flegetine, his wife, who was grief-stricken and distressed because she had had no news of him and because of the way he had departed. 36The sinner does likewise....he has savored nothing” supplied from Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail 29. Flegetine Has the Towers of Judgment Built.! Now the story says that after Nascien had left Bellic, just as you were told earlier, his wife Flegetine, not knowing where he could have gone or whether he could be found far or near, remained grief-stricken and chagrined, for she loved him a great deal more than many ladies love their husbands. And yet in her sorrow, she was never one to act foolishly or blame God for sending her such great tribulation. But like a wise [124] and gracious woman, she cheerfully endured all the calamities that befell her, thanking the High Master for what He sent her, be it sadness or joy, and praying very sweetly to Him, in tears, to protect her son and her husband in such a way that, whatever might happen to their bodies, their souls might be in peace and in the sweetness* of Paradise. All day long the lady was very frightened and deeply worried about what had become of her husband and her child. When night came and she saw that several of the messengers who had gone to seek Nascien had returned without bringing any news, then she was more frightened than before. And yet she suffered and endured her great and heartfelt grief so patiently that she did not appear to be half as upset as she was. Thus she suffered inside until day appeared, beautiful and clear, throughout the world. That morning, before she went to a chapel that Nascien was having built in the castle in honor of the Mother of God, the men of Karrabel came before her, greeted her, and said, “My lady, Duke Nascien, our lord and yours, greets you.” And they told her straightway what had happened to the lord of Karrabel and to Nabor, before theirt eyes, and about the giant from the Foreign Port. Then they told her everything that Nascien wanted done, just as the story recounted earlier. After hearing the news about her lord and listening to his message, the lady went to the mountain as quickly as she could, taking gold and silver with her. Right away she sent far and near for workers [125] and had the towers begun, just as Nascien had specified, so that before three months had gone by, they were completed, so high and marvelous that on any day they could be seen. Once they were finished, before Easter came, she had beautiful, splendid tombs placed on top of each of the graves, and on each tombstone she had written how the man who lay underneath had passed away. When the towers were completed, she gave them a name that will never change but will always last as long as there are people in the country. She called them the Towers of Judgment, and they are between Varrachin and Karrabel, right at the border of Egypt, in the direction of the empire of Babylonia. Corresponds to Hucher III; 123-125; Sommer I: 207-208, Ponceau §312. 2“Sweetness,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “birth”). 3“and they told her,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “he told us”), 4Their,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “his”), The History of the Holy Grail Once they were finished, she returned to her county, to the castle of Bellic, saying that she would await her lord there, since he had departed from there. No matter what might happen, she would never leave until he returned or sent her a true sign to go where he was. Thus the lady remained in Bellic, in her country, from around Christmas until after Easter. King Mordrain and Queen Sarrasinte often came to see her and would willingly have taken her to Sarras with them if she had wished. But she said she would never leave, no matter what might happen, unless she saw her lord or he sent her a sign that she would know to be true. With that the story now leaves off speaking about the lady and about King Mordrain, Nascien, and Celidoine and this lineage, and returns to Joseph and Josephus, for it has been silent about them for a long time. [126] 30. Josephus and Some of His Followers Cross the Sea Without a Ship and Arrive in England.! Now the story says that when Joseph left Sarras, he wandered with his companions for many days, going where chance took them, until they crossed the river Euphrates and many lands. Many people stopped them and tried to hold them prisoners because they were Christians. But whenever they were imprisoned, Our Lord delivered them and freed them from all earthly subjection. One night during the winter they lay in a wood, in lodges they had made themselves, after having eaten food in as much abundance as their hearts dared to conceive or their mouths describe. That night Joseph was next to his wife, a good lady in God’s and the world’s eyes, and praised by everyone who knew her. And then there descended a voice that said to Joseph, “The High Master, at whose order you left your country with the large group you took with you, makes this command: tonight you are to know your wife carnally. May such seed issue that will keep and maintain the land that is promised to you. And when this child, who will be a male, is born, he shall be called Galahad. Thus the Arbiter of all things commands.” To this, Joseph replied, “I am ready to do His command, but I am old and so frail that I don’t know how this can be, except that He has said it.” “Fear not, Joseph,” said the voice. “for thus it is to be, since the High Master wishes it.” Then it became silent and said no more. That night Joseph knew his wife and fathered Galahad, who was later such a worthy man that one should certainly recall his deeds and {127} the nobility of his life in the hearing of all worthy men, so that the wicked will abandon their folly, and worthy men, who hold the order of chivalry, may better themselves toward the world and God. Every day they prayed before the Holy Vessel before eating anything, praying to Our Lord to guide them safely to the land that had been promised to them. They 1 Corresponds to Hucher III: 126-133; Sommer I: 208-212; Ponceau §313-317. 1g wandered? until Our Lord guided them to the sea, arriving just as night fell, on a Saturday evening. When they reached the sea, they found neither ship nor galley by which they might cross. They were terribly afraid of remaining there. So they began to weep bitterly and cry for mercy to Our Lord, praying in tears that, in His sweet pity, He would come to succor and help them in this need, for they were in greater need than they had ever been since leaving their country. Then they went to Josephus, their bishop, and began to cry for mercy, weeping very softly, saying,® “My lord, what shall we do? We must remain on this side, for we have neither ship nor galley with us to take us across. For God’s sake, tell us if we will remain on this side, or whether we will cross over, and if this is the land that is promised to us and our descendants, where we are to spend the rest of our lives and do Our Lord’s service.” Seeing their fear, Josephus took heartfelt pity on them, because they had departed from their country, leaving their lands and riches and beautiful households, and besides, [128] most of them were his relatives. Then he said to them, “Dear lords and ladies, do not be afraid before you know why. I tell you that He who has been your guide until now will lead us across in safety, but He will not take all of you, and I will tell you why. “When you departed from your countries, leaving your lands and the comforts of this world for the love of the sovereign Crucified One, you promised to serve Him as sons should serve their father, that is to say that henceforth you would keep yourselves from sinning, whatever you might have done before. And He promised to give you whatever your heart conceived and to deliver you from the hands of all those who wished to harm you. It seems to me He has kept His promise, for since then you have never asked for anything that He did not immediately give you, and many times since then you were held prisoner by many a prince from whom He delivered you. Thus* He has indeed repaid your promise. “But you have badly repaid Him, for when He spoke to you at the entrance of the Wood of the Ambush, each of you” vowed to hold to chastity and keep his flesh pure until he had permission to hold his wife. You know very well that you made this promise. Now look how you have acted. You have kept your promise so well that many are in vile and filthy lust, while others are already so cool and indifferent to doing well that many regret leaving their country. Thus some are sullied with regret and [129] others with lust, because of what they did and because in their hearts they forgot what they had promised. “But whatever they have done ® truly, the others, whose bodies and hearts still belong to Our Lord, and are still as hot and burning with the fire of the Holy Spirit and the ardor of charity as they were in the beginning, and who have since then kept their flesh pure and held to chastity, as 2“Wandered,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “spoke”). 2 “Saying” supplied from Ponceau. 4“He has delivered you” omitted, as in Ponceau. 5 “You,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “us”). 8“and whatever they have left” omitted, as in Ponceau and Sommer. 120 they had promised—these will truly cross without a ship and without oars, and they will be held up by the sea, that is, the world, because they have in them neither dirt nor filth nor stain nor baseness. These people will cross without a ship, for their faith and belief and great purity will carry them across. “And you who have fallen into sin, and who have not watched over yourselves as well as you should have, will have ships and galleys, and you will follow us. Do you know why Our Lord does not want us to separate? He does not want the death of a sinner. Rather, He wants him to live and better himself and to recognize and return to the straight path of truth. I have told you this so that you might recognize your folly, once you have confessed the fact that you have erred toward Our Lord, and no longer remain in it, whatever you may have done in the past.” When those who felt guilty of the sins of which they were accused heard this speech, they drew back from Josephus and began to carry on the greatest and most wondrous lamentations that you will ever hear, calling themselves miserable, wretched, and unhappy. This group could have numbered four hundred sixty. And the others, who had not committed the sins they were accused of, approached Josephus, knelt [130] before him, and said, “My lord, how can it be that we will cross without ships or galleys, while our companions won’t cross with us?” And he said that they would see. In this group there were some one hundred fifty by count, and most of them were Josephus’s relatives. The night was quiet and serene, and the sea beautiful and peaceful, without a storm. The moon shone very brightly, and the weather was pleasant, just as in April, and this was the Saturday before the Resurrection of Our Lord. Josephus came to his father, kissed him, and said, “Follow me.” And then he went to those before him and kissed them all, one after another, saying to each one what he had said to his father. He was about to step into the sea when a voice said to him, “Josephus, do not enter thus, but put’ those who watch over and carry the Holy Vessel in front. Then remove your under-tunic® from your back, and tell your father to put his foot on the length that extends to the knee; after that, call all those you have kissed and have each ‘one do likewise. If they have indeed done what they promised their Savior, they will all be able to stand on the length of cloth, and it will suffice for all. But those who have not kept their promise will not be able to stay there. This cloth will be ship and galley and will carry them across this sea before day breaks.” Josephus did what the voice told him: he called the men carrying the Holy Vessel and had them enter the sea, saying, “Go with assurance, for the power of the Holy Vessel will guide you.” Fearlessly, they entered the water at once and began to walk on top [131] just as if they were on flat ground, 7 Yourself” omitted, as in Ponceau and Sommer. 8The principal medieval undergarment was the “chemise,” worn by both men and women. On the male it came about to the knees. Though one was not considered improperly attired in only a “chemise,” a tunic or robe was usually worn over it; that is why we have chosen the word “under-tunic.” The History of the Holy Grail carrying with them the Holy Vessel called the Grail. When Josephus saw that they had all set out in this way, he removed his under-tunic from his back and put on his robe, telling his father to step onto the length of cloth. He was already on top of the sea, having spread his under-tunic on the water just as if it were land. Joseph came forward and stepped onto it. He called another relative, whose name was Bron,? and who already had twelve handsome, grown children. When he called him, the latter stood on the length of cloth of the tunic, just as Joseph had. Then Josephus called all the one hundred fifty, and as each one stepped on the length of cloth, it grew and became bigger, just as the High Master willed it. An evident miracle occurred, so that all one hundred fifty stood on the length of cloth of the under-tunic except two whom Our Lord did not consider fit for His service, as they should have been. One was the father of the other, and the father was called Simeon. When these two tried to set foot on the length of cloth, after having entered the water, they sank like a piece of lead. Upon seeing this, Joseph, who knew very well who they were, said, “You acted badly by deceiving us. Now it is indeed clear how little faith you have.” Once they had sunk to the bottom of the water, they struggled because they were afraid of dying and therefore had to reach shore. Those who had remained behind ran to help them, grabbing them and pulling [132] them to land. And Josephus, who was holding his under-tunic by the sleeves, began to go forward,!° pulling it after him across the water. They had all commended themselves to Our Lord, putting themselves in His hands and in His command and placing themselves and all their hope in Him. Everything went so well for them that before daybreak they had arrived in Great Britain and saw the land and the country that was completely peopled with Saracens and unbelievers. After their arrival, once Josephus had put his undertunic back on, they all knelt on the seashore and began to thank Our Lord and praise Him greatly for having shown them such a wonderful sign of pity!! that night. And Josephus, who had gone aside a little from the others, began to pray to Our Lord, asking Him in tears, in His sweet pity, to lead those who had remained behind safely to the place where they had arrived. As soon as he had made this request, a voice replied, saying, “Josephus, your request has been heard, for those you want to see will arrive soon. And you can be sure, truly, that this land where you have come is promised to your descendants, who are to increase and to fill the country with people more fitting than those who are there now. Take care henceforth to be strong and ardent in preaching Jesus Christ’s name and the truth of the Gospel everywhere you go. Continue as long as you can, for you can be sure that no matter how much you hurry, you must suffer before %Bron,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “Dro”). 10“Regan to go forward” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. M«Such a wonderful sign of pity,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “and full of pity”). The History of the Holy Grail the Christian faith is spread throughout this land. Now stand up, and do as I have told you.” [133] After hearing this, Josephus stood up, looked toward the heavens, and said, “Lord, your servant is here, ready to do what you command.” Then he turned toward his father and his relatives and said, “My lords, I have wonderful news for you. This is the land that is promised to us and our descendants.!? It is therefore fitting that it be planted with new trees: since unbelief and false religion are firmly held here, it is fitting that Jesus Christ’s faith, which is good and right for eternal life, be planted and raised and rooted here, and that the Saracen faith, which is cultivated and upheld here, be removed.” Those who were before Josephus responded, “My lord, our hearts and bodies are prepared to do what you command. We are ready to die or live in order to glorify the faith of the True Crucified One. Command, and we will obey your commandments to the best of our ability.” He said he would not command anything before he had certain news about their companions who had remained on the other side of the sea. But with that the story leaves off speaking about Josephus and his companions and returns to Nascien, in order to bring his story to an end. 31. Nascien Arrives in Great Britain with the Rest of Josephus’s Followers.! Now the story says that after the worthy man who had told Nascien the meaning of the letter had left the ship, so that Nascien did not know what had become of him, Nascien went to the ship’s side, happy and joyful about the adventure. Once there, he thought he would board the ship? he had left—the one with the rich sword—but he did not see it anywhere. [134] This made him very sad, for the three spindles on the bed comforted him because of the beautiful words and meanings the worthy man had recounted about the boat. But when he realized that he would not see any of these things and that there was no man or woman there who could tell him anything, he resigned himself to it, comforting himself with his letter. At nightfall he? lay down in the ship and fell asleep. Once he was asleep, it seemed to him that the worthy man who had given him the letter took it out of his hand and said, “You will not see this letter again before you pass from this world, and you will never leave this ship before the day of the Resurrection. At that time you will arrive in the country where you will find your son Celidoine; with you will arrive the sinners who, because of their sins, will not be 12*Descendants,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “ancestors”). 1 Corresponds to Hucher III: 133-146; Sommer I: 212-219; Ponceau §318-324. 2“Once there .. . board the ship” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 37 istened and” omitted, as in Ponceau. d2i able to follow Josephus‘ across the sea.” This is what happened to Nascien in his sleep. In the morning when day appeared, clear and beautiful, throughout the world, he awoke and remembered very well what he had seen in his sleep. And then he began to look high and low for the letter. Unable to find it anywhere, he realized right away that the man he had seen in his sleep had taken it. He would have been very upset, had he not thought that this would displease Our Lord. But because he saw that this matter was done more through Our Lord’s will than for any other reason, he was not overly disturbed, but was easily comforted. That day he happened to encounter a ship from the city of Cordova; in it was the [135] emir with a large number of knights and other men. They were armed and were going to war in Greece against the king of Salamander. Upon seeing Nascien alone in the ship, they were very surprised because he was a man, in every way like them. They would gladly have taken him with them, had he wished it, but he did not. When they saw this, they considered him crazy and said they had never seen anyone so foolish. Thus, in pity they let him be; and their lord ordered them to give him some of their food, enough to last him half a year. Then they departed, saying that they had never seen a man go to sea alone as he was, for he had no rudder or helmsman, or anything that might guide him. And Nascien remained at sea, drifting as chance led him, sometimes forward and sometimes backward. Often he landed in a strange place, far from people, and often he was imprisoned by unbelievers, when chance occasionally brought him to shore. And yet, no matter how often he was held, Our Lord always delivered him. Thus he drifted at sea all winter long, until the beginning of summer, when he came one evening to port, as it pleased God. It was around midnight, and he was sleeping so soundly that he did not awaken upon landing. And if anyone should come forward to ask where he landed, I would reply that the History of the Holy Grail says that he landed? directly at the very port where Josephus’s companions were—those who were unable to follow him because of their sins—and they had already [136] waited a long time. Once the boat had come to port, so that they could board it, a voice said to them, “Enter, sinners! This ship will take you to the land that is promised to you. But henceforth, keep from sinning and live better lives if you do not want to be destroyed in body and soul.” Upon hearing these words, they replied, “My Lord, henceforth we will be Yours, in such a way that we will never trespass Your commandments.” In the ship there was a sail that was not set, so they set it. Once all of them had boarded and the wind, which was good and strong, struck the sail, the ship had soon gone so far they they did not see land on any side. Then they commended themselves to Our Lord and began to pray to Him very urgently that, in His sweet pity, He would lead them where their companions had landed. 4“Josephus,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “Joseph”). 5“ would reply... he landed” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. c22 While they were praying, they looked around the ship and saw Nascien, who was sleeping so soundly that despite their arrival, he never awoke or moved. Upon seeing him, a good many of them gathered around him, saying among themselves that they would wake him to ask where they were. “Yes,” said someone, “let’s wake him.” One of them put his hand on his head and shook him. He awoke and crossed himself. When he saw so many people around him, Nascien was surprised, because when he had fallen asleep, there had been no one. Startled, he stood up, greeted them, and asked them what country they were from and what [137] adventure had brought them to him, they who had not been there a while ago, when he had fallen asleep. They told him that some of them were from Jerusalem, some from Galilee, and some from the surrounding lands, and that they had left their lands because of the commandment of the King of Kings, that is, Jesus Christ, to go to a land, they knew not where, but that was promised to them and their descendants. While they were telling Nascien who they were and the truth about their country, he looked among them and saw a knight whom he thought he had seen in the past. After looking at him carefully, he realized that it was Clamachides, whose arm had been cut off and who had been cured as soon as he touched the cross on the shield that King Mordrain had carried in the battle against Tholomer.® Once Nascien recognized him and knew for sure it was he, he could no longer hide from him, but called him by his proper baptismal name, and said, “Clamachides, are you the one who used to hold land from me?” When Clamachides heard his name, he stared until he recognized Nascien, the lord from whom he used to hold all the land he had. Then he embraced him and kissed him and wept over him with joy and pity, saying, “My lord, for God’s sake, what adventure has brought you here, outside of your country? For God’s sake, tell me!” “And you, Clamachides,” asked Nascien, “what has brought you here?” “As soon as Josephus, our bishop, and Joseph, his father, left Sarras, as you saw,” said Clamachides, “I left behind all the land and riches I had in the [138] world, and my household and children, to follow Josephus and his group, until we reached the sea, which we could not cross because of our sins. There we all remained, just as you see.” “What became of Josephus and his companions?” “My lord, they crossed on top of the sea.” Then he told him how and through what miracle. “After they had left, we had to stay on shore until God came to help us. Now things have turned out so well for us, thanks be to God, that this ship came to shore with you, and we boarded it, for we wanted nothing more than to follow our companions.” “Now tell me,” said Nascien, “if everyone with you is from Josephus’s group.” “My lord, yes, we all are, but because of our sins, they had to leave us when they crossed the sea. Now that I have told you the truth about us, tell me how you have fared since we left you at Sarras.” See Chapter 12. The History of the Holy Grail And he replied that he would tell them indeed at the proper place and time, but this would not be before they had joined Josephus’s group. Everyone on the ship rejoiced over Nascien when they learned who he was. They ran to embrace and kiss him, and he, them. This rejoicing lasted until they saw day break; then they got down on their knees in the ship and prayed to Our Lord not to consider their sins, but in His mercy to guide them safely until they found Josephus and Jesus Christ’s other ministers. [139] They prayed this way from daybreak until the hour of prime. After this prayer they all made the sign of the cross, stood up, and began to look ahead. They saw land nearby, and a number of men on shore, but they did not know who they were. Seeing land so close, they were so overjoyed that it can scarcely be told. So they all thanked Jesus Christ. When the ship had come closer to land and they could more clearly see those on the shore, they recognized their companions who had left them on the other side of the sea and were more joyful than before. And when those on shore saw their companions,’ whom they had awaited a long time, they cried out from afar that they were welcome and hoped that God might grant them joy and good luck. And those in the ship did likewise. In this way those on shore recognized their companions. After the ship reached land and they disembarked, those awaiting them ran to embrace and kiss them, weeping with joy as hard as if they believed they had lost them forever. When Nascien saw Josephus among the others, he went to him and made himself known. And when Josephus recognized him, he rejoiced over him greatly, for he loved him dearly. He asked him all about himself and how he had fared since he last saw him, and he did not forget to ask about King Mordrain. And Nascien told him everything that had happened to him [140] since he had® left him and about all the adventures that Our Lord had sent him. He told him so much that everyone who heard him considered it to be a great marvel. All those who had come with Josephus remained thus on the shore that day, giving thanks to Our Lord for having led them there in safety. That day they ate no food, except that each one received Our Lord's body at the table of the Holy Grail. The next day they all ate whatever food was available, and the third day as well. They stayed in this way for four days on the shore, with enough of what they requested and needed. On the fifth day they set out, traveling the entire day through a forest, so that they found nothing to drink or eat, which dismayed them greatly. The following day an adventure happened to them that should be heard in a story. After they had traveled for some time—until it was certainly noon—and were suffering from hunger, they found a poor hut, in which a poor old woman was baking her bread. She had twelve loaves, though they were small. Desperate for the bread, they bought it. Once they had it, great strife and shouting broke out among them, for they could not agree upon how each one would have his share of the bread, since there were MAnd recognized their companions, whom they had left at the sea” omitted, as in Ponceau and Sommer. 8Corrected to singular, as in Ponceau and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail only twelve loaves and [141] more than five hundred men and women in the group. There was such a fight that they all would have killed one another if calm had not been restored. The leaders went to Joseph and said that these people would kill one another over a little bread if he did not intervene. “Certainly,” said Joseph, “it is not because of the bread, but because of their sins, and they are incited by the enemy, who still holds them in his power.” Then he went to his son Josephus and told him that the people were quarreling over a little bread. When Josephus heard this, he was very angry, for he was convinced that it was the devil’s power that had caused such an angry dispute to break out among them. He went to them and ordered them all to sit down on the ground, some on one side, and some on the other. And they did so. After that he took the twelve loaves and had each one broken in three parts. Then he had the Holy Vessel called the Grail brought before the tables. Our Lord performed a great miracle; because of the presence of the Holy Vessel, the twelve loaves multiplied so that they who numbered five hundred had bread in such plenty that they could not eat it all. Indeed, so much was left that it seemed to them that there was even more than the original twelve loaves. Our Lord showed such a miracle to those in Josephus’s company who dwelt in [142] mortal sin. And this miracle occurred in Great Britain, a half day’s journey from Oxford. That day the people were very content. After they had eaten, Josephus began to preach to them and set forth the articles of faith of the Gospel, telling them that this famine had happened to them because of their sins and the devil’s provocation, for they were not yet strong enough to resist his power. “And you can be sure, truly, that if you act as I advise in every way, you will never ask for anything that you won't have, just like your companions who followed me through the sea when you remained behind. They have everything they want, since they serve their Creator, according to His will, but you serve Him so badly that He is not grateful for anything you do for Him.” Josephus frequently spoke such words to them, admonishing them so often to do good that they should indeed have changed. However, they changed very little, for the poison that did not allow them to do any good was enclosed within them. That night the people slept? in a wood, on leaves and branches from the wood itself. In the morning, after day appeared, beautiful and clear, and they had come before the Holy Vessel, where they said their prayers and orisons, they set out on their route and traveled until the hour of prime, when they came to a castle called Galafort. When they reached the entrance, they looked above the gate and saw a red cross. This surprised them, for they did not believe there was a symbol of Holy Church anywhere in the country, since they thought there were only pagans in all the land. [143] When Josephus saw the cross on the castle, he said the castle was marked with such a good sign that they could all enter there with confidence. 9“Slept,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “were”). Is They entered at once, barefoot as they were. Upon entering the streets, they found that the castle was beautiful and strong and well constructed, as castles were at that ume. But they saw no men or women anywhere, which surprised them very much. Because they saw no one inside, they said they believed that God had prepared this beautiful, good castle for them to stay in. So they went up to the main fortress and entered it, for they found no man or woman anywhere to forbid it. When they had reached the middle of the town, right in front of the main tower, they stopped to listen. It seemed to them that they heard a great number of people in the fortress, so they entered nght away. Once inside, they went into a small courtyard and they found a hall; in this hall they found all the people of the castle and all the wise men of the country and the good clerks who were well versed in the Saracen religion. And the lord of Galafort himself was there in a silver chair, having called this assembly on account of Celidoine. The lord of the castle, whose name was Ganor, had promised Celidoine that if he could prove to his people that the Christian religion was worth more than the Saracen, they would immediately receive baptism and become Christians. And Celidoine was to be there to debate this. All the high masters of [144] the land and good clerks were assembled there. And yet Celidoine had already led them to the point that they did not know how to respond to what he had said. They wanted him to give them time to reply and set a date, but Celidoine told them they would not have their day and that they should respond nght away, !9 which was the custom. Nevertheless, because the duke of the castle had requested it, Celidoine had given them until the next day, with the understanding that they would all reassemble there. If Celidoine could not prove what he had promised, he would be destroyed. And if the others could not prove themselves and their religion through reason, the duke would wreak justice on them in such a way that it would be talked about forever after. Thus those who were assembled there were about to depart. As they did so, each one heading for his lodging, they began to look at Josephus and his group, who had come among them in poor clothes. And when the others saw they were barefoot, they wondered who these people were. When Nascien saw his son Celidoine, who was near the duke, he certainly recognized him. He was so overjoyed that scarcely could anyone describe it. He ran to him at once, with open arms, and began to embrace him and kiss him, rejoicing more than anyone in the world and crying with happiness. When the others with Nascien saw Celidoine, they were filled with joy and gathered around him. And he embraced them all, one after the other. When Duke Ganor saw their joy, he wondered [145] what this could mean. Totally astounded, he looked at them for a long time before he spoke. He had them step back from Celidoine and asked, “Who are these people whom you are so happy to see? Your behavior makes it clear that you love one another more than just a little.” “My lord,” said Celidoine, “this is my father,” pointing out Nascien. “And this is the master and minister of Holy 10“Right away” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 124 Church,” showing him Josephus. “And there is his father,” pointing to Joseph. “All of them are worthy and holy men, as are all the others who are barefoot. Despite their poor clothing and denuded state, they are nevertheless rich men in their country. But they have left everything for love of Jesus Christ, who appeared just as poor and denuded while He was in this world. May your clerks who wish to defend the false religion be prepared, for they will all be shamed and confounded before you, as they will never be so bold as to tell lies before this high person,” said he, speaking of Josephus. “Rather, they will all be mute and silent.” “Celidoine,” said Ganor, “since you love them so, go up into my palace yourself and have them served and made as comfortable as you wish today. And tomorrow bring them with you at the time of the trial, for it pleases me greatly that they are here to help you. And I promise you on my word of honor that if the masters of our faith cannot defend themselves against you, I will wreak such punishment on them that it will be spoken of forever more.” Then he ordered his servants to take Celidoine and the Christians to the great palace!! [146] and serve them as best they could, and to bring them back the next day at the hour of prime to the trial. The men took the Christians to the beautiful and splendid great palace and served and honored them that night as best they could. Thus Josephus’s companions were received and made comfortable, for love of Celidoine, and that night they had all they needed to drink and eat. That night Nascien asked Celidoine what adventure had brought him there. And he said that the little boat he had boarded when he last left him had brought him there. “Have you been in this land a long time?” Nascien asked. “Yes,” said Celidoine, “four months or more.” “Where did you stay all this time?” “My lord,” said Celidoine, “I stayed in a forest with a hermit, a very worthy man leading a holy life, who kept me with him since my arrival and gladly listened to me speak about Jesus Christ’s ministers as opposed to those of the Saracen faith.” That night they spoke at length with Celidoine, asking him a great deal about himself and how he had fared. But now the story leaves off speaking of him and returns to Duke Ganor. 32. Duke Ganor’s Conversion; The First Christian Victory over the Saracens in England.! Here the story says that after the duke had gone to bed, he began to think very intently about the marvels he had heard Celidoine describe that day. That night he was so pensive and doubtful that he did not know what to think, until ll«which was beautiful and nice” omitted, as in Ponceau and Sommer. Corresponds to Hucher III: 146-169; Sommer I: 219-231; Ponceau §325-341. The History of the Holy Grail finally he fell asleep. As soon as he was asleep, it seemed to him that he came to the clearest and most beautiful body of water he had ever seen, and he stopped to look at it. After [147] looking at it for a long time, he saw people whiter than snow emerge and leave on a path that he did not know. But he knew this much very well: a cloud descended onto some of them, making them become very ugly and spotted, while the others never changed color. After they had gone along for a while, he saw the spotted ones come to a black and dark valley, where they were taken prisoner and forced to stay, while the others passed through safely. The duke saw this in his sleep and was so troubled and anguished that he woke up. Unable to fall asleep again all night long, he thought a great deal about what he had seen in his sleep. The next day, once day had broken, he arose and sent for all the master clerks of the castle. Once they had all come before him and he had related his dream just as you? have heard it, not one of them could interpret it. Rather, they all responded that they did not know what this meant. “Ask the Christians, my lord,” said they. “We think that they will tell you, if anyone can.” The Christians were summoned to come at once before the duke. They came willingly and humbly and sat down on the ground. After the duke had recounted his dream to them, he began to implore them to tell him what its meaning could be. Then Josephus stood up and said, so that all could hear, “Ganor, I will tell you the meaning you have asked about.” “Tell us then, my lord,” said the duke, “and I will listen, [148] for I would certainly like you to explain it to me.” Then Josephus turned to his companions and said, “My lords, this vision that came to the duke should be a warning to you, for it is clearly a sign for you, and I will tell you in what way. The river and the water the duke saw in his sleep symbolize baptism, from which you emerged clean and purged of all sins and baseness as soon as you were washed, for in this holy water you were cleansed and purged of any sin you had committed before baptism. But afterwards, once we had departed and left our country to come to this land, which Our Lord had promised us, the cloud and the darkness fell upon some, so that we became black and spotted; that is, the enemy struck within us, leading us to sin mortally, so that the whiteness—that is, the purity, the perfection of good works—was erased? in us, and we became black and spotted* —that is, base and filthy and stained with mortal sin. And this was evident at the crossing of the sea, when many of us had to stay behind. Each of you should be afraid of the valley where the duke saw part of the people stay,> while part of them passed through, for this dark, deep valley no doubt symbolizes the deep valley from which no one can emerge. In this valley, my lords, some will remain—these are the sinners—while the others, the worthy and just, will pass through.” 2You,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “we”). 3“Frased,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “placed”). 4“Spotted,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “escarchiet,” ?). The valley ... stay” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail After he had spoken these words, he asked Duke Ganor, “Do you believe I have given a true [149] account of your dream?” “Certainly,” said the duke, “I think so, and just hearing it told, whether it is the truth or a lie, has comforted me more than anything I have ever heard.” Then he said to the masters of the Saracen faith, “My lords, you are to® speak against Celidoine, to prove that man could not be born from the one whom the Christians call the Virgin Mary, mother of Jesus Christ, in such a way that she would be a maiden before and afterwards. Now we will see what proof you will offer so that the Christians will be unable to respond.” Immediately, one of the masters of the faith stood up, the wisest of their clerkly order in all the land. Because of his knowledge, he was called Lucan the Philosopher. When he turned toward Josephus to speak against him, Josephus said right away, “Oh, Lucan, be careful not to tell a lie about this lady called the Blessed Mother of Jesus Christ, for you can be sure that if you do, you will repent of it before you leave here.” “I won't say anything,” said the latter, “that I do not know for a fact or see clearly, for no one can deny that no woman ever carried a child without being deflowered at conception and suffering great pain at childbirth.” “In the name of God,” said Josephus, “in this beginning you have basely lied; thus I pray to this lady whom you are slandering with your lies, trying to turn them into the truth, that if she was a virgin at conception and at childbirth, may she not let you speak another word against her.” [150] After he had said this, the man called Lucan began immediately to bray and bellow just like a bull and to die in the most hideous way possible. He took hold of his tongue with both hands and began to tear it apart with his nails and pull it out of his mouth. After this terrible thing, he fell dead on the ground, never moving again. Upon seeing this, Ganor was so frightened and filled with dread that he could no longer bear to see the man before him, so he had him thrown out of the palace. And then he said to Josephus, “Master of Holy Church, your words have frightened me so much that I don’t know what to say except that if you wish to show me clearly how this Virgin could conceive and give birth while remaining a virgin at all times, I will do whatever you advise.” “Certainly,” said Josephus, “I will show you clearly, by telling you about something you saw’ when you were a child. I was not yet conceived, and would not be for a long time. You never revealed this anywhere, for you were more afraid of it than you ever were of anything, and you still remember it, just as if it had happened to you yesterday.” At these words the duke began to laugh, and Josephus looked at him and asked him why he was laughing. “I am laughing,” he said, “because you are telling tales as boldly as if I were not here.” “How am I telling tales?” asked Josephus. 6 Know and” omitted, as in Ponceau and Sommer. Topy telling you about something you saw” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 125 “You say you were not born when this happened to me, and yet you know it well,” he said. “So I ask you how this could [151] be.” “By my faith,” said Josephus, “it is no wonder that I know it, for He who knows everything has revealed it to me, and I will make it known to you. If He did not know everything, He could not reveal what you have done, for no mortal man saw it, nor did you ever reveal it to anyone on earth. And yet I will tell you everything word for word, just as it happened to you. “It is true that you were born in Galilee, and you were begotten by a poor cowherd, who set you to watch over the animals as soon as you were four years old. In the summer, in the month of May, it happened that you were watching over your animals in a field called Tarcis Field. It was a Tuesday, and you had gone under a rosebush to escape the hot weather. Once you were seated there resting, you saw a tall and wondrous lily beside you. After you had looked at it for a while, it seemed to you that the rosebush stemmed from it, just as one tree can stem from another. There were many roses on the rosebush, but they weren’t very beautiful. You began to look all around to see why they were so ugly. You saw that the lily was the reason, for from the lily there emerged a thick reddish dew, which spread over the rosebush so that the roses fell to the ground, rotten and withered. Once they had fallen and none remained, you saw another one emerge, so beautiful and marvelous that you had never seen its equal. This rose stayed on the rosebush for nine days,’ constantly growing and getting larger and more beautiful. Because of the great wonder it caused in you, you came to the rosebush every day and looked at the rose as long as you could, watching over it so [152] that no animal or any other thing could carty it off. And you know very well that it was never in full bloom, but always tightly closed, just like a rosebud. And the fact that it never bloomed was the thing that astonished you more than anything else. “On the ninth day!® you happened to be next to the rosebush, wounded in your thigh by a boar and so sick that you could move only with great difficulty. When it was noon, you began to look at the rose, and you saw that it was a hundred times redder than any other, and that it was larger than a hundred roses!! in full bloom. As you looked at it, you saw something emerging from the rose; you could not easily tell what, and yet it had the form and shape of a man. However, you know very well that the rose never opened, despite what emerged, but stayed closed at all times. After the emerging figure had moved a little on the ground, suddenly a serpent appeared before him and tried to devour him. But he fought until he killed the serpent, then quickly went to the lily and the flowers that had fallen, took them, and carried them away with him. “This astonished you so much that you forgot about your wound. You arose and said that you did not know whether what you had seen was true or an illusion, and you 8“Dew,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “large rose”). *“Days,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “months”). 10Day,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “month”). Nand that it was was larger... roses” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 126 thought you would go to the rose to see what was inside. So you went and picked it from the rosebush and began to kiss it. As soon as you had kissed it, [153] your wound was healed, and you felt whole; and you were filled with great sweetness and delight, as if you were not a mortal man. As you held the rose and tried to open it, a man descended from the heavens as if in flames. He came before you faster than anyone could imagine, took the rose from you, and said you should not keep the symbol of the Virgin, since you were not of her faith. These words made you more afraid than you had ever been since the moment you were born, and this was the fear I spoke to you about. Now I have told you what happened to you, when you were a small shepherd, only five years old.” When the duke heard this, he fell at Josephus’s feet and said, “Oh, minister of Holy Church, now I recognize indeed by what you have told me that you are the wisest man in the world. In the name of the One in whom you believe, tell me what this can mean, for certainly nothing I have seen has caused me such great wonder or such great desire to comprehend as this. For God’s sake, reveal the truth to me, if you know it.” “Duke Ganor,” said Josephus, “T will tell you, but if you do not act upon what I tell you, you will repent of it more than of anything you have ever done. Now listen to me, and I will tell you the meaning of the lily and the rose. “The lily you saw before the rosebush, from which the rosebush!2 stemmed, symbolizes Eve, our first mother, who was the beginning and root of our lineage and of this world. The sin she committed as soon as she was in the Paradise of Delight, through which all sorrow and misery were given as an inheritance to her lineage [154] and the branch that descended from her, is symbolized by the sweet water that fell from the heavens!? and made the roses wither on the rosebush. Our first mother was rightly represented in the semblance of a lily, for she was a virgin and pure in body without corruption, and she fell into sin through!* disobedience. “By the roses you should understand the prophets, the worthy men who lived before the Passion of Jesus Christ, who paid for our original mother’s sin! by being thrown down into hell and into the devil’s power, just as if they were the most traitorous men in the world. By the rosebush you should understand the world, for just as the rosebush pricks and scratches those who grasp it, so does the world, for it pricks and scratches those who grasp it so tightly that they delight only in the things of the world. Those who think only about delights and worldly things, so that they forget the glorious inheritance of the heavens, are indeed pricked deeply and are tied and bound with the enemy’s bonds. Those who do not wish to keep the rich stone, but look to the swine’s garbage and left-overs, are quite blind. “By the roses that fell from the rosebush and dried out and withered, you should understand the prophets and 12“Rosebush,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has ‘“lily”). 13Though this does not correspond to the vision, all the editions have this reading. 14“Through,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “without”). 15Corrected to singular, as in Ponceau and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail worthy men who, because of the first mother’s sin,!® were thrown down into hell as soon as they left the world. And they remained in this sorrowful prison until the True Flower, the Flower of Flowers—that is, Our Lady—came to the rosebush. She was more beautiful than any other maiden; by His great goodness He was incarnated in her in such a way that her virginity [155] was neither harmed nor damaged. Thus it happened that He emerged just as effortlessly as He entered, so that she was neither debased nor violated at childbirth any more than at conception. Thus she was a maiden before and afterwards; she was exactly the same at conception as at childbirth,” just like the rose you saw on the rosebush. “After He was born—He who was the King of Kings, and who is and always will be—He lived for thirty-two years in such apparent poverty that the enemy did not recognize Him, but believed He was a mortal man like any other and tested Him in three ways. But he found Him so set against him that he could not bend Him at all. Finally, thinking he could win Him over, he had Him put on the cross to suffer the anguish of death by his machinations. But because He was God, He was not afraid; rather, He rose again on the third day and descended to hell, delivered those who had been wrongly put in this sorrowful prison, and led them to His glory. This was the figure you saw emerge from the rose and fight the serpent, by which you should understand the enemy against whom He fought so much on earth. Or if you wish, by the serpent you can understand death, against which He fought on the cross, when He vanquished it by dying. For by dying!® he vanquished death and brought joy back to the world. “Thus, as I have said, the blessed lady who carried the Son of God is called the Virgin Mary, for she was whole and closed before and afterwards, just like the rose you saw, where all other women must be open. And to convince you more [156] about this, the voice said to you, ‘This is the symbol for the blessed Virgin Mary, which you should not have with you because you have not been washed in the holy river or in the sweet water called baptism.’ Duke Ganor, now I have told you the meaning of what you saw. Tell me if you think I have told the truth.” “Certainly,” said the duke, “you have told me so much that I see very well that the wise men of our faith, whom we call philosophers, are gathered here to discomfit truth and put forward perfidy and falsity. You have put great joy in my heart by telling me what I had an inexpressible desire to know.” Then he turned to his clerks and said, “Do you wish to say that this lady called Mary, who carried the prophet called Jesus Christ, could not conceive and give birth to Him while remaining a virgin?” “My lord,” said they, “we wouldn’t dare deny it. What you clearly saw leads us to certainty and forces us to believe it. Your words and his have led us to the point that we no 16“Recause of the first mother’s sin,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “who paid so dearly for the first mother’s sins that they”). 17For she was never deflowered or violated, but” omitted, as in Ponceau. 18For by dying” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail longer wish to be subject to the pagan religion, but to the Christian faith. Thus you can do with us what you wish, because even if we were threatened with death, we would never again worship anything other than one God, the One who is called Jesus Christ.” Then they went down on their knees at Josephus’s!® feet and requested baptism. When he heard them speak this way, he wept with pity and joy. He raised them up and granted what they asked. [157] Then he spoke to Duke Ganor, “Good Duke Ganor, do you wish to do as the masters of the faith have?”2° “My lord,” said he, “even if they had refused baptism, I would have requested it, for I don’t need to do so for their sake, but for mine. I ask it of you with Christian mouth and heart, and I would do so even if my men did not wish to do it.” At these words, a great hue and cry arose in the palace, because most of those who had heard Josephus speak wanted to be baptized, which made him very happy. At once Josephus had a large tub prepared and filled with water, and blessed it with his hand. Then he baptized the duke and everyone who requested it, so that before the hour of nones had passed, a thousand or more men and women had been baptized. When evening came, the duke had all those who did not wish to become Christians removed from his court. Those in his court and castle who refused Christianity numbered no more than one hundred fifty. The duke, who did not want to change his name because it seemed beautiful to him and because his father had had the same name, told those who did not want to be Christians to leave his land. And they said they would gladly do so. They went to the Humber, which flowed around the castle. When they reached the shore, they found a ship with sailors in it who were awaiting those who wanted to cross. They boarded the ship to cross, persuading the sailors to take them to another land. Once they were on board and the sailors had taken them out a short distance from shore, a [158] strong wind came up, capsizing the ship, so that everyone perished— both those who had refused to be Christians and the sailors who were on board. That night Ganor rejoiced and feasted with Josephus and all those who were with him. They spoke at length about those who had left, refusing Christianity. The duke asked Josephus, “My lord, what do you think will become of those who left?” “I tell you,” replied Josephus, “that they will all be back in your land tomorrow. I also tell you that what happened to them today will be of great comfort to you and will make your faith firmer. You have never seen a greater wonder than what will happen tomorrow when you see them.” The duke was frightened by this and would gladly have asked Josephus what adventure was to come, had he not thought it would annoy him, but because of this, he let the matter drop. When the light of day gave way to the darkness of night, they went to bed and rested until the next day. 194and the king’s” omitted, as in Ponceau. 204s the masters of the faith have” supplied from Ponceau. we 7, The next day, as soon as the duke had risen, a frightened youth brought news that did not surprise*! him. The youth came before him, saying, “My lord, I have marvels to tell.” “What is it?” asked the duke. “Tell me.” “By my faith, all those who left here last night, not wishing to be converted to Christianity, lie drowned and dead on shore under the castle’s tower.” When the duke heard this news, he left his palace and went down to the shore [159] to find out whether this was the truth or not. Upon arriving, he found the castle’s inhabitants gathered there to see the marvel. When they saw him coming, they made way for him and welcomed him respectfully, telling him about those who lay dead on the shore. After examining them and realizing that a great many had died, the duke asked those who were there how many people had left, “who did not want to do as we did.” “My lord,” said a knight who was next to him, “I heard from people in the group that they numbered one hundred fifty.” “Have someone see how many there are,” said the duke. They counted them right away and found that no one was missing—that all one hundred fifty were there. And with them were two of the sailors, still holding the oars in their hands. Because of this marvel, the duke summoned Josephus, going in person to seek him and his companions. Josephus and his companions came immediately; after they had seen those who had perished in this way, with no survivors, the duke asked Josephus what this could be. “What is this?” said Josephus. “It is as it should be. You will never see a sinner better rewarded for serving the devil. When he has served him all his life and thinks he has gotten the better of him, then the devil comes and kills him, causing him to die in mortal sin, so that his body and soul are lost.” “My lord,” said the duke, “what do you advise us to do [160] with the bodies?” “T will indeed tell you,” Josephus replied. “We will have them buried in this plain next to shore. Once they are buried, you will have a high and marvelous tower built over the bodies. When the tower is done, it will be called the Tower of Marvels. Do you know why? I will tell you. “In this land, which is called Great Britain, there will be a king whose name will be Arthur, who will be so valiant and full of chivalry that it will be a wonder. At this time, by the blow of a single sword, adventures so great and marvelous will happen that everyone will consider them wondrous. These adventures will last twenty-four years, and they will end only through the last person in Nascien’s line. As long as these marvels that I am telling you about last, this tower will remain standing, so marvelous and fit that no knight from the court of this King Arthur will ever come asking to joust or do battle without meeting with a knight as good as he is. And however many knights may come from outside, just as many will come from within, without anyone knowing where they come from, until the one who will put 21 Corrected to singular, as in Ponceau. 128 an end to the adventures pursues them. That is why -the tower will be called the Tower of Marvels. “Now have them buried just as I have told you, and have the tower begun and completed. I tell you truly that I have not said anything that will not happen just as I have predicted.”2? The duke said he would have it built immediately. He had the bodies buried at once and sent for carpenters and masons and had work begun on the tower. When it was finished, he had it called the Tower of Marvels, a name which it kept until [161] Lancelot breached the tower and knocked it down because of Mordred’s two sons, who were driven there with all their army, just as the Chronicle of the House of King Arthur tells.?° While they were building this tower, the duke had a chapel founded in honor of Our Lady, in the middle of the castle. Before the chapel was completed, Joseph’s wife’s term came. When she was delivered of the fruit of her womb, they saw it was a boy, and they called him Galahad. Everyone in his family rejoiced over his birth, as did the inhabitants of the castle and everyone else. And because he was born in this castle, they called it Galafort. When the duke’s neighbors found out that he had gone over to the Christian religion, they were very surprised. Many began to make war on him and sent messengers to tell him they would not leave him a foot of land. And he replied to the messengers who brought this news that he would maintain his land as best he could against those who wished to hurt him, for he would never return to the pagan religion, even if they were to kill him. When those around him heard this, they told the king of Northumberland, from whom they held their fiefs and their lands. Coming before this noble, they told him that the duke deserved to lose his land and be dishonored, for he had left the pagan faith to become a Christian. This made the king of Northumberland very angry, for he knew that Duke Ganor was [162] a good knight, the most feared of all the knights one could find in all of Great Britain. Therefore, he asked his lords what to do. They said, “My lord, send for him to come to you. If he comes and refuses anything you want, we advise that he be killed. If he doesn’t come, march against him with your army and destroy him and the Christians, so that Christianity cannot take root in this country.” The king did as they advised. He sent a message to the duke summoning him as his liegeman to come to speak to him without fail; if he refused, he could be sure he would be shamed and destroyed. When the duke heard this order, he was very frightened because he was well aware that the king was a powerful man, with both friends and land. He went to Josephus and asked his advice. “I will tell you what to do,” said Josephus. “Send him a message straightway that you are not his liegeman, for you have renounced his subjection and all other authority except that of Jesus Christ, whom you have made your 22 “That will not happen ... predicted” supplied from Ponceau. 23For the battle between Lancelot and Mordred’s sons, see The Death of Arthur, Chapter 25. The History of the Holy Grail Father and Lord and from whom you will hold your land henceforth; nor do you want to hold it from anyone else. And if he does not agree to this,24 but is so foolhardy and presumptuous as to march against you with an army, do not be afraid, for you can be sure that Our Lord will help you and give you victory over him, no matter how many unbelievers come. And if it came to death, it would be better for you to die defending the faith of Our Lord against the unbelievers than to live and be with those who are worse than dogs. This is my advice, and you will follow it [163] if you wish to be Jesus Christ’s heir and a son of Holy Church. And if you do otherwise, Jesus Christ will have gained a bad knight and servant in you.” “My lord,” said the duke, “I will do as you have advised, for it will not be otherwise.” The king then returned to the messengers and said, “My lords, you can tell your king that [ will not go to him; if he wants to speak to me, he should come here, for I will do nothing for him as long as he holds to the pagan faith.” “What!” said the messengers. “Don’t you hold your land from him? And you won’t go to him!” ‘[ hold nothing from him or any other man except Jesus Christ,” the duke replied. “But from Him I hold and want to hold everything I have, and for His love, I have denied all other authority.” “By my faith,” said the messengers, “if you don’t come, you can be sure that you will see before this castle great numbers of armed men, all of whom will be your mortal enemies.” “If they are my enemies,” said the duke, “and God is my friend, I have no reason to fear their power or their forces.” Thereupon the messengers left and came to their lord. After they had told him everything they had learned from the duke, he was more than a little chagrined. And he made it clear by sending his messengers throughout all the lands, telling his men far and wide to assemble with as many forces as they could, equipped with arms and horses, at a city called Escose. On the day he had set, his men came to the place he had specified. The king set out immediately with five thousand men, on foot and on horseback; they traveled until they reached the [164] Humber. They crossed over and went along the plain straight to Galafort. On the day they came before the castle Josephus and his followers were not there, for they had gone a half day’s travel away to a castle called Caleph. When the duke saw the king setting up camp2° near his castle, he was not happy, but very sorrowful, as he had never been besieged without being able to go forth to meet the enemy, for he had been and still was one of the best knights in the world, and one of the most confident, fearless, and dauntless. The castle was well supplied with men, for as soon as the Christians had learned that the king intended to start a war against the duke, they thought that, whatever the outcome, be it peace or war, they would be safer inside the castle, since it was a stronghold, than outside. They were *4Aand if... this” supplied from Ponceau. «Setting up camp,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “was following him”). The History of the Holy Grail much comforted by this thought. When the Christians had come, bringing what they could to equip the castle, the duke felt more confident. Once the king had come before the castle, he began to set up camp as if he thought those inside would never issue forth. The duke leaned out the window and began to look at the men, thinking very intently. After some time, he looked up and saw Nascien. Having heard many good things about him, including his prowess, he cherished him and held him dear. Then he said to him, “My lord, what shall we do? Will we let this wretched people, these enemies of Jesus Christ, camp so close to us?” “Certainly not,” said Nascien, “if you don’t want to.” {165} “If you advise me that it would be a good thing to do,” said the duke, “I will have my men arm themselves quickly, mount up, and engage them in battle before they have finished setting up camp. Most important, I think we’ll find them less prepared now, for they don’t expect us to sally forth now.” “Certainly, my lord,” Nascien answered, “I advise that we do this. Let us go forth in Jesus Christ’s name; may He be our protection and defender against His enemies. And we should be even more confident on this occasion than any other, for if we were to die in this battle, our souls would be saved, since we would be martyred for Jesus Christ and for defending His faith and maintaining Holy Church. I have great faith that Our Lord will help us against this cursed people. If we are victorious over them, it will be to the glory and honor of Our Lord, while we should be considered terrible cowards and cravens if we let them set up camp in peace.” When the duke heard this, he was as happy as could be. He cried out at once to his men, “To arms! Let's go forth!” As soon as the order was issued, the men ran immediately to arm themselves, and they brought good strong arms to the duke and Nascien. Once Duke Ganor and Nascien were armed, they went down from the palace, mounted their horses, which were ready in the courtyard, and rode through the city until they reached the castle’s gate. The duke ordered the gate opened so they could go out. [166] Once it was open, he went out first, followed by all the others. And he himself was at the forefront, with Nascien beside him, both mounted more splendidly than anyone else. Seeing that they were free to charge wherever they wished, they spurred toward their enemies, who were intent only on setting up camp so that they were not on their guard. The men defending the castle did this in order to take the enemy more completely by surprise. Once upon them, they began to fell and strike down the enemy so mercilessly that in short order they left more than two hundred dead, wounded, or bleeding. Meanwhile, the other knights who had followed them out of the castle began to fight so fiercely, once they had come upon the enemy, that they injured and killed a great many of the men from Northumberland. Throughout the enemy army, a hue and cry rang out so loudly from those who were fighting, those who lay wounded to death, and those who saw themselves in peril of death that one could not have heard God’s thunder. Those 129 who had the ume to arm themselves did so quickly. The king of Northumberland himself threw a hauberk on his back and put on his helmet, arming himself as best he could. Fearing for their lives, all the others did likewise. The king and all his retinue and his most trusted men mounted. “Follow me,” he said, “for if I can find Ganor, the Chrisuan God won’t keep me from killing him!” Then he rushed among the Christians, wherever he found them, and began to deal such great blows all around and inflict harm with all his might, that it was [167] a marvel to see. The king went back and forth through the thick of the battle, looking untl he saw Nascien, who was performing wonders. He was slaughtering so many to the right and left that anyone who saw him would be afraid. No matter how great the press of pagans and despite their resistance, Nascien rushed in among them, dealing such mighty blows—I do not know whether it was because of his strength or Jesus Christ’s grace—that he pierced with his sword every man he found, no matter how hard his helmet or how strong his hauberk. Everywhere he went, he performed such marvels that only the strongest waited for his blow. After watching Nascien’s deeds, the king said this was not a mortal man but the enemy. And Nascien, who was pursuing the pagans to left and right, did not refuse to face any knight, no matter how bold. He rode forward, striking his enemies before him until he met the king of Northumberland,” whom he recognized by his priceless armor. When he saw the king in front of him, he did not refuse to fight, but tured his horse’s head that way. Once before him, he raised his sword to strike. When the king, who had already seen the kind of blows he gave, saw the sword raised to strike, he was not bold enough to wait for the blow but threw himself to the ground as fast as he could. And Nascien, who could not hold back his blow, struck the horse so hard in the shoulders that it fell in a heap. Then he ran to the king, who had already gotten back up, and struck him on the helmet so that he [168] fell to his knees, unable to get up again. When Nascien saw that the king had fallen in a faint, he jumped down from his horse amidst his enemies and put his sword back in its sheath. Grabbing the king by his helmet, he pulled so hard that he broke the laces and tore it off his head. Feeling his head bare and unprotected and himself defeated and in the hands of a man who would kill him if he did not plead for mercy, the king did not know what to do. Meanwhile Nascien cried out to him to give himself up or he would kill him, so help him God. “Kill me,” said the king, “for I prefer to die a pagan than to live as a Christian.” Upon hearing this, Nascien no longer sought to convince him but drew his sword from the scabbard and gave him such a great blow that he severed the head from the trunk. Then he went back to his horse and mounted it, despite his enemies. And he began once again to strike down all those he met, fighting as well as before or better. Thus began such a great and wondrous battle between the men besieging the castle and those defending it that 26xJ}orthumberland,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “North Wales”). 130 you would surely have seen more than a thousand dead and wounded on the ground. The battle would have lasted a long time, since the besiegers outnumbered the castle’s defenders, but as soon as the men from Northumberland?’ learned that their king was dead and that they were fighting without a lord or leader, they were terrified, and they had no more prowess or strength to fight, even though they could have defended themselves as well as they had before. At once most of them turned and fled through the Humber on horseback, where [169] many drowned and perished. Those who could cross were safe, but they were few, for the men from Galafort pressed them so hard that they knocked down in the water those they were able to overtake. But you can be sure that they would never have performed such a great feat of arms had it not been for the great grace of Our Lord God, who gave them courage and strength beyond what was normally theirs. When they saw they had vanquished all their enemies, they set fire to the tents the latter had set up, saying they preferred all their things to be burned, for they did not want to have any benefit or comfort from them. Thus the Christians won victory and honor in the first battle against the Saracens in the land of Great Britain. And when they learned they had been so few against so many pagans and yet had won, they said to one another that they had not won this honor through their prowess but through the grace of Jesus Christ, who had helped them in this battle. This therefore strengthened their faith and proved that Jesus Christ’s power was great and wondrous. They were all more humble toward Jesus Christ because they had won such great honor on this occasion. But thereupon the story leaves off speaking of them and returns to Joseph and his followers. 33. King Crudel Imprisons the Christians; Mordrain Defeats Crudel and Liberates Them.! Now the story says that when Josephus left Galafort with his father, he took one hundred fifty of his ministers with him. But Celidoine and Nascien and several of his other relatives stayed behind to protect Joseph’s wife. When Joseph and his companions left Galafort, they took with them the Holy Vessel called [170] the Grail and went to preach here and there, until they arrived in North Wales. At this time the lord of the land was King Crudel, the cruelest and most traitorous pagan ever known. When he heard that people had just arrived in his land who were not of the pagan faith, but the Christian, and who were bearing with them a holy vessel full of such grace that they lived nearly completely from it, he considered this to be a lie and a tall tale. He said they were treacherous thieves, who deceived people with their words, and he ordered those with him to bring them to court, so he could see them. His 27-Northumberland,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “North Wales”). Corresponds to Hucher HI: 169-195; Sommer I: 231-244; Ponceau §342-359. The History of the Holy Grail men soon succeeded in carrying out this order, bringing Josephus and his father and his followers before the king. When the king saw them in such poor clothes— barefoot and badly dressed—he had so little respect for them that he barely deigned to look at them, and he said they were not worthy of consideration. He immediately had them thrown in prison, all together in one room on the ground, ordering the members of his household not to release them for at least forty days. Nor was anyone who valued his life to make so bold as to give them anything to eat, “for,” said he, “I want them to have to live from the grace of their lord or the grace of their vessel, since they claim, so I am told, they do not live from anything else. So this grace will have to be strong, for by the god in whom I believe, they will have no other food as long as they are in my prison.” The traitorous pagan gave this order, [171] thinking he could get them to abjure Christianity and return to the faith of the infidels by duress. But they did not, for throughout the first night Our Lord Himself came to comfort them, telling them not to be afraid, for anything their hearts desired would be granted. “Be not afraid,” said He, “if you stay here, for in time I will send you the earthly avenger, who will destroy these perfidious dogs who have imprisoned you. And I will destroy him and all those who seek® to torture you.” The voice spoke to them thus, comforting and reassuring them. That very night it happened that King Mordrain lay in bed in Sarras with his wife. And they wondered why they had not heard any news about Nascien, Celidoine, Josephus, or any of the others. This grieved the king, for he would have liked very much to know how they were faring. As the king slept, it seemed to him that Our Lord came toward him, in great anguish and suffering, for He had been wounded on the cross, and His hands and feet were pierced with nails. When the king saw Him suffering so, he said, weeping, “Oh, Lord, who did this to you?” And He replied at once, “This was done by King Crudel, the lord of North Wales, who has crucified Me thus. It was not enough for him that I was put on the cross once, but he has done it again. Get up and take your armor and your wife, Nascien’s wife, and King Label’s daughter, and go to the sea and cross over to Great Britain. There, avenge Me against King Crudel, who has thus [172] tortured Me.” And the king replied that he would do so gladly. In the morning, when he awoke and remembered what he had seen in his sleep, the king was very happy® that Our Lord wanted him to avenge His anger. He went to matins at the church and afterwards heard Mass. Then he told the priest about his vision. After he had done so, the priest said, “My lord, you must not delay. Send for your men, summon your army, and go to avenge Jesus Christ’s shame and wrath. You can truly be sure that no more beautiful sign could come to you than the one you have told me about.” The king believed the worthy man’s advice, and rightly so. First he sent for Nascien’s wife and King Label’s daughter, and then for his men, far and near, informing them that they should come to him equipped with arms 2Tense corrected following Ponceau and Sommer. 3“What he had seen... happy” supplied from Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail and horses. As soon as they heard his message, his men came to the city of Sarras as quickly as possible, equipped as was proper. When Nascien's wife came before the king, he took her aside to speak to her privately, avowing what he had seen in his sleep. “Because I know it pleases Our Lord,” said he, “we will take you with us, for our ships are equipped and furnished with everything we need. We will take King Label’s daughter and the queen, my wife, with us; and I will leave my land in the care of Aganor, the best knight in this country. We will entrust the land to him with the understanding that if neither we nor our heirs return, the land will be his since there would be no nearer relative. And if it pleases God that we return, we will have the land as freely as we do now.” [173] It was done exactly as the king had said, for he had all those who remained take an oath on the saints that, as long as he and his family were outside the land, they would consider Aganor their minister and lord. And if anyone came forward to wrong Aganor, by removing him from his position and taking the land, they would help him as they would their liege lord. And if by chance the king died or remained in the country where he was going, he wanted Aganor to be crowned as lord of all the land and invested with everything, for he did not know of any man in the country who was more worthy of having the kingdom than he. Those who were to remain in Nascien's land and King Mordrain’s kingdom swore this oath. In the morning, as soon as the king had arranged things to the best of his ability, he left Sarras with the men he had. There could well have been three hundred shields in his company, besides the squires and the foot soldiers. After they had gone a league from the city, the king told Aganor that he had forgotten something important. “My lord,” said he, “what?” “I4 did not bring the white shield with me,” said he, “the one that helped me so much in the battle against Tholomer.® I won’t leave the shield behind, for I could not bear not having it and not seeing it every day in remembrance of the Crucifix, which helped me so much in the battle.” At once the seneschal had a squire return for the shield, which had been left in the king’s room. The squire hurried so that [174] before the king had arrived at the port, he came back. And when the king saw the shield, he rejoiced over it, for he loved it a great deal, and he had it placed in the ship where he was. Then the queen—his wife—and the duchess and King Label’s daughter boarded, followed by all the others. When the king left his men, there was a great hue and cry. The sail was set, and the captain sat at the helm, while the others attended to their jobs, spreading out throughout the ship. Each one went to do what he was supposed to. And when it pleased God that they set forth from their country, the wind filled the sail, and the three ships loaded with men, women, and everything necessary, left port, and in a short time they were so far away that they could no longer see land. 4“Forgot my shield and” omitted, as in Ponceau. 5For the role of the shield in the battle, see Chapter 10. 131 Once they were at high sea, such a fierce and wondrous storm came up that everyone was afraid of dying. The storm was so horrible and the sea so terrifying that it was a wonder. Those who saw themselves in such peril were so afraid® that they did not know what to do, so they wept and lamented, crying out to Our Lord for mercy. They all cried out, “Lord, please don’t let us die here, but save our lives and give us time’ to make amends to You for our misdeed. Lord, in Your pity, come and help us!” While they were lamenting to Jesus Christ and His sweet Mother, a voice came among them and said so loudly that they all heard it, “Remove the devil from among you, or you will perish immediately!” Hearing this, the king realized [175] at once that the enemy was lodged among them, but because he could not immediately see him, he ran to the holy water and had it sprinkled from one end of the ship to the other. While they were doing this, they heard, in a room at the front of the ship, a cry so ugly and hideous that everyone was sorely afraid. After that it was not long before they saw a devil come through the doorway of the room in the form of a young woman, who was carrying a living man and who said in the hearing of all, “He is mine, and therefore I am taking him away.” Right after saying this, the devil jumped in the sea, and they quickly lost sight of him. This frightened everyone in the ship so much that they did not know what to say. The king called to one of his chaplains who was nearby and told him to enter the room the enemy had come from, for he believed it was indeed the enemy, and he wanted to see what was in the room. The worthy man took his stole and the holy water and entered the room, followed by the king. The stench was so strong that they thought they would faint from it. The worthy man began to sprinkle holy water high and low, but they found nothing more. Then the king asked those around him if there was a knight or man-at-arms missing. They began to look at each other and discovered that the castellan of La Choine was missing. “By my faith,” said the king, “you'll be sorry if you don’t believe me! It's the devil who has carried him away!” While they were talking about this, a lady said to the king, “My lord, [176] a remarkable thing can be seen: the worthy man you brought with us is asleep before the helm and was not awakened by the storm we went through.” The storm had ceased, and the sea had become calm as soon as the devil had left the ship. The king went to the helm, where he saw the worthy man, who was still asleep. In his sleep he was weeping as hard as a person who was awake could have. When the king saw him crying in his sleep, he wondered what this could mean. He made a sign to those around him to be silent, and they obeyed. Once they were quiet, they heard the worthy man say in his sleep, “Oh, traitorous creature! Why did you commit such a terrible murder and perfidy, betraying and killing him thus?” Then he began to lament as much as before or more. The king remained there for a long time to see if the worthy man would awaken. He stayed so long that the man did wake up, opening his eyes. When he saw the king and 6Were so afraid” supplied from Ponceau. Time” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 132 the others looking at him, he was not frightened, but wiped his eyes,8 which were still full of tears, and said to the king, “Oh, my lord! What are you doing here?” “Indeed, my lord,” said he, “we have been watching you a long time, because you were crying in your sleep. You slept through a great storm; we were in such danger that we thought we would all be drowned, and you never awoke! And besides that, you spoke so many words in your sleep that we are completely amazed.” Then the worthy man got up and said to the king, “Certainly, my lord, it’s no wonder if I was crying and lamenting, for [177] I saw something in my sleep that made me very unhappy.” “What could that have been?” asked the king. “Can it be told?” “My lord, yes, certainly,” he said, “for in my sleep I saw one of your knights, the castellan of La Choine himself, and I will tell you how it came about. It happened that the castellan of La Choine loved Nascien’s wife very much, but he could never succeed with her, no matter what he did. He loved her for a long time and sought so much to do his will that the enemy appeared to him the other day in the city of Sarras in the shape of this woman, and told him that if he became his liegeman, he would let the castellan have Nascien’s wife; he would be able to lie with her carnally and do what he wished. Teday at noon he became the enemy’s liegeman and abjured Our Lord. “As soon as I fell asleep here, the devil appeared to him in the room below in the semblance of Nascien’s wife. And the castellan, who desired nothing so much as to have his way with the woman he loved, ran to the devil as soon as he saw he resembled the woman he loved so much, in order to indulge his wretched lust with her. That is why the terrible and wondrous storm you saw began. Once the wretch had had his way, the enemy showed himself in his right person and [178] told him he was going to carry him off as his own. Upon seeing how ugly and terrifying the devil was, the knight became so frightened that he forgot God and His Mother and lost his mind. The devil immediately took him and loaded him on his shoulders, just as you heard. I, who remained here, saw this in my sleep, as it pleased Our Lord. ; “When I saw the enemy carrying off the sinner, I began lo grieve, as you saw, until I awoke. Nor is it over yet, for though I’m not crying now, nevertheless it distresses me, for it grieves me that through such ruse and misfortune his soul and body are lost. And that is why I slept as long as the storm lasted and why I wept in my sleep.” “By my faith,” they said,? “this is a most extraordinary thing.” “My lord,” said the king, “what you saw is exactly what happened to the castellan. May God have mercy on his soul.” This adventure was revealed to Nascien’s wife and to those in the ship, and it was an exemplum to teach them to keep from sinning and to improve their lives in the service of their Creator. 8“when he saw... wiped his eyes” supplied from Sommer. 9 Corrected to plural, as in Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail The ships sailed across the sea day after day, as chance led them and the sailors guided them, until they arrived in Great Britain, at a castle called Caleph, which was near the kingdom of North Wales. Once they had arrived and had unloaded their provisions,!° arms, and horses from the ships, the king looked toward a tall mountain and saw two knights coming. The [179] king was mounted on a horse, completely armed, except for his lance. Seeing the knights approaching, he turned his horse in that direction and went to meet them to find out who they were. They said that they were Christians. “And who are you, dear lord?” they asked the king. He said he was also a Christian, like them, that his baptismal name was Mordrain, and that he was king of Sarras. Upon hearing this news, they jumped down from their horses and ran to embrace the king, saying, “My lord, you are very welcome! We were searching for you.” “Me?” he asked. “Who are you then?” “My lord, we are knights of your brother-in-law Nascien, who sent us here to meet you.” “To meet me?” said the king. “Who gave him news of my arrival?” “Indeed,” said they, “we don’t know, but this much we can tell you: six days ago he knew you were to come to this country, arriving today or tomorrow at this port.” “And who are you?” asked the king. “Remove your helmets so I can see whether I know you.” They did so; when he saw them bareheaded, he recognized one as Clamachides, whom the story spoke about earlier,!! while the other’s name was Naron, a good and marvelous knight who was the son of a king and queen. When the king saw them, he was so happy that it could barely be recounted. He removed his helmet, dismounted, and ran to embrace and kiss them. And he rejoiced over them as much as if he had begotten them from his own flesh. When the other knights on shore saw the merriment and rejoicing between the king and the men [180] he had met, they hurried to them as quickly as possible to see who they were. Once they recognized them, the rejoicing became even greater than before. When the Duchess Flegetine heard that these knights who were making so merry were Duke Nascien’s men, she was so joyful that no woman’s heart could be happier. Then she ran and kissed them for love of her lord and asked them if they knew anything about Celidoine. “Certainly, my lady,” said the messengers, “you will soon be able to speak to your husband and your son, both of whom are safe and sound, for not long ago we left them nearby with a large number of men, coming this way as quickly as they could, since they had been told you would alrive tonight or tomorrow. Nor will you need to move in order to see them, for we tell you truly that they will soon be here.” The king and all of his companions were very happy about this; there was not one who did not rejoice. 10“provisions,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “estoire,” “army’”?). MClamachides is among the Christians who join Nascien in the boat in Chapter 31. The History of the Holy Grail The king ordered his tents and pavilions to be set up in a plain along the shore so that when Nascien came, he and his retinue could lodge with them, as well as Duke Ganor, who had a large number of knights with him. The men carried out his orders so happily that they seemed to fly. They had not yet finished preparing everything that had been ordered when they saw Nascien and his large and splendid retinue suddenly appear on a mountain. When the king saw them coming, he and his knights mounted [181] and hurried to meet Nascien as fast as they could get the horses to go. You should have seen them meet; it was extraordinary how they embraced and kissed and wept when they saw each other. But nothing could compare to the tears shed by the duchess over her husband and her son, for she was so happy that she fainted more than a hundred times. She fainted so often that those who saw her said it was a wonder she did not die of joy. That night the king and his companions rejoiced a great deal over Nascien, for it had been a long time since they had seen each other. After they had supped as sumptuously as was fitting for such men, King Mordrain began to ask Nascien how he had found Celidoine, and in what country. He replied that he had found him in Galafort Castle, where he was debating against the master philosophers of the pagan faith, “but I can’t tell you how he came there, nor how it happened that Duke Ganor was on such close terms with him.” The king asked Celidoine how he had come there, and he replied, “My lord, since it pleases you, I’ll tell you. Now listen to ine, you and all those with you. It is true that when I left you and got in the little boat as directed by the man who told me that Jesus Christ’s people would cross the sea that very night with dry feet, I drifted at sea for a long time without the company of any earthly thing except a bird, which brought me something to eat every day. I drifted until it pleased Our Lord that chance bring me before Galafort Castle. [182] But before that I was at sea for a long time. When the ship reached land, so that I could disembark if I wished, a man I did not know said right away, ‘Leave the ship and follow me.’ “I left the boat at once and did as he ordered, because he seemed to be a worthy man. He went quickly toward the castle; upon reaching the entrance, he put his finger on the gate and made a cross that truly became red. He looked at me and said, ‘Do you know what this means?’ ‘My lord,’ I replied, ‘no, not at all.’ ‘Now you can be sure,’ he said, ‘that I have placed this castle under the sign of Holy Church, because here Holy Church will be more honored and glorified than in any other place in this country. You should know that this cross I have made here will henceforth be so important to this castle that as long as it is left there, no Christian who stays!2 here will ever die a terrible or awful death, nor will the lord of the castle ever fall under the domination of anyone who displeases him.’ “Thus spoke the worthy man who made the cross on the gate. And he took me by the hand and led me inside, through the castle up near the fortress!5 until we came to a large, marvelous garden, right underneath the tower. In the 12eStays,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “shows”). 13«Fortress,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “castle”). 133 middle of the garden there was a beautiful and delightful fountain, lovely to look at. When we got there, we found Duke Ganor, in whom the enemy had entered that morning and already taken his senses away, for he held a small child of his above the fountain with the intent of drowning it. When the worthy man who was with me saw he was about to cause the child’s death,!4 he went forward, removed it from his hands, and blew on the duke’s [183] face. At once the duke returned to his right senses. “The worthy man began to make the sign of the cross over the fountain. Then he put the child in it, taking him out as soon as he was completely wet. Then he said to Duke Ganor, ‘Now you can be sure that this child has been removed from the devil’s servitude, for he has received Christianity. Henceforth, you and Celidoine will protect him. I am leaving Celidoine with you so that he can teach you how you should put your heart and belief in the Creator who made all creatures.’ Thus the child was baptized by the hand of the worthy man who made the sign of the cross on the castle gate. “He left me in Duke Ganor’s hands, who was so friendly to me that thereafter he wouldn’t go anywhere without me. And without fail I began henceforth to exhort him daily about the truth of the Christian faith and the Gospel, just as I had heard it told. I taught him a great deal of what the prelates of Holy Church had told me, so that he said he would never be content until he knew by true reasoning which faith it was better to hold to and believe— the Christian or the pagan. Then he had all the pagan masters assemble against me to hear how they would debate me about the Christian faith. Thus they met several times for this reason until one day our friends who are assembled here came to the debate. Now I have told you what I have done and what has happened to me since I left you. Now please tell your adventures.” The king asked Nascien to tell what had happened to him since he [184] had left. “My lord,” said Nascien, “with all due respect, I won’t tell you now, for many things happened to me that should be concealed and not recounted unless they were told in confession.” “At least tell us the truth about the giant—the one you killed on the mountain when you ordered the three towers made.” “T will tell you this,” said Nascien. “It is true that when I left Bellic, I rode until I came to the mountain, where I found the giant under an elm he often visited. The giant used to come every day from a seaport where his manor was and watch for passersby, immediately killing anyone who came by. And if he didn’t kill him, he carried him off to his lodging and put him in prison. Throughout the country everyone who had heard about him feared him, for he had done them a lot of harm. . “When he saw me coming, he attacked at once. And so the combat began between us, and it lasted so long that I was near death, when Nabor, one of my knights who was seeking me, came along and killed the giant. But then he wanted to exact a high price for this good deed by killing me outright because I did not want to return. However, lMé«when . .. death” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 134 Our Lord did not wish to allow this, but intervened so that Nabor fell dead at my feet.” Next he recounted the death of the lord of Karrabel!5—how he was struck by a thunderbolt. But he refused to recount the other adventures that had happened to him. [185} And yet he would have told them, but he did not dare, for he did not want things to become common knowledge before!® they had happened. Thus they spoke among themselves and were comforted by the fact that Our Lord had brought them solace and that He had brought them back together after having separated them so far away from one another. The king asked Nascien the truth about Josephus, and he replied that King Crudel held him in prison. King Mordrain could no longer remain silent but said he would go with an army against King Crudel to disinherit and dishonor him because of his perfidy, if he did not return those he held in prison. Everyone there agreed to this. The next day, when day had come, the king ordered his tents and pavilions struck and set out with his army, riding until he reached the land of North Wales. Then he sent a message to King Crudel to return the Christians he held in prison; if he did not, he could be sure that King Mordrain would take all his land and imprison him in a place that he would never leave as long as he lived. When!” King Crudel heard this message, he considered it to be prideful folly and replied to King Mordrain that he would do nothing of what he asked, but that King Mordrain should leave his land. Upon hearing that Crudel would not honor his request, King Mordrain began at once to ravage the land of North Wales, burning cities, castles, and houses. When King Crudel heard this news, he sent far and wide for his [186] men until great numbers assembled in one of his cities called Longtown. Once they were gathered and everyone was armed, they saw that they numbered at least five thousand knights, men-at-arms, and simple soldiers. The next day, at the hour of prime, they left to launch an attack against the Christians. When they were a day’s travel from the city, a pagan came to the king and said, “My lord, you must take up your arms quickly! The Christians who have come against you are here! You can already see more than one hundred banners coming,down the knoll!”!® At the time this news reached the king of North Wales, it was near the hour of prime. When he heard the Christians were coming against him, he asked if they were numerous. “Yes indeed, my lord,” said the messenger. Then the king had his men arm themselves, and he formed his battalions, placing the leaders he knew each one needed. Before the battalions were fully organized, they saw the Christians surge down a mountain, completely armed, helmets on their heads, with Nascien at the forefront, for King Mordrain had given him the first battalion to lead. 15“Karrabel,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “Mirabiel”). 16“Refore,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “some”). Vewhen” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 18Down the knoll” supplied from Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail When the Christian army met the pagans in battle, you would have heard a great outcry and seen many knights fall to the ground. Then Nascien began to perform such prodigious feats of arms that anyone who saw him would have been amazed [187] and considered him the best knight in the world. As for Duke Ganor, he also performed such feats that anyone who saw him held him to be a worthy man. Thus the battalions met in battle. Once everyone was on the battlefield, many knights fell and died. As soon as King Mordrain, who was a good knight, entered the melee, he began to deal blows right and left with a sharp sword. As he went along, separating the press to right and left!9 and wreaking havoc on the enemies of the Christian faith, he happened to rush before King Crudel, the lord of North Wales, who saw how King Mordrain was killing his men. Perceiving him ahead, he cried out to his men, “Capture this man for me! Take care he doesn’t escape, but kill him at once!” Upon hearing their lord’s orders, the men rushed at King Mordrain, some striking him with their lances and others with their swords, wounding him in so many places that it was a wonder they did not kill him. And he defended himself so marvelously that no one on the field, especially a man of his age, could do half as well. And yet they would certainly have killed him if chance had not brought Duke Ganor there. When he saw the enemy already holding King Mordrain on the ground amidst the horses’ hooves, about to kill him, he charged the king of North Wales at full speed, striking him on the helmet so hard with his sword that no armor could protect him from a mortal wound. He could not stay in the saddle, but flew to the ground in such pain that he thought he would never see [188] nightfall. At the moment when King Crudel was struck from his horse by Duke Ganor’s blow, Nascien came up and rushed among those holding King Mordrain. He began to deal great blows, dispersing his opponents as savagely as a wolf does sheep. When the men from North Wales saw their lord unable to get up, they were so frightened that they stopped defending themselves and turned and fled as fast as they could drive their horses. Just as you have heard, the men from North Wales were defeated. When the king saw them fleeing, he said to his men, “After them! Take care they don’t escape! Follow them up into the city!” King Mordrain’s men did exactly as he told them to do, for they pursued the men from North Wales into the city, rushing in with them. The slaughter of pagans in the streets was so great that everything in the street was completely covered with blood. The battle lasted a long time, and they fought so hard that that evening no pagan or unbeliever remained, for all had been killed. In the evening, when King Mordrain came to the castle, the men of his household who placed their trust in him said, “My lord, no man of your age ever performed such marvelous feats of arms as you did today.” Then he replied, “My lords, rest assured that I did not do this. He in whom all power and goodness reside brought With a sharp sword. ... right and left” supplied from Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail this work to an end. And if you [189] believe I did it through my own strength, you would be foolish.” Then his men hurried to remove his armor. Once he was stripped of his armor, they began to look him over. They were horrified to discover that he had so many wounds that any other man would have died. They asked how he felt, and he replied that he felt none of his wounds Or injuries. Then they had Josephus and his companions freed from prison. Once the prisoners had come to the palace, the king ran and embraced Josephus, rejoicing over him, for he loved him dearly. And Josephus asked what had brought him there. The king took him aside, far away from the others; when they were alone, he recounted what he had seen in his sleep, which was the reason he had come. “Where is King Crudel, who imprisoned us?” asked Josephus. “My lord,” said King Mordrain, “he was killed today in the battle.” Then he told him how he had fought the pagans and won victory. Upon hearing this news, Josephus said to King Mordrain, “My lord, God has truly shown His power!” because so few Christians had defeated the king of North Wales in battle. That night the Christians were made as comfortable as possible in the city. The next day it happened that they came before the table of the Holy Grail to thank Our Lord for having helped them so much against the king of North Wales. They began their prayers and orisons. After Josephus, their master, had put on his vestments to go before the Holy Vessel and had begun [190] Mass, as he was accustomed to, King Mordrain, who had longed if possible to see the Holy Vessel2° clearly ever since he first glimpsed it, came up closer than he should. A voice descended among them, saying to the king, “King, you should not go any closer!” But he had already gone so close that no tongue could name what he saw”! nor mortal heart conceive it. He wanted so much to see it that he stepped farther and farther forward. At once a cloud descended and took away his sight and his bodily strength, so that he could barely move. When the king saw that Our Lord had taken such great vengeance against him because he had transgressed His commandment, he said in the hearing of the people, “Dear Lord God, Jesus Christ, now you have shown me what folly it is to break Your commandment! I am truly pleased to accept this scourge You have sent me, dear Lord, and ask only that You grant me in reward for my service that I will live until the good knight, the ninth in Nascien’s line, he who is to see the marvels of the Holy Grail, comes to visit me, so that I can embrace him and kiss him.” As soon as the king had made this request of Our Lord, the voice responded, saying, “King, fear not, for Our Lord has heard your prayer. Your wish has been granted, for you will live until the knight you have asked about comes to see you. At that time your sight will return, so that you will see him clearly, and then your wounds will be healed, but not before then.” 20-The Holy Vessel” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 21 What he saw” supplied for sense. HISD} Thus spoke the voice [191] to the king, promising that he would see the coming of the knight he so much wanted to see. The words spoken by the voice were heard only by four people: Josephus, his father Joseph, Nascien, and the man they addressed. After they had done the service as usual and had put the Holy Vessel in its proper place, they returned to the king and asked how he was. He replied ‘that he had certainly lost his sight and the strength of his limbs because of the offense he had committed in wanting to see®* what he should not. “This is the vengeance Our Lord has taken against me. And I swear to you,” he said, “that nothing has ever happened to me that pleases me as much as this, for now I see that Our Lord considers me His son, when He punishes me so quickly for my sin.” Then everyone who had heard this began to weep because of the king’s repentance. They asked him what he wanted them to do with him. And he told them to take him to Galafort, because he wanted the marriage between Celidoine and King Label’s daughter to be celebrated, for Our Lord had planned it thus. And they said they were ready to do as he wished.23 When King Mordrain’s wife, Queen Sarrasinte, learned that her lord had lost his sight and the strength of his limbs, she began to lament bitterly. And all the high lords and ladies who were there did likewise. The lords and ladies lamented greatly over King Mordrain; Nascien and Duke Ganor wept. And yet amidst the grieving, Nascien had the king and the other lords mount. And when they saw [192] that the king could not*4 ride a horse because he had lost his bodily strength, they had a beautiful and elegant litter made, put him in it, and carried him thus to Galafort Castle, where they put him down. That day Nascien gave King Label’s daughter to his son Celidoine and invested them both with the kingdom of North Wales. A week later the wedding was celebrated. The rejoicing and feasting were great and would have been more so if the king had been as healthy as before, for his sickness, which distressed them, took away a good part of their happiness. Once the children were joined in marriage, as it pleased Our Lord, they conceived an heir who later was valorous and powerful and was king of the Land Beyond. And he was called by his grandfather’s name, Nascien, just as the divine voice had told Nascien, and as he had found it in the letter given to him on the ship, which the story spoke about earlier.25 Once the wedding was celebrated, King Mordrain said to his lords that he no longer wanted to remain among them. “What do you want us to do with you, my lord?” “I will know what to advise you,” said the king. “Send Josephus to me.” 22“In wanting to see” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 23“and they said... wished” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 24estand up or” omitted, as in Ponceau. See Chapter 28. The heir’s name, however, is given as Narpus in Chapters 28 and 41. 136 They sent for Josephus, telling him the king wanted to see him. He came right away; once before the king, he asked what he wanted. “My lord,” said the king, “I would like you to advise me where I can be alone, away from these people who think more about the pleasures of this world than I will and who will therefore only perturb me.” “My lord,” said Josephus, [193] “I can easily advise you, for nearby, in this forest, a very worthy hermit has recently settled, and his company will be good and fitting for you.” When the king heard this, he was marvelously happy, and he said to Josephus, “My lord, you who are my shepherd and my master, and who should guide me as your sheep, lead me to this place you promise me. There I will spend the rest of my life serving my Father in heaven to the best of my ability. This will be with my tongue alone, for thanks be to Him, He has divested me of all other power. He will restore it when it pleases Him, but this will not be for a while, for this will not happen in our time.” That night the king spoke at length to his lords. He took leave of them, telling them he would leave them the next day. He admonished them to do good and told them to remember above all to avoid angering their Creator. “If you do as[ tell you, you can be sure that whenever you go onto a field, you will be victorious, and if there is any danger, He will deliver you, for He never allows those who hold to Him to perish, but keeps them and guides them as His sons.2° I beseech you to protect Queen Sarrasinte, who is such a valiant and worthy woman, as your earthly lady, and cherish her as you should, [194] for you are held to it by your oath. “Nascien, my dear friend, whom I have loved more than any other knight, and rightly so, I beseech you to hold dear my wife the queen, your sister, and love her as a worthy and valiant woman. And if you have ever loved me, I beseech you to keep this shield that I carried in battle the day we were victorious over Tholomer. I give you this shield to keep like your heart in your chest. You can be sure that any worthy man who carries it in battle will have honor and victory. Therefore, I tell you, dear friend Nascien, to keep the shield, for many miracles will certainly come from it here and elsewhere.” , Thus the king left his wife, the queen, and his shield in Nascien’s keeping, and the next day he went to stay in the hermitage with the worthy man Josephus had spoken so highly of. Because of the king, the place grew and flourished so much that before the year had ended there was a large and beautiful abbey there—and it was an abbey of white monks—for since the king had entered it, a great many of his lords, those who were the highest and most worthy knights, began to become monks. This abbey was thus established2’ by King Mordrain, who remained there in great authority until Perceval of Wales saw him clearly and Galahad, the ninth in Nascien’s line, the one who was such a good knight, came to visit him, just as the Story of 26The Mans ms. is missing two folios here. Both Hucher and Ponceau follow Paris, BN fr. 770. 27 tablished” supplied from Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail the Holy Grail will clearly tell it?8 And my lord Robert of Boron, who translated this chronicle from Latin into French by order of Holy Church, affirms that since the day when the king [195] became a monk in Nascien’s time, he lived on for two hundred years after Nascien’s death, and as the true chronicle testifies, the worthy man lived until he saw the ninth knight, who was called Galahad. Thus the king remained in the abbey, and Nascien stayed in Galafort Castle with Duke Ganor. With them there were a great number of Christian knights and worthy men who bravely dared to expose their bodies to death and danger in order to defend Jesus Christ’s faith against the unbelievers. 34. King Agrestes Becomes a False Christian; Moses Sits at the Grail Table; Bron’s Son Alan Is Named Future Guardian of the Grail.} When Josephus saw that the king had become a monk and that Nascien intended to stay with the duke, he left Galafort with his relatives, to preach* and announce the truth of the Gospel. After they had left Galafort, taking leave of Nascien, the queen, and the other knights, they wandered far and wide throughout foreign countries, until they came to a city called Camelot. It was the richest of the Saracen cities in Great Britain, and it was so important that the pagan kings were crowned there, and its mosque was larger and taller than in any other city. At the time when the Christians came to Camelot, its lord and king was the cruelest man in the world, and his name was Agrestes. When Josephus came to the city and began to preach the name of the High Lord, there were only unbelievers in all the country around Camelot. That day, as it pleased Our Lord, it happened through Josephus’s words that one thousand fifty Saracens converted and turned to the Christian faith, abandoning the evil belief they had held before. When King Agrestes saw [196] his people converting in such great numbers, he was deeply chagrined, for he was absolutely the cruelest and most traitorous man in the world. So he thought of a great deception, saying to himself, “By my faith, if I wanted to turn these people who have converted back to our religion, I could not, for they have as many men on their side as I do, if not more. Therefore, it is good for me to pretend to convert now. But once Josephus has gone, I’ll use prayers, threats, and fear of death to make all our people return to their original belief.” He did as he said, for the next day he received baptism, to his soul’s destruction, since he only desired faithlessness and perfidy. His people were overjoyed, for 284 reference to events in The Quest for the Holy Grail. For Perceval’s visit, see Chapters 24-25; for Galahad’s visit, see Chapter 80. 1 Corresponds to Hucher III: 195-209; Sommer I: 244-252; Ponceau §360-368. 2“Preach,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “treat”). The History of the Holy Grail they believed the king had become a good Christian. However, he had not, but remained at all times a false Christian, for in his heart he had enfolded the devil, who would not let him do good works. The people did not realize he intended to trick and deceive them, and so everyone in the country, poor and rich alike, became a Christian. After remaining in the city for a week, Josephus departed, leaving twelve of his relatives to preach and to exhort the city’s residents every day. Josephus knew the world’s frailty to be so great that he was afraid the enemy might take great pains to deceive them and make them return to their original unhappiness. That is why he left behind his relatives. One Friday morning after Josephus and his father had gone toward parts in Scotland, King Agrestes got up and sent for all the noblemen in the country. He knew enough about [197] them to be sure they were false Christians. Then he went to a cousin of his and said, “Landoine, you must help me accomplish what I have undertaken.” “My lord,” he replied, “tell me your pleasure, for I am ready to do whatever you wish, be it wise or foolish.” “Then I will tell you what I want to do,” said the king. “What I have in mind is to make our people return to our original faith, for the one I have just accepted doesn’t please me; rather, I hate it more than anything in the world. Because I know I can’t convert my people except through force, I will send for all my noblemen and take them into my room, one after the other. And I will have our gods put on one side, and on the other, the Christian cross, ’ which they say saves them.? You and I will kill all those who want to worship the cross, while all those who wish to worship our gods will be free once they swear to help us do our will.” Landoine said this plan was very well conceived and that he would gladly agree to it. So they sent for the noblemen of the country, and the king did as he had planned. Anyone who did not want to worship their gods immediately lost his head. Most reconverted because their faith was tender and new, returning to their original folly for fear of death. The common people were also forced to revert to Islam by force and were unbelievers as they had been before. After doing this, the king had Josephus's twelve companions arrested, and he said he would kill them if they did not agree to worship the gods the people did. They replied they would not do so, in spite of his strength. When the king heard this, he had them stripped naked and [198] dragged through the city behind horses. Then he had them taken to a cross Josephus had had placed at the entrance to the forest. He had the first man attached to the cross, then had him struck in the head with a big mace, spilling his brains out onto the cross. The twelve companions were martyred in this way. And the blood that spurted in all directions from their brains turned the cross completely red. Considering himself well avenged, the king left them before the cross and departed. Upon reaching the city, he 3“And I will have our gods... saves them” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 17, found a wooden cross at the edge of a cemetery. He ordered it burned, after first having it dragged through all the streets of the city. As soon as this was done, he went out of his mind and began to eat his hands. Coming upon one of his small children, he took him by the throat and strangled him; he did the same thing to his wife and a brother. Then he went down through the city, shouting and screaming. At the head of the main street, he found an oven where a fire had been started. Having gone completely mad, he immediately jumped inside it, and there he died. The people in the country were so frightened by this that they did not know what to do. They sent a messenger to Josephus, telling him what had happened and asking him to come as soon as he could, for they needed him greatly. Hearing this made him very unhappy, and he came to them in tears. He had the bodies of the twelve martyrs taken from before the cross and buried in a chapel. Then he ordered the cross washed. It was blackened with blood, for it is well known that blood gets blacker and blacker as the days go by.4 However, God worked [199] a great miracle here, for the stone of the cross did not change color, but remained black in memory of the blood that was shed there. For this reason those who knew the truth about it called it the Black Cross, and this name never changed until King Arthur's reign, at the time when the adventures of the Grail were brought to an end. Once the bodies of the worthy men who had been martyred in this way were buried, Josephus ordered the pagan temples that had been built in the city of Camelot knocked down, the idols burned, and all the edifices of the pagan religion completely destroyed. In the middle of the city he had the Church of Saint Stephen the Martyr built. Then, seeing that the people in the country had calmed down and returned to the Christian faith, he left the city. After he had traveled for about two days, he and all his followers reached a large knoll called® the Giant’s Knoll. It was a Friday, and that day Bron was sitting next to Josephus at the table of the Holy Grail. Between them, at the very middle of the table, there was easily enough space to put a man’s chair. When Peter, a relative of Josephus, saw this empty space, he said to Josephus, “My lord, why don’t you call someone to sit there? There are so many worthy men crowded together at this table eating in discomfort. It seems to me that it would be a good thing if you called one of them, for the empty space is of no benefit to us.” “Peter, my good friend,” said Josephus, “this place is to stay® empty. No one may sit here who is not worthier than all others. It is not for nothing that it’s empty: it serves as an important symbol, for you should understand that it symbolizes [200] the place where Jesus Christ sat at the holy table on the day of the Last Supper when He ate with His disciples. This place is empty because it awaits its master, Jesus Christ, or someone He will send. That is why I don’t want anyone to sit here now.” 4“And buried in a chapel. ... as the days go by” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. aA large knoll” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 6«To stay,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “a bed”). 138 Those at the table, and especially the ones in mortal sin, considered these words proud and presumptuous. Once they had eaten, some said that Josephus was only telling a tall tale and a lie, “for doubtless one can sit in this seat as surely and as easily as in any other place, without greater danger.” Twenty-four people were at this discussion, all from the land of Jerusalem, and the two who had said the most were called Simeon and Moses. These two said to the others, “My lords, what do you think about your bishop and what he said today at the table about the empty place? Does it seem to you that he is telling the truth—that anyone who sat there would be doing a foolish thing and that it is forbidden to all except the one Our Lord will send?” “Certainly,” said the others, “we believe it is more of a lie than the truth, but it isn’t fitting for us to reproach him with everything he tells us. Nevertheless, we would like to have someone sit there, for then we would be sure whether he told us the truth.” “In God’s name,” said Moses, “if you want to ask him to let me sit there, I will do so tomorrow and take the risk. I believe I have served Our Lord so well since leaving our country that I don’t think I need to worry.” “In God’s name,” said the others, “we will gladly ask him, if you swear you will sit there.” [201] And he swore it. Then they came to Josephus and said, “My lord, there is an empty place at your table, which amazes us. And we have found among us a religious man, leading a holy life, who is worthy of sitting there. We beseech you, my lord, for God’s sake and for your honor and his, to let him sit there.” Josephus asked who this was who was worthy of sitting in the place where he did not dare sit. And they replied, “My lord, it’s Moses, your relative and ours.” “My God,” said Josephus, “he already stayed behind with his father when we crossed the sea. They could not follow us, but remained with the others who had sinned against their Creator. And now you tell me he is such a worthy man that he wants to sit in this place? Certainly, it’s hard to believe you, except that Our Lord quickly makes a worthy man out of a sinner.” “My lord,” said they, “whatever you say, we know he is such a worthy man that it is fitting for him to sit there. Therefore, we implore you to allow it in order to learn whether God will grant him this honor.” He replied that he would be pleased if Moses were such that it would please Our Lord for him to sit there. “But I don’t believe he is. And yet I will let him sit there, since you wish it.” They thanked him, returned to Moses, and told him he had permission to sit in the empty seat.” And he said they could therefore be sure he would sit there. That night things were left at that and were discussed no more. The next day, at the hour of prime, when they were sitting at the table of the Holy Grail, they [202] came to Moses and said, “Moses, now you may go sit where you said yesterday that you would, for you have permission.” And he said he would do so in that case. He went where Josephus 7To sit in the empty seat” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail and Bron were sitting, pretending to be so humble and full of piety that it was a wonder. And he seemed to be a very worthy man. When Josephus saw Moses coming, he said, “Moses, don’t sit here unless you are worthy of it, for otherwise you can be sure you will regret it. Don’t think this place was prepared for a sinner, for it is the symbol of the place where Our Lord sat on the day of the Last Supper. Therefore, don’t sit here unless you are the worthiest man of us all, for I believe this will lead to the destruction of your body and eternal torment for your soul.” When Moses heard this, he was very frightened, and yet he replied, “My lord, I believe I’m worthy of sitting there and that Our Lord will not be angry.” “Come forward, then,” said Josephus, “and sit down, for if you are what you should be, it will soon be made clear.” Then Moses came forward and sat between Josephus and Bron. But he had not been there long when those at the table saw seven hands come down from the heavens, all of them burning and in flames. They could not see the bodies the hands belonged to, but they could see that they were casting® fire and flames onto Moses so that he caught fire and began to bum as brightly as if he were a dry bush. Once he had caught fire and was burning fiercely, they saw the hands take him and raise him from where he was sitting and carry him through the air to a large and remarkable forest nearby. When those sitting at the table [203] saw this, they were all very frightened. They all began to talk about it and said to Josephus, “Oh, my lord, now we know indeed that you were telling us the truth about this seat. Those who advised him? to sit there in spite of your having forbidden it sinned and did evil. For God's sake, tell us, if you know, where he was taken and whether he has been saved or has perished.” “You will be certain about this in time,” said Josephus, “for I will show you the place where he has been put, so that you will be able to see! him clearly. Then you will know whether he is comfortable or not. After that I will tell you whether he has perished or been saved.” After these words no one asked him anything more, for they were very frightened by what they had seen. Once they had eaten, Bron said to Josephus, “My lord, give me your advice about something I’m going to ask.” “Tell me what it is,” Josephus replied. “I have twelve sons, all close relatives of yours, I beseech you to send for all of them. Once they have come before you, ask them how they intend to act from now on and whether they will marry or not.” “I will certainly do this,” said Josephus. Then he sent for all of Bron’s children. When they had come before him, Josephus took them aside, far from the others, and asked each one what kind of person he wanted to be and whether he wished to marry. Eleven said they would marry, just as the rest of their line had done. The 8They were casting,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “from their hands issued”). “Who advised him” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 1O<will be able to see him” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail twelfth did not accept this, but stated forcefully that he would never have a wife and would remain a virgin all the days of his life and serve the Holy Vessel called the Grail as long as he had life in his body. The twelfth of Bron’s children chose to keep holy virginity and to serve [204] the Holy Vessel, while the others all chose to have a wife. When Josephus saw the son who had vowed to keep virginity and serve the Holy Vessel, he began to embrace him and kiss him, rejoicing more than anyone in the world. And he said to the eleven who had asked for wives, “You will have what you have requested, for I will find brides for all of you. May God grant that you keep yourselves as true as one should in marriage. And you,” he said to the twelfth, “have requested two things: to remain a virgin and to be a minister of the Holy Vessel. I grant you the one, and Lord God grants you the other. May He grant that you be a virgin all the days of your life, in mind and in deed, so that your flesh might not be sullied by the sin of lust. May God give you this, my dear friend, for I gladly grant that you be a minister of Holy Church and of the Holy Vessel. Because you have chosen such a high thing as virginity, I grant that after me, you be invested with the guardianship of the Holy Vessel you have requested, so that you will be its guardian after my death.!! And when you have passed from this world, the one you give it to and his descendants will be its lords. The grace of the Holy Vessel will be so important that if their lands are ever devastated, they will receive food in abundance as long as they live. I give you this gift, dear friend, because of the high gift you have requested.” The boy knelt before Josephus and, in tears, thanked him. And Josephus invested him with the Holy Vessel after his death. Then he did for the other brothers what he had promised, for he saw that they were all married well, as they wished. [205] After taking care of Bron’s children in this manner, Josephus began to wander through Great Britain with his followers, as chance led him. Not a day passed without his group growing by twenty or thirty men who followed him, barefoot and in humble pilgrim’s woolens, leaving their riches and inheritance in order to keep him company. Nor did he go anywhere without converting a great number of people to the Christian faith and taking them away from unbelief, for his words were so powerful and full of ardor, through the grace and power of the Holy Spirit, which was at work in him, that he found hardly anyone so unbelieving that he was not easily converted once he heard Josephus. As a result, his group increased!? daily. One day it happened that they came to an uncultivated and barren land where they could not easily find food. Do not think that everyone in Josephus’s group lived from the grace of the Holy Vessel; but some did—those who were worthy men leading good lives. And the others, who were in mortal sin and lust, and who did not want to mend their ways, despite any prayers or sermons, did not live from it, but from what they found or what people gave them. The day they entered this wasteland I have mentioned to you, it happened that they descended into [206] a deep, Meyou have requested . .. death” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 12The Mans ms. picks up again here. 159 wide valley. In the middle they found a large pond; at the far end there was a small boat and a fishing net. When they reached the pond, they sat down to rest, and some of them took their robes off because it was hot. Then the Holy Vessel was brought out, and Josephus and his ministers began the service they offered every day. Those in the company who were worthy men leading good lives and those who were not ordained for this service stepped forward a little and said their prayers, asking Our Lord in His sweet pity to lead them safely wherever they might go and to send them enough grace to sustain their bodies. That day the Christian ministers served the Holy Vessel humbly. After doing this as they should, they sat down in the middle of the field, and some began to spread tablecloths, while others lay folded cloths on the grass, for they wanted to eat at the dinner hour, and they had no other tables. Once they were ready to eat, Peter, one of Josephus’s relatives, carried the Holy Grail before the ranks. It happened that at the coming of the Holy Vessel all the tablecloths where the religious worthy men sat were covered with the most beautiful food a mortal heart could conceive. But where the sinners were sitting, no one could see any sign of the grace of the Holy Grail. Rather, that time the sinners had nothing to eat. After the others had eaten and stood up, the sinners [207] came to Josephus and began to say, “Oh, my lord, what will we do? If you don’t help us, we will be destroyed, for the grace of the Holy Vessel did not give us food as it used to. Therefore, you must take care of us, if you don't want us to die of hunger.” Hearing this, Josephus replied, “My lords, it grieves me that things are so. Now your faith is apparent: you have abandoned God, and He has abandoned you. As long as you were good sons, He was a good Father, for as long as you served Him loyally, He gave generously whatever you needed. But now you have begun to serve Him like stepsons, and He will give you food like a stepfather. So you can clearly see that no good comes from abandoning Him, for if you still held to Him, you would still have whatever your hearts conceived. And yet, because I see you are so unfortunate, I will advise you as best I can. I would not do this if I saw you had something to eat nearby.” Then Josephus called Bron’s twelfth son, the one he had chosen to be a minister of the Holy Grail; and this child was called Alan the Fat. Do not think this was the Aijan who was descended from Celidoine’s line, for he was never a king, nor did he ever wear a crown, while the other was a king who wore a crown!3 and held beautiful, rich lands. When Alan came before him, Josephus said in the presence of everyone there, “Alan, you who will be one of the most gracious of our lineage, as I believe, go to the pond and get in the little boat; throw the net you will find there into the water [208] and catch a fish, which these people will live on tonight, for they need it.” The child did as Josephus!4 commanded. He went to the water, got in the little boat, took the net, and threw it in 13who wore a crown” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. Josephus,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “Joseph”). 140 the water and dragged it to shore. When he got there, those who were waiting looked in the net and found only one fish, though it was undoubtedly a large one. They told him to go after more, for this one would not suffice for a tenth of those who had had no food. Josephus!® said he would not go back, and he ordered the fish taken out and cooked. Once it was cooked, he ordered those who had not eaten to sit down. They did so, for they needed to eat. Then Josephus said to Alan, “Alan, take this fish and make three parts. Put two of them at the two ends of the table, and the third in the middle. And pray to Our Lord to show you in His sweet pity—not as a favor to you, but through His grace—how generous He is toward you and how gracious He will be to you once you are entrusted with the Holy Vessel.” Then Alan began to weep very tenderly, and he came before the Holy Vessel, where he remained in prayer for a long time. After completing his prayer, he did what Josephus had ordered, dividing the fish into three parts and putting them in three places. As soon as he had done so, Our Lord worked such a beautiful miracle for him that, in honor of the child and as a sign of the goodness that was to be in him, He multiplied the fish until all those who had had no food [209] were filled as if all the good things in the world had been set out in abundance. And after everyone had eaten, what was left over was greater than the original fish. Because of the great plenty they had had from the gift of the fish Alan had caught, they gave him a name that was never abandoned, for they called him the Rich Fisherman. Thereafter he was called more often by that name than by his right name. And in his honor and because of that day’s grace, all those who were invested with the Holy Vessel were called Rich!® Fishermen. Without a doubt all those who were invested by him had more grace in the world than he did, for all were!” crowned kings, whereas he was not. But in remembrance of this, the pond was henceforth called Alan’s Pond. And this adventure brought such great joy to those to whom it happened that I could recount none greater. While they were talking about this, Joseph said to his son Josephus, “The desire has come over me to leave you and go where chance will lead me. My desire to do this is so strong that I think some good will come of it. You can be sure I will come back to you as quickly as I can, for once I have left you, I will want to see you again soon.” 15“Josephus,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “he,” which is ambiguous here). 16eRich” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 1“tnvested by him .. . were” supplied from Ponceau, The History of the Holy Grail 35. Joseph Converts Matagran; The Christians Cross a Deep River, Then Visit Moses; Canaan and Simeon Sin.! Joseph left his companions and wandered all alone until he came to the forest of Broceliande, on a Friday at the hour of prime. As he rode along a narrow path, a Saracen who was fully armed and mounted on a big horse came up behind him. When he caught up with Joseph, he greeted him, and Joseph did likewise. After they had traveled along together for a while, the Saracen asked [210] Joseph what. country he was from. “I was born in Arimathea,” said Joseph. “Arimathea?”* said the Saracen. “What brought you here?” “The One who knows all ways and who is the Way and the Life brought me here,” said Joseph, “the One who led the people of Israel through the Red Sea, when Pharaoh pursued them to kill them; this very One led me here.” “What kind of minister are your” asked the Saracen. “Iam,” said Joseph, “a doctor.” “A doctor?” replied the Saracen. “Do you know how to heal wounds?” “Yes, truly,” said Joseph. “Then you will come with me,” said the Saracen, “to a castle of mine that lies ahead of us, where my brother has been sick for over a year with a wound in his head. And I haven't been able to find a doctor who could heal him.” “In God’s name,” said Joseph, “if he will believe me, I will heal him with God’s help.” “With the help of what God, do you say?” asked the Saracen. “We already have four gods: Mohammed, Jupiter, Tervagant, Apollo. Not one of these can help him. How will you be able to do so? Which one of these gods will give you the power to heal him?” “Which one?” Joseph said. “None of these four will help me, for their help is worthless. And if you believe they can help you, you have been shamed and deceived.” “Deceived!” exclaimed the Saracen. “Certainly not. I will never be deceived, since I believe firmly they can help me, for they are powerful, reigning gods, and they will be as long as the world lasts.” When Joseph heard the Saracen’s words, he became incensed, and his face turned red with anger. He replied at once, [211] “What is this? Are you saying that the images men make out of wood and other things are gods and that they have more power over you than you have over them?” “Yes,” replied the Saracen, “truly, I say that the images have power, not by themselves, but from those whose semblance they have, that is, those in whose semblance they are made and in whose honor we adore and worship them, for I know very well that the images alone cannot help, but each one can, through the force of the one in whose form it is made: the image® of Mohammed can, through the one 1 Corresponds to Hucher III: 209-235; Sommer I: 252-266; Ponceau §369-386. 2“Aarimathea” supplied from Ponceau. 3 Corrected to singular, as in Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail in whose honor it is made, and so can each image through its god.” “In God’s name,” said Joseph, “if you take me to your castle, I will show you by tonight that they’re worthless— they can neither help, harm, take away, nor give by themselves or others—and that you have been deceived as long as you have believed in them.” “I will take you there,” said the Saracen. “But I swear that if you have lied about anything, you will not escape alive.” They rode all morning, talking in this way. When the hour of tierce4 came, they approached a castle that sat on a mountain. This castle was called The Rock, and it was enclosed on all sides by walls and deep moats, and it was very well fitted out with everything a good castle should have. After Joseph had entered the gate with the Saracen, they met an unchained lion running down the main street. Upon seeing the armed Saracen, it jumped on him from the height where it was, knocked him off his horse, and strangled him. When the men from the castle who were running after the lion saw the dead Saracen, [212] they began to grieve bitterly, for he was their liege lord. They seized Joseph immediately and tied his hands behind his back. As they were taking him to prison, the seneschal from the castle drew his sword and struck Joseph in the thighs so that half of the sword remained in his thighs. This is how Joseph was wounded. And those who had tied him up led him off to prison. When they reached the tower entrance, he spoke to them, asking, “My lords, why are you taking me here?” “Because we want to,” they replied. “You have no other reason?” asked Joseph. “We have enough of a reason,” they said. “Where are you putting me?” asked Joseph. “We are putting you somewhere that you will never leave,” they replied. “Oh, my lords,” said Joseph, “before putting me there, bring me all the sick from this castle.” “Why?” they asked. “So that I may heal them,” said Joseph.® “Are you a doctor?” “Yes,” said he, “and with such powers that before tonight I will heal them all if they believe me.” “My word,” said they, “we’d like to see this.” First, they brought the lord’s brother, who had a wound in his head that no one could heal. When Joseph saw him coming, he asked when he was wounded. “More than a year ago,” he replied, “and I have not been able to heal since then. When I was wounded, I sought a doctor and had all the best ones who could be found searched for, but none of them did anything for me. If you know how to heal me, I will make you a rich man forever.” 4“Tierce,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “prime”). 2 “Joseph,” as in Ponceau and according to context (Hucher has “Joseph”). Throughout this section Mans often substitutes “Josephus” for “Joseph,” which we have corrected without noting each change. Heal Then Joseph began to smile and said to the Saracen, “How can you make me rich? You are so poor that you have nothing.” “I have enough gold, silver, and precious stones, and {213] a great many silk cloths and gold and silver dishes, so many that I don’t want more,” said the Saracen. “Aren’t these great riches?” “No, not at all,” said Joseph. “This is poverty. And you can see it yourself. Tell me: if your gold and silver and precious stones and dishes were before you now and someone else came forward who could give you health, wouldn’t you give him your fortune just to be healthy?” “Certainly,” replied the Saracen. “I would willingly give him everything.” “Thus you can see that you are poor,” said Joseph, “when you would give everything to have one thing, and that gold, silver, and precious stones don’t make a man as rich as health does. Since you can’t buy health with your riches, you must obtain it in some other way, if you want it.” “This is true,” said the Saracen, “and if I knew how I could obtain it, I would seek it to the best of my ability.” “In God’s name,” replied Joseph, “if you want, I will seek it for you.”® “Howe” asked the Saracen. . “If you will believe in God,” said Joseph, “I will make you heal quickly.” “I believe in god,” said the Saracen; “not in one, but in four.” “In four!” said Joseph. “Are there then four gods?” “Yes,” said the Saracen. “Mohammed, Apollo, Jupiter, Tervagant. And I believe in each one of these four.” “You are so much the more shamed,” said Joseph, “for these gods you speak of cannot help you or anyone else. And you can easily test it.” “How?” the Saracen asked. “T will tell you,” Joseph replied. “Have the man the lion strangled brought before your gods. If he revives, you can indeed say that they are powerful gods, for they make men return from death to life. And if [214] he doesn’t move, you can see clearly that you are shamed and deceived by believing in them.” “Indeed,” said the Saracen, “reviving him won’t be easy,’ for I never heard of gods who could bring a dead man back to life. And yet I will try, since you want me to.” Then the Saracen had Joseph unbound. None of them knew anything yet about the sword wound he had in his thigh. Then they went to the mosque. When the Saracen had his brother carried before Mohammed, all the other pagans knelt and prayed to their god to take pity on the dead man. After they had prayed for a long time, with Joseph looking on, he cried out to them, “Oh, unhappy, deceived people, why are you so wretched that you believe in these images,® which cannot do you any good or help you? Don’t you know that they cannot move, speak, answer, or hear? Now look how they all revive this dead man!” For you” supplied from Ponceau. 7 Reviving him won't be easy,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “T don’t believe in resuscitation”). 8Corrected to plural, as in Ponceau and Sommer. 42 Then Joseph knelt and said, “Oh, dear Father of Jesus Christ, who brought me to this country to preach Your holy name, I beseech You—not for me, but to glorify Your faith—to demonstrate now before this wretched people how they are deceived by worshiping and believing in these monsters.” Joseph kissed the ground, then stood up and said in everyone’s hearing, “My lords, now you will see the power of your gods.” After these words, it was not long before loud thunder began, and the heavens began to flash with lightning and the earth to shake, and the heavens and the air grew dark. The Saracens thought they were about to die there. And then lightning struck the images, burning [215] and shattering them all on the ground. The smoke that came forth had such a terrible odor that those who smelled it thought that their hearts were about to burst. Everyone except Joseph fainted. After a while, when they were somewhat reassured and had regained their senses, Joseph spoke, saying, “My lords, now you can see how powerful your gods are. You can be sure that just as they help each other, they can help you. I tell you that the One who shattered and burned them will destroy you, if you don’t mend your ways and change your lives and your faith.” After Joseph had spoken, Matagran, the dead man’s brother,? the one who had the wound in his head, spoke. “My lord, tell me your name.” “My name is Joseph of Arimathea,” he replied. “Aren’t you a Saracenr” asked Matagran. “No, not at all,” said Joseph. “I am a Christian, and I believe in the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit.” “Then you believe in three gods?” said Matagran. “No,” Joseph replied, “only in one, for the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit are only one God. And He is so powerful that He can raise the dead. He can make the evil and perfidious into good and just men. He can make any sinner who reconciles with Him overcome all his enemies. He has demonstrated before all of you that He is more powerful than all other gods. No one can compare to His power, no matter how powerful he may be. You can see this very well by these images you call gods and in which you believe, which He has shattered and struck down by lightning and burned to ashes.” , “Certainly,” said Matagran, “I see He is much more [216] powerful than I thought. And if He can make my brother revive and speak to me, I will never believe in any other god but Him.” When Joseph heard Matagran’s words, he immediately knelt down on the ground and prayed, “Dear Lord God, who created the world; who made the moon, the sun, and the four elements; who deigned to be born of the Virgin maiden and who was hung on the Holy Cross, allowing Yourself to be beaten and struck and spat on by the cruel Jews; and who wished to suffer the anguish of death to redeem Your people and bring them back from the torments of hell; Lord, as truly as You rose from the dead and returned to life, work the same miracle on this dead man, in the sight of everyone who is here.” 9“Matagran, the dead man’s brother” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail Then Joseph stood up. After that it was not long before the dead man arose, sound and healthy. He ran to where he saw Joseph, kissed his feet, and said so loudly that everyone heard him clearly, “Here is Jesus Christ’s servant, who took the Son of God down from the Holy Cross, and whom God has sent among us to baptize us, for otherwise we cannot escape the eternal torment of hell.” When Joseph saw the dead man revived, he wept with pity and thanked Our Lord with a sincere heart. He said to those around him, “My lords, now you know that the One I spoke to you about is God without peer and is more powerful than any other god.” “Certainly,” said Matagran, “this is true. I will never believe in any other god but Him, for I know very well, since He raised Argon, my brother, that He is God without peer.” Thereupon everyone fell at Joseph’s feet and said aloud, “My lord, we put ourselves completely in your mercy and [217] keeping. If we have done foolish things in the past because of our lack of belief, we are ready to make good on them, as you advise. We will never do anything against your will, but teach us what faith we should hold and how we should do so.” Thus the people in the castle were converted and baptized. When the seneschal who had struck Joseph in the thigh saw everyone becoming a Christian, he admitted before them all how he had struck Joseph and how the sword had broken. “And I believe,” said he, “that if you look, you will find half of it in his thigh.” Then Matagran had someone look, and they found the piece of! sword, which astounded them. And then Matagran said, “My lord, how will you be healed?” “Easily, if it pleases God,” said Joseph. “But the wound on your head will be healed first.” Then he had the rest of the sword brought, including the pommel, where the hilt was. He made the sign of the true cross on Matagran’s wound, and it was immediately healed. Then he pulled the piece of!! sword out of his thigh. Those who saw this marveled a great deal, for as it was pulled out, not a drop of blood came out of the wound, and the sword was so clean and bright that it seemed it had never gone into flesh.!* The people were astonished by this. When Joseph saw the two! halves of the sword, he said, “Oh, sword, you will never be rejoined before the one who is to achieve the high adventures of the Holy Grail holds you in his hands. But as soon as he holds you, you will be rejoined. !4 And the part that entered my flesh will never be seen without blood coming forth until the one who will rejoin it [218] holds it.” Thus Joseph addressed the sword. And then throughout the castle everyone became a Christian. Argon lived a week after that. And when Joseph left the castle, they kept the sword there, holding it dear. 10“Pi ece of” supplied from Sommer. “Piece of” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 12“Gone into flesh,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “become worse”). 3«Two,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “three”). Meyou will be rejoined,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “he will rejoin it”). The Estory of the Holy Grail Joseph set out on his way, just as before, traveling many days as quickly as he could in the direction where he thought he would find his followers. Chance led him toward the forest of Darnantes, where he approached a river called Celice, which was wide and dangerous to cross. When he arrived at the shore, he found his companions, who had stopped there to see whether they could find a place to cross the river, for it was so rapid and deep that they did not dare enter it. When they saw Joseph coming, they were overjoyed; they went to meet him, receiving him very happily. Then they turned tol5 Josephus and said, “My lord, how can we cross this river? Shall we go across or stay here? We don’t know what to decide, for there is no ship or galley, and the water is so deep that we would soon die if we went in.” “T will tell you what we will do,” said Josephus. “Let us all go down on our knees and pray to Our Lord, by whose commandment we came to this country, in His sweet pity, to send some sign that will give us the courage to go in.” They did as he said. They went down on the ground on their bare knees; weeping, they began to beseech Our Lord, in His sweet pity,!® to send them a sign or symbol through which they!” might cross this deep, dangerous river. After they had been there from the hour of prime until!® noon, waiting for [219] Our Lord to bring them some answer to their prayer, they suddenly saw a stag whiter than snow, with a gold chain around its neck, come out of a small wood. With it were four lions—one in front, another behind, and two at its sides, one on the right and the other on the left. The four lions seemed to be leading and protecting it as dearly as a mother would her child. When the stag approached the Christians, it passed among them, as did the lions. Seeing that the lions did no harm to anyone, Josephus!9 let them go by. And the stag went straight toward the river and leapt in, as did the lions. Upon seeing this marvel, Josephus said to the people who were with him, “Follow me; you can be sure you will cross this river without danger, for Our Lord has sent us this sign.” Then he followed the animal, as confidently as if he were on a rock, for he had placed all his hope in his Creator. As soon as he and the people following him went in the water, Our Lord showed him such graciousness that they found ground beneath their feet less than two cubits®? below the surface, so that they hardly got wet at all. This 15«They were overjoyed....turned to” supplied from Ponceau. 16h tears” omitted, as in Sommer, and “By whose commandment we came... His sweet pity” supplied from Sommer. VW«Them” and ‘They,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “us” and “we”). 18«Erom the hour of prime until” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 19Tosephus,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “Joseph”). There is some confusion in the Mans ms. in this chapter between the two characters; throughout the following episode Mans frequently has “Joseph” instead of “Josephus”; we have corrected, as in Ponceau and Sommer, without noting every correction. 20The cubit is an ancient unit of linear measure, originally equal to the length of the forearm. 143 ground they found was a road and a bridge for them to cross the deep and rapid river. Thus they all crossed over. Everyone crossed this river together except for one person called Canaan. This Canaan was born in the city of Jerusalem, and he had twelve brothers, with the same father and mother, who were all in the group and had crossed the river with Josephus. [220] Once they were on the other side, and the twelve brothers noticed that their brother Canaan had remained behind, they were grief-stricken. They went to Josephus and said, “My lord, for God’s sake, tell us why our brother Canaan remained behind while all the others crossed with us.” “I will certainly tell you this,” said Josephus. “Those of you who are here, who crossed with us, unburdened yourselves of your sins some time ago, insofar as you could. But he has not yet done so.?! Therefore, if he had gone in the water, the burden of his sins would have pulled him down to the bottom, and he would have drowned. Feeling guilty, he stayed behind because he knew he could easily perish where we all went safely. Now I have told you the truth about why he stayed behind.” Then the brothers began to weep very softly, and they said to Josephus, “Oh, my lord, will he stay there thus, never to come with us? How can we leave him behind, outside his land and far from his nation? He is our oldest brother. We should watch over him as we would ourselves. My lord, for God’s sake, please do whatever you can so that he will be with us, for we will die of sorrow if we depart without him.” Then they lay down at Josephus’s feet and wept so hard that he took great pity on them, for they were worthy men in the sight of God and Holy Church, and valorous and bold knights. So he replied, “For love of you, I will see that he comes across, but I believe [221] that greater harm will come to you from his company“* than should, and it would be better for you and for him if he stayed there rather than come over here to you.” They still implored him to have their brother with them, for otherwise they would die of sorrow. And Josephus said he would do as they asked, since they were so anxious. He went back to the river he had crossed, went in, and crossed as easily as before. When he reached Canaan, he said, “Canaan, now your lack of faith is apparent. If you had kept to your faith as loyally as your brothers did, you would not have remained here.” Then he took him by the hand,23 saying, “Follow me.” After he had led him to the shore, Canaan looked at the rapid, black, deep water and said, “My lord, you can return confidently, but nothing will make me go into this water without a ship and risk death.” Josephus replied, “If you don’t have enough faith in God,”* it is no wonder, for you yourself know very well that some time ago you failed to do something that Our Lord would have been grateful for. Therefore, you don’t dare put yourself under His protection. Now stay here, and I will 2l“Who crossed with us” and “of your sins. ... not yet done so” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 22th 5 company,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “his companion”). 23“By the hand” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 241f.. God” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 144 go back to your brothers. Don’t worry about staying here a long time, for I assure you that some fishermen will soon come by who will take you across.” Thereupon Josephus crossed back over, and Canaan stayed on the far side. When Canaan’s brothers saw that he was not coming, they began to lament again as much as before. But this sorrow did not last long, for after Josephus had crossed back over, it was not long before some sailors passed by in a small ship. [222] When Canaan saw them, he beseeched them to take him across in their ship, which they did. There was never so much rejoicing as that of his brothers once they were reunited. They loved him so much that otherwise they would have died of sorrow. When Josephus saw that Canaan had crossed, he said, “Canaan, do you know what the men who took you from one side to the other have gained? Your burden will be so sorrowful for them, and the fact that they welcomed you on their ship will be so badly rewarded that they will perish immediately before your eyes even though they are pagan unbelievers. Do you know why this will happen to them? Because they did something that displeased Our Lord, for it did not please Our Lord for you to keep our company henceforth. That is why He left you on the other side. And the reward for those who brought you over will be that the water will engulf them. Now you will see whether what I have said is true.” As soon as Josephus had spoken, a great wind arose, with a crack of thunder, and began to agitate the water from one shore to the other so wondrously that it would have seemed to you, because of the huge, high waves, that the river would flood the entire country. After that a great whirlwind came from the forest and struck the ship, overturning it. It sank at once, so that no one saw the ship or those in it again. Rather, they all perished and drowned just as Josephus had promised. When Josephus’s words came true, just as they were spoken, and those on the bank of the river saw they had lost sight of the ship and the men [223] in it, they asked Josephus, “My lord, what will we do? Will we stay here or go on?” “We will go into this forest,” he replied, “and then I will show you Moses, as I promised the day before yesterday.” “Oh, my lord,” they said, “will we really see Moses?” “Yes,” said he, “I will show you?> what I can that is good.” Then they left, going toward the forest of Darnantes. And Alan the Fat, who was called the Rich*6 Fisherman, Bron, and Peter came to Josephus and said, “My lord, for God’s sake, tell us what the stag and the four lions symbolize, if you can.” “My lords,” he said, “this is a symbol of the High Master, who sometimes shows Himself obscurely to His disciples. And yet if you are not in mortal sin, you can easily understand that He should show Himself in the form of a stag, and I will tell you why. You know very well that when the stag reaches old age, he becomes young again by shedding part of his hair and skin, thus returning from old 25«Moses, as I promised. ...1 will show you” supplied from Ponceau. 26Rich” supplied from Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail age to2? youth, which is like returning from death to life. In this same way Jesus Christ, the sweet Lord, the blessed Prophet, came back from death to life when He left His skin at the agony of the Cross, that is, the mortal flesh He had taken on in the womb of the blessed Virgin Mary. Because there was never a spot of sin in this Lord, He appeared to us as a stag without spots. “By the whiteness covering him you should understand virginity, which was so nobly housed in Him that one could never see a sign or spot of lust in Him. By the chain around his neck you should understand humility. By the four animals that kept him company, you should [224] understand the four Evangelists, the four chaste holy men who put into writing part of the works Jesus Christ did while He was among us as an earthly man. Thus you should understand Jesus Christ by the stag; virginity by the whiteness; humility by the chain; and the four Evangelists by the four animals.*8 For this reason you should understand and realize that Jesus Christ came dressed in the sign of virginity and humility to lead us across the water. Therefore, you should rejoice when you had such a noble Leader to take you through this danger. “T will tell you yet another thing that should make you very happy, for just as Our Lord appeared in this form for your bliss, He will appear for their despair to the two wretches in the time of the king who will be called Arthur. And the names of the two wretches will be Lancelot and Mordred. Before this time Our Lord will not show Himself in this form, but then without fail He will show Himself to these sinners, just as you saw today.”29 They conversed in this way until they came to the forest of Darnantes. After they had entered and wandered two leagues* in the tall and ancient forest, Josephus, who was in front, turned off the road. Seeing him leave the main road, those behind him followed. He traveled*! until he came to a valley, where he found a large, strong, sumptuous castle, which was nevertheless not very easy to defend. When they [225] reached the entrance, they found the gate open. They went in, finding no man or woman to oppose their entry or departure. Once inside, they considered the castle very beautiful, except that it was quite old and falling into ruin. Josephus led them to a great hall on ground level next to®? a courtyard. After entering the palace, they saw a big and marvelous fire burning with huge flames, as brightly as if all the logs in the world had been set on fire. Upon seeing this fire, they asked Josephus what it was. At that very moment they heard a voice say loudly enough for everyone to hear, “Holy man, Josephus, filled with the grace of the Holy Spirit, blessed creature, pray for me to the High Master, whom you serve night and day, to make this anguish I suffer, which is so great that no mortal heart could imagine it, lighter and easier to bear, so that it is less 2744e becomes young ... old age to” supplied from Ponceau. 28Four animals” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer, 294 reference to events in the Lancelot, see Chapter 167. 30“) eagues,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “days”). 31 Corrected to singular, as in Ponceau and Sommer. 32-Next to,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “inside”). The History of the Holy Grail than what I deserve to suffer.” The voice that said this clearly came from the fire. Josephus replied to the voice at once, “I would pray to Our Lord if I did not think I would anger Him.” “Ah,” said the voice, “I beseech you to pray to Him anyway, because I know that my torment will be lightened.” “Tell us how things have gone for you—whether you are lost or saved,” said Josephus, “and if you will ever find mercy from your Creator.” “I believe,” he replied, “that my misdeed was not so great that I cannot still find mercy, for the mercy of the High Master is so sweet toward sinners that they easily find [226] pardon as long as they do penance. But I committed too great an offence when I sat in the seat that was not granted to me or to any mortal man. It is undoubtedly a Spiritual seat, for the High Master rests there in the company of His ministers, although we don’t see Him. “Because of the great offense I committed when I sat there, I who was an old and sullied sinner, such great vengeance was taken on me that I was lifted from the table before your eyes, by the ministers of hell, who carried me away to take me to the dark house. They went along, tossing me back and forth to each other, until we got here. While they were passing through the forest faster than the wind blows, it began to thunder and lightning began to flash, and the greatest storm in the world blew up right at this time. This storm lasted a long time. At the moment when they were carrying me, it happened that a worthy religious of holy life, who had been in a hermitage in this forest for thirty-two years, was passing by. When he saw them carrying me away, sure of having won me completely, he adjured them until they stopped and put me down on the ground precisely where I am now. “This worthy man came forward and said to them, ‘Leave him, for you don’t have the right to him. He is not yours, nor has he committed such a great sin that he is completely lost.*3 Rather, he will yet find mercy, though he will pay for his offense by being consumed in a burning fire, as a symbol of his lust, until the good knight [227] who will bring the great adventures of Great Britain to an end comes to visit him to learn about the marvel of this thing. Once this knight has come—he in whom there will be no fire of lust or stain of base sin or carnal burning—the fire that will have lasted until then will cease. And then this man will find mercy and pardon with the help of this holy knight.’ This is what the worthy man said about me and about the punishment I must suffer because I committed an offense when I sat in the seat. “Upon hearing what he said, the devils left me completely and went on their way. But they harmed the people living here, who were pagans, by strangling them all. And I remained here in such torment and heat as you can see.” Then Alan the Fat said to the one who was speaking, “Say, creature, whatever you may be—man or woman—tell me who you are, so that I may be more certain, for I want very much to know you.” 33-1 ost,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “pardons,” “pardoned”?). Ne “Oh, Alan,” said Moses, “I am Moses, your close relative, who am thus put in fire and flames because of my misdeed when I sat in the seat before all of you. I ask you to pray to the High Master for me, to lighten my pain a litde. I firmly believe that if you pray to Him, He will listen to your request, for He willingly grants the requests of the just.” When Simeon, who was next to Josephus, heard that this was Moses, he cried out aloud, “Oh, Moses, are you the one who is suffering this great travail and pain?” “Father, it is really I. And I would be even worse off if I were in the dark house of hell, where I would have been put if it had not been for the prayer of the holy hermit, who delivered me from the devils’ hands. Simeon, my father, [228] this happened to me because of what I did, and I would have been eternally damned if it hadn’t been for the holy man’s prayer. I tell you and Canaan this, so that you will protect yourselves better in the future than you have done so far, for you can be sure that by sinning against your Creator, you can fall into even greater pain than I am suffering.” “God!” said Simeon. “Moses, how can I protect myself? For I would not want to endure this anguish for any reason.” “Father,” said Moses, “you have with you the doctor who will heal you of the deadly venom, if you believe him. You have with you Jesus Christ’s minister, Josephus, the holy bishop. Ask for his help, and do as he advises, and I tell you truly that you will never know what pain is.” While the son and father were speaking thus, Josephus and Alan, the Rich Fisherman, went down on their knees to pray to Our Lord for Moses, that in His sweet pity He lighten Moses’ pain in some way, if it seemed fitting. While they were praying to Our Lord, they saw clearly that from the heavens water fell into the fire in the form of rain, putting out a large part of the fire so that the flames were only half as big as they had been before. And when this happened, Moses cried out so loudly that everyone in the group heard him, “Oh, Josephus, now you can stop praying when you wish, for you have cut my pain in half. God led you here for my good, for I felt all the torment and [229] pain that mortal heart could conceive. But, thanks be to God, now it seems to me that my pain has ceased, so much has it been lightened because of you.” Josephus replied that he was pleased he had found a remedy for his pain. Then Simeon spoke to Moses again, “Moses, my son, do you think this fire, which has diminished, will last a long time?” “It will last, father, but it won't be as long as I deserve, for if Jesus Christ considered my fault, it would last forever. But it won’t, thanks be to Him, for in His pity and mercy He has prepared the end of this pain. This fire will stop when chance brings Galahad, the good knight, the one who will put an end to the adventures of the Holy Grail and will complete*4 the adventures of Great Britain. Father, at that time my punishment will end, and I will find rest from my pain. And you, my lord,” he said to Josephus, “for God's sake, don’t stay here long, but go throughout this land, 34¢To the adventures... Ponceau and Sommer. . will complete” supplied from 146 preaching the name of the True Crucified One. It is much needed, for in this country® there are only unbelievers, and they are the most unbelieving and traitorous people you have ever seen. Go in the grace of Jesus Christ. May He guide you wherever you go. And I will stay here until the one whose human goodness will put this fire completely out comes.” Then Josephus departed with his followers, leaving Moses in the fire. They wandered all that day and the next until they came out of the forest of Darnantes and entered the kingdom of Scott. It was not called that because it was Scotland, but because that was the king’s name. That evening [230] they spent the night in a great, wide plain. After they were seated for supper it happened that everyone in the group was filled so completely with everything their hearts conceived that it was miraculous— except for two, Canaan and Simeon. These two had nothing from the grace of the Holy Vessel, but were hungry and wretched for two whole days. Seeing that everyone in the group was more blessed than they, they discussed it, saying, “This misfortune that has happened to us is not because of our deeds or acts but doubtless because of our relatives, who pretend to fear God but don’t. And I know that God punishes us more easily than them, because we are old, while they are young.” “Indeed,” said Simeon, “I know” that Peter, my cousin and Josephus’s,>’ who pretends to serve his Creator, does not suffer on this road as I do, nor has he done as much good or given as much for God's sake as I have. So I believe his sins have been turned against me. And I am convinced that Our Lord is not angry with me because of my misdeed.” “Certainly,” said Canaan, “I agree with you fully, and I say the same thing about my brothers.*® They are so perfidious that in no way should they follow our bishop’s group. And I believe I am shamed by their disloyalty, just as you see, and that Our Lord hates me. Tell me what I can do.” “I don’t know,” replied Simeon. “But I will avenge myself against my cousin Peter before the hour of prime tomorrow in a way [231] that will be spoken of here and elsewhere.” “And if I don’t deal with my brothers in such a way that it will be spoken about,” said Canaan, “I don’t ever want the grace of the Holy Spirit to give me sustenance.” Thus these two were in despair because they saw that Our Lord did not take care of them as He had before. Their anger made them do such a treacherous thing that the entire world spoke about it, and everyone knew about it. And the chronicle tells what that treacherous act was, how great it was, and its manner. In the evening, once they had gone to bed in the large, beautiful plain, Canaan, into whose heart the enemy had 35«Country” supplied from Ponceau. 361 know” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 37Tosephus’s,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “Joseph”). Throughout this section Mans often has “Joseph” instead of “Josephus.” We have corrected, as in Ponceau and Sommer, without noting each correction. 38Corrected to plural, as in Ponceau and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail entered, had not forgotten the perfidy he had in mind. He took his sword, which was very sharp, and went where his twelve brothers lay. Having recognized them in the moonlight shining on them and seen that they were asleep, he drew his sword and struck the first one so hard that he made his head fly off. Then he began to kill them one after another, until every one of the twelve had paid for his despair. When he saw they were all dead, he left them and went to find Simeon. As soon as he saw him, he told him what he had done to his brothers. “Is this true?” asked Simeon. “You have acted as I wish. I swear to you that I will do the same to my cousin Peter. Wait for me until I’ve killed him and returned.” “You will find me under that tree,” said Canaan, pointing to a fig tree in the middle of the field. He went to the tree, and Simeon [232] went where Josephus was, thinking Peter would be nearby. He carried in his hand a keen, sharpened knife whose blade was easily a foot long. The knife was greatly to be feared for two reasons: it was strongly poisoned, and it cut better than any other that then existed. Upon arriving where Peter slept and recognizing him, Simeon raised the knife to strike him in the trunk. But it happened, either for Peter's salvation, or because it did not please God that he die in such a way,39 or because Simeon was afraid, that he failed to strike Peter in the chest, but struck him in the shoulder so hard that he sank the point of the knife in up to the hilt. Feeling himself wounded, Peter cried out, “Oh God, I am dead!” and the others awoke. Seeing that Peter, the one they loved the most in the group, was wounded, they asked him, weeping, who had done this. He said Simeon had wounded him. They seized Simeon and led him before Josephus and asked, “What shall we do with the man who killed Peter?” As they spoke these words, they heard a loud and piteous cry and great weeping, for those who had found the twelve brothers dead were grieving as if everyone they knew lay dead before them. And when Bron, who was there, saw them dead like this, he came to Josephus and told him, weeping, “Oh, my lord, come see the greatest sorrow and harm you will ever see—Canaan’s twelve brothers, who have just been killed, I don’t know how.” When Josephus heard this, he was [233] shocked. He went there as quickly as he could. Upon arriving, he saw them lying on the ground all covered with blood and said angrily, “Oh, enemy, your traps are so cruel, and you are so clever in trickery and deceit! Oh, dear Lord God, I have kept such poor watch over those whom you commanded me to protect!” Then he had Simeon brought before him and asked, “Simeon, do you know who killed these twelve brothers?” Not wanting to hide it, Simeon replied, “My lord, their brother Canaan killed them.” “Where did he go?” asked Josephus. “My lord, he is there, under that fig tree, where he is hiding while he waits for me to return.” Then Josephus ordered those with him to go to the fig tree, seize Canaan, and bring him before him quickly. They 3%Or because... in sucha way” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail did what he ordered as fast as they could, and went to where Canaan was waiting for Simeon. They seized him despite himself and brought him before Josephus.4? When Josephus saw him, he asked him, weeping, “Oh, Canaan, why did you do this? Why did you kill your brothers, who were such worthy men and such good knights on earth?” He replied that if he killed them, he was glad about it and did not repent of it, and that Simeon had advised him to do it. “Where did this desire come from?” asked Josephus. “By my faith,” said Canaan, “it was because I saw that they seemed to be more blessed than I was, for every day they were filled with the grace of the Holy Vessel,*! while I was dying of hunger.” “What!” said Josephus. “Because Our Lord loved them better than you and showed them greater love, you hated them mortally so that you killed them like this? Never has any man done a greater act of treachery. Therefore, I pray to Our Lord to give us a sign by which we might know whether [234] we should take earthly vengeance for this or whether we should wait until Our Lord shows us His vengeance.” Then a voice came among them, saying so that they all could hear, “You must pass judgment on both of them, for divine vengeance is all ready.” Upon hearing this, they said this was a very good sign, since Our Lord agreed that they ought to die, because of what they had done. When the beautiful, clear day had spread out over the world, and the sun, which had already risen, began to evaporate the dew, Josephus said to his followers, “Judge these two men as you know you must, for it seems to me they deserve it.” They replied, “My lord, you know better than we what should be done. Therefore, we won't say anything; it is you who will say it.” “I will never undertake to judge them,” said Josephus. “You who have been valorous and bold knights on earth,*? who know about the world, and who have now become Jesus Christ’s knights, judge this in the way of the world.”* When they heard they must do this, they stepped back and began to ask one another what they thought they should do. They discussed it, offering many different opinions and suggesting different judgments and means of death, until they agreed that the two men deserved to be buried alive and thus put to death. When they had reached this judgment by common assent, they came to Josephus and told him what they had decided. He replied, “Do what you have decided upon, for I will not [235] stop you.” They took the two, tied their hands behind their backs, then ordered two huge pits to be dug where they would be put. This was done; while they were putting them in as quickly as possible, they looked toward the kingdom of Wales and saw two men glowing with burning flames, as red 40“Ouickly.... Josephus” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 41 Vessel,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “Spirit”). 427alorous and bold” and “on earth” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 43“and who ... world” supplied from Ponceau. 17 as a burning log, flying through the air as easily as two birds. They came straight toward them as fast as the wind blows, seized Simeon in spite of them all, lifted him from the ground, and carried him off in the direction they had come from. But here the story does not tell where they took him, nor does my lord Robert of Boron undertake at this point to tell where they put him or in what place they left him. But when it is time, he will tell it clearly, so that no one should have any reason to blame him.*+ Now the story leaves off speaking about Simeon and returns to speak of Canaan. 36. Canaan’s Burial and Peter’s Illness.! Now the story says that at this point Simeon was carried away, just as I have told you, so that all those who saw it were very frightened. They watched as long as they could see him* to find out where he would go, but he was soon so far away that they could no longer see him anywhere. Realizing they had lost him completely from sight, they came back to the pit they had started for Canaan. They made it deep enough [236] to hold a man’s body. Once they had done this, they put Canaan in it, his hands tied behind his back, then threw soil down on him until he was covered up to the shoulders. Seeing himself in such a state, Canaan thought he was truly going to die. Pitying himself, he began to lament bitterly. He turned his head toward Josephus and said as best he could, weeping, “Holy creature, Josephus, I have sinned against what I shouldn’t have, but because there is no sin for which a sinner cannot be pardoned by his Creator, I pray for mercy with a good, repentant heart. Thus, [237] I pray to Him, in His great pity, to have mercy on ime so as not to lose what He put in me, that is, my soul. And you, Josephus, whom I know to be such a worthy man and such a holy creature that your prayer can help me, I beseech you to pray to Him that if He ever had mercy on a sinner, He have mercy on me.” After that he said to everyone there, “For God’s sake, untie my hands, so that I can extend them toward my Creator before I die. And for God’s sake, before I leave this world in your sight, please do what I ask: bury each of my brothers, whom I killed so treacherously, as you know, in a grave by himself around mine, so that I will be surrounded by them all. Do you know why I ask this of you? Because I want everyone who comes after us and who sees my brothers’ tombs and hears the story of my great treachery from everyone in this land to pray for me. And I ask all of you here, as my brothers in God,? [238] to pray for me, that 44Sce Chapter 38. 1 Corresponds to Hucher III: 235-245; Sommer I: 266—269, Ponceau §387-390. 2Corrected to singular, as in Ponceau and Sommer. 3“God,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “faith”). 148 He take such vengeance on me in the present time‘ that on Judgment Day my great misdeed will be pardoned. After he had made this request, those before him, seeing him weeping, took great pity on him and did exactly as he implored, for they untied his hands and buried all his brothers around him, each one alone, putting over each a marble tombstone, the most beautiful and splendid they could find in the country. They also put one over Canaan, who was still alive when it was put in place, as they knew very well. After that they put the proper name on each tomb, but on Canaan’s they put words that said, HERE LIES CANAAN, BORN IN THE LAND OF JERUSALEM, WHO KILLED HIS TWELVE BROTHERS THROUGH ENVY. After having done this, they asked Josephus if they would set out from this place that day. “No,” he said, “we will not set out from here today, but I will tell you what to do—something you have forgotten and which is appropriate in this instance. You know very well that these were worthy and brave men. Put a sign that {239] will show they were knights.” They asked him what symbol he wanted. And he told them, “Put on each tomb the sword belonging to the man who lies beneath, and I believe no one who comes here will be able to bear those swords.” And they did exactly that. That night the group slept in the very place where the twelve brothers had been killed. And they looked at Peter’s wound. After examining it carefully, they agreed that they could cure him, so they put in the wound what they thought would heal it. But in this they were badly deceived, for they did not notice that the wound was poisoned. Because they did not use anything to remove poison, they did more harm than good to Peter, for as soon as they had put on their salve and herbs, which were not antidotes to poison, the flesh began to fester, and the illness began to torment him more than before, so that it soon seemed to Peter he would die from the pain he suffered. Thus he said to Josephus, “My lord, you can be sure that I am now sicker than before,” and that the herbs were only harming him. And he replied, “Peter, dear friend, fear not, for if it pleases God, Our Lord will tend to your illness.” Thus Josephus comforted Peter, because he saw he was frightened. He and the entire group remained that day and night before the tombs. They had worked so hard that day making the graves, [240] burying the bodies, and carrying the tombstones that they rested that night better than they had before. The next day, upon arising, they looked at the tombs and marveled over something they had never seen before, for they saw clearly that the swords they had placed on’ each tomb were standing upright with the points down and the handles up, without any mortal man having set his hand on them, as far as they knew. And at Canaan’s tomb they 44In the present time” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 54S they... heal it” supplied from Ponceau and Hucher variants. 6“So that it soon seemed to Peter. .. . before” supplied from Ponceau, Hucher variants, and Sommer. 7On,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “under”). The History of the Holy Grail saw a wonder: it was burning on all sides as brightly as if it were a very dry log when it is put in a great fire. Upon seeing this wonder, they asked Josephus, “My lord, do you believe this fire will last a long time? Is it eternal?”§ ‘T tell you,” said Josephus, “that it will not burn forever but will cease. However, this will not happen soon; it will burn until a sinful and lustful? knight, who will nevertheless surpass all his companions in goodness and chivalry, comes. Upon his arrival this fire will be extinguished, not because of his goodness, but to show that man should direct his knightly grace in some way. This knight will be called Lancelot, and he will beget the good knight, to whom Our Lord will give His blessed grace, and who, because of his holy [241] and religious life, will accomplish all of the adventures and marvels of Great Britain, where other knights will fail. Simeon and Moses will be delivered from their great suffering by the one I am telling you about, whose baptismal name will be Galahad, while Canaan will be delivered by Galahad’s father. And all these things will happen in the time of a king who will be called Arthur.”!° Thus Josephus told his companions a great part of the things that were to come, just as the divine secret had revealed it to him. On the very day he told them this, one of their companions named Parent, who was a priest, decided to remain behind. He said he would stay there all the days of his life and, with God’s help, build a chapel, where he would sing Mass every day as long as he lived and where he would pray to Our Lord to have mercy on!! Canaan. He did all this because he saw that Canaan had truly repented of his sins before the tomb had been put over his head. Thus, Parent stayed there, in order to pray for Canaan. He founded a chapel, which Count Balaan, who was the lord of the land, caused to be built. Through Parent’s advice, Count Balaan was later converted [242] to the Christian law. The next day all of Josephus’s group departed except for Parent, who remained there. And Peter remained with him, because he was wounded and could not follow the others. Before long Peter, who was wounded so badly that it was thought he would die, began to get much worse, for the poison in the wound made him swell up so much within the first three days that anyone who had seen him before would hardly recognize him. Parent knew quite a lot about healing wounds, but he was not clever enough to know the poison in this wound, which frightened him immensely. When he saw that the wound was only getting worse from day to day, he was very sad. And when Peter, who was suffering as much pain as a man can from a wound, saw that Parent was unable to cure him, he began to weep with self-pity, because he saw he would die for lack of a doctor. Then he said, weeping, 8«T5 it eternal?” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 9“And lustful” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 1°The only one of these prophecies to be fulfilled in the Lancelot-Grail cycle is the deliverance of Simeon; see The Quest for the Holy Grail, Chapter 80. “tim and” omitted, as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail “Parent, my dear friend, I see very clearly that I won't be healed in this place, for [243] it does not please Our Lord. But because I think that with God’s help I can yet do some good that would remain undone if I were to die now, I beg you to take me to the nearby sea. I feel certain that when we get there, we will find something that will help me more than if I were to stay here; you can see very well that I am merely getting worse from day to day.” When Parent heard Peter’s request, he said he would do his best to take him to the sea. His search was so successful that day and the next that he got a donkey. He had Peter, who was very sick, mount it, and led him on it until they reached the sea. Once there, they found nothing but a small boat whose sail was set and which was prepared just as if to depart right away. Upon seeing the boat, Peter thanked Our Lord, for he thought indeed that Our Lord had sent it only for him. Then he said to Parent, “My dear friend, help me dismount and get in this boat, and I will go by sea to a place where I will find a cure for my illness, if it pleases God.” Then Parent began to weep bitterly and said, “What is this, Peter? Will you leave me thus, and do you want to go to a place from which you may never return? How [244] can you leave all alone, without any company, as sick as you are? l implore you to let me at least go with you.” “Put me in this boat,” said Peter. “Once you have done so, I will tell what I would like you to do.” Parent immediately took Peter and carried him to the boat. Once he had put him inside, as gently as he could, Peter said, “Now leave, Parent, my dear friend, for you have fulfilled my desire. I will remain alone, and you will return to your chapel and pray every day to God to guide me toa place where I can find a cure. If you see my lord Josephus before I do, greet him for me and tell him that I must do this, for otherwise I would not be healed of my wound. And I think that God will indeed lead me to a place where I will find a cure.” Thereupon Parent left the boat, weeping [245] softly, for he felt great pity for Peter, whom he was leaving so ill. And Peter was also weeping tenderly, for he was very much afraid of dying. They bade each other Godspeed. After they had kissed each other, Peter told Parent not to forget him in his prayers, and Parent did likewise, for each knew the other was a worthy man in God’s sight. As soon as Parent had left the boat, while he was still looking at Peter, weeping, the wind struck the sail, and the boat left shore and was soon so far out to sea that Parent could no longer see either Peter or the boat. Then Parent mounted the donkey and returned to his chapel, grieving bitterly over Peter, who had left him in such a way. But now the story leaves off speaking about Parent and returns to Peter, to tell what happened to him and how he was cured of his wound. 149 37. Peter’s Healing and King Orcant’s Conversion.} Here the story says that after the boat Peter was in had gone some distance from shore, so that Parent had completely lost sight of it, and was at high sea, a stiff, strong wind [246] began to push it forward at a fast pace—faster than a bird could fly. For four days Peter traveled at sea in the boat in this way, eating or drinking but little. On the fifth day, around prime, it happened that he fell asleep from fatigue and exhaustion, for he had suffered a great deal of pain in a short time. As he slept, as thin and wretched as he could be, he happened to arrive at an island where there was a wondrously splendid, beautiful stronghold. This castle was full of pagans, and the lord, who was a king named Orcant, was one of the good knights in the world, among those who did not believe in God at that time. When Peter arrived at the castle, King Orcant’s daughter, a lovely girl, esteemed for her beauty more than all the women in the country, had gone to play on the seashore with several of her companions. While [247] she was amusing herself on shore, she came upon Peter’s boat. It was so terribly hot that Peter had taken off his tunic and under-tunic so that he was almost nude. When the girl came toward him and found him sleeping, she began to stare at him, for he seemed to be very sick. Seeing his large, hideous wound, she said to her companions, “Do you know why this man is so thin and weak? It’s because of this wound, which is so dangerous that it’s a wonder he’s not already dead. In my opinion it would be a great shame if he were to die from it, for he had a beautiful body when he was sound and healthy. That's why, if it were possible, I would like the Christian who is in my father’s prison—the one who knows so much about how to heal wounds—to be here, for I know very well that if any mortal man can do something about this, he can.” As she spoke these words, Peter woke up; when he saw before him the sumptuously dressed girl and the others with her, he wondered who they were. And when she* saw that he was awake, she asked who he was. He said he had been born in Jerusalem, that he was a Christian, and that he was not well and badly needed to find a worthy man who would know [248] what to do about his illness, for he was dying for lack of a doctor. “What!” she said. “You're a Christian?” He replied he was indeed a Christian. “And are you a knight?” she asked. “Yes,” he said, “I am a knight.” “My word,” said she, “since you're Christian, you have not arrived at a good place, for in this country and on this island there are only pagans, who will soon kill you if they learn you are Christian. And yet, because you are alone and sicker than I have ever seen any man, I will see that you are healed, if I can do it so secretly that my father doesn’t learn anything about it.” Corresponds to Hucher III: 245-271; Sommer I: 270-281; Ponceau §39]-405. 2“Sumptuously dressed.... she” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 150 “My lady,” he said, “do you think you or someone else can try to do this?” “By my faith,” she replied, “my father is holding prisoner a Christian whom I believe to be a very worthy man in his faith. I am sure that if he were free to come to you, he would cure you, if mortal man’s knowledge can do so. Certainly, I wish you were in my room now without anyone knowing about it except my ladies. I swear I would figure out by tonight how to get you in this worthy man’s hands.” “Ah, my lady,” said Peter, “in the name of God and nobility—not for love of me, but for love of yourself and out of nobility and kindness— [249] take pity on me so that I might speak to this worthy man.” When she heard him implore her so gently, she looked at her companions and said, “What shall we do with this Christian? It seems to me that the person who healed him of his illness would be doing a good deed. There seems no doubt that he would be a good knight if his health returned.” “My lady,” said the others, “if you feel as you seem to, he will certainly be healed, for we can easily put him in your room. We’ll tell you how: we will take him from shore up to the garden, and from the garden we will take him to the courtyard, and from there to your room. Once we have put him there, you can easily do as you wish, and the man in your father’s prison will come to talk to him.” “By my faith,” she said, “I would like you to do that.” Then they took him as gently as they could out of the ship and, bearing him up on all sides, led him to the garden. From the garden they led him to the courtyard, and from there to the room of the king’s daughter. Once they had taken him to her room, they put him to bed so he could rest, if possible. [250] But this was not possible, for he was in too much pain. The girl asked him how he was. And he replied that he was dying and that he did not think he would see the next day. Hearing this, she took pity on him and said, “Now don’t be afraid, for I will soon find help for you, if I can.” Then she went to the cell, where she succeeded with some difficulty in freeing the man who was imprisoned there. After she had removed his chains, he asked her, “My lady, what do you intend to do with me? Certainly, you will gain nothing from my death.” He said this because he really believed she wanted to have him killed. And she replied, “Don’t worry. Just follow me to my room, and I will show you why I have taken you out of prison.” Then the girl set off, and he followed. When they reached the room, she showed him Peter, who was so sick that there is no man so hardhearted that he would not be moved to take pity on him. And she said, “Here is a Christian whom we found on shore. If you can cure him, I will deliver you from the prison you are in and send you both out of this country as splendidly equipped as you can imagine, and [251] you will go wherever you please. Do you know why I’m doing this? It’s only because I was overcome with pity, as he is suffering such great pain.” When the prisoner heard that the man was a Christian, he was overjoyed and said to the girl that he would gladly undertake this, both because she had implored him and The History of the Holy Grail because he shared his religion. Then he asked Peter how long this illness had lasted. He replied that sixteen days previously, as he could see, he had been wounded, and that since then his wound had grown steadily worse; that he had gone to several doctors, who should know about it, “but it was no use. And this is what frightens me the most.” The prisoner said to the girl, “If you please, I would like him to be carried into the meadow, where I will see the wound better than in this room.” She had Peter carried to the meadow, in the sun. The prisoner began to examine the wound carefully, until he realized it was poisoned, and the reason it could not heal easily was that the poison had not been removed. Then he said to Peter, “Dear friend, you are badly poisoned, and this is why you cannot heal. But since I have recognized the poison, I assure you that I will heal you within a month, with God’s help.” Then he began [252] to seek herbs in the meadow and elsewhere, in order to remove the poison. He set himself to the task so well that before the month had passed, he returned Peter to the girl sound and healthy. And if Peter, who was one of the most handsome men on earth, was handsome when he left Jerusalem, he was now even more so. During this time it happened that the king of Ireland, who was called Marahant, came to see King Orcant, his relative. He brought with him one of his sons who was a new knight and who was a very strong man. That night in the castle there was a great festival. But in the evening a traitorous wine steward in King Orcant’s service® poisoned the son of the king of Ireland, who died at the very table where he was eating. When the king of Ireland saw that his son had been poisoned, he truly thought it had been done on King Orcant’s advice. So he went straight to Great Britain to see the king, who was called Luce, since both he and King Orcant held their lands from him. After Marahant came before Luce and charged King Orcant with poisoning his son, Orcant was immediately summoned. When he reached London, where King Luce stayed [253] more often than anywhere else, Marahant immediately accused Orcant of treachery, stating that by an act of perfidy he had killed his son in his castle. And King Orcant* immediately pledged to defend himself against this accusation, either personally or through someone else. He did not tender this pledge because he dared enter into combat against Marahant, for he knew? Marahant was one of the strongest and best pagan knights in the world, but he wanted one of his brothers who was a very good knight to fight for him. Thus the battle was swom on both sides. They gave good hostages,® and then the date of the battle was set. When King Orcant returned home, he asked his brother to do battle for him against King Marahant. And he replied, “Certainly, my lord, no one would advise me to do 3“Who was his relative” omitted, as in Ponceau. 4That by an act of perfidy....Orcant” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 5“He knew” supplied from Ponceau. 6When a battle was set for some future time, the combatants offered hostages to ensure their return. The History of the Holy Grail what you are asking—do battle against King Marahant for you—unless he wanted my death, for we know very well that no man’s prowess can compare with Marahant’s. Therefore, there is no way, for life or death, that I will enter a field against him in single combat.” When King Orcant heard this, he was very frightened, for since he had failed to enlist his brother, he did not know where to turn. He had tested Marahant so many times in battle that he knew he was really the most valiant knight [254] he had ever met. That is why he did not dare to enter a field against him. Then he sent for twelve of the best knights in his land, having planned how he would learn who was the best one. He pretended to be sick. When they saw him lying in bed, they really believed he was ill, so they asked him what was wrong. He said he was distressed by some news that had come to him, and they asked him what this was. “King Marahant has sent into this land a knight who boasts that he alone will fell twelve of the best knights of my land. And to test this, he is to be at the Round Pine tomorrow at the hour of prime. Now decide what you will do, for the only reason I have sent for you is so that you will go and humble his pride, for I don’t want him to be able to boast in his country that he had no one to joust with.” Thus spoke the king, telling them lies, for no foreign knight had come. But he himself wanted to test whether among these twelve there was a worthy man he would dare to put in a field against Marahant. The knights said to the king, “My lord, do you know indeed that the knight will come to the Round Pine tomorrow at the hour of prime?” “Yes,” the king replied. “We will go to him,” they said, “and joust in such a way that we should not be blamed.” Thereupon the twelve knights left [255] the king and went to their lodgings. And the king remained lying in his bed until evening. Once night had fallen, he called his seneschal and said, “Bring me arms, but disguise them, and cover my horse with a blanket to disguise him, for I want to leave, and I will return tomorrow evening. If anyone asks for me tomorrow, say that I am unwell, and don’t let anyone enter my room, no matter how close he may be to me. The seneschal did exactly as the king told him. When day was near, the king arose, armed himself, and mounted his horse. He made his seneschal swear that, no matter what news he heard, he would not tell anyone that the king had gone out. Then the king crossed the bridge and rode until he reached the Round Pine, where he waited until the hour of prime. At this very moment, before the hour of prime had passed, all twelve knights arrived, but they did not bring any lances with them, for in all seasons, night and day, the pine was surrounded with lances, because the people of the country who engaged in arms often came there to test themselves against one another. When the twelve knights saw the knight who had come to joust under the pine, [256] each of them took whatever lance came to hand. The king took one and charged the first of the twelve knights, striking him so fiercely under the armpit that he made a large and terrible wound, and knocking him so roughly to 51 the ground that he did not have the strength to get up, for he was crushed in the fall. Once the knight was on the ground, the king charged the next one, bearing him to the ground as fiercely as the first. And he was badly wounded in the fall. Then he felled the third and the fourth ones in like manner. Thus he dispatched all twelve; there was not a single one whom he did not fell. As he knocked each knight down, he took his horse by the reins and returned it to the knight who had fallen. Once all twelve were felled and had remounted, the king said to them, “My lords, you know that by the custom of this country you are my prisoners, and I can do with you what I want, except take your lives.” And they said this was true. “Since you are my prisoners, I order you,” said he, “to go to King Orcant and give yourselves up to him on my behalf.” They asked what his name was, and he said, “Don’t worry about my name, but give yourself up to the man I told you to, for I am certain that when he hears about this exploit, he will know me well, because I have been with him in many battles.” They said they would indeed do this in order to obey his command, but they were sorrowful and dejected because they had been defeated by a single knight. [257] With that the knights departed, returning to their homes. And the king immediately struck out into the nearby forest, because he did not wish to be seen by any man who might follow’ him. He remained all day in the forest. And in the evening, once night had fallen, he returned to his garden under the tower, where the seneschal was awaiting him. He dismounted and gave the seneschal his arms and his horse. Once he was stripped of his arms, he went into his room; from there he entered the hall, where he pretended to be very ill. Seeing him arrive, those in the hall stood up to greet him, asking how he was. He told them he thought he would be cured, and he forced himself to be joyful, putting on a good face. The next day, at the hour of prime, all twelve knights he had felled came before him and gave themselves up in the name of a knight they did not know. They recounted how he had felled them without a single one of them being able to move him from his saddle. “Ah,” said the king, “I know very well who the knight is. Certainly, you did badly by letting him escape.” And then he pretended to be very upset. He immediately sent word throughout his land by messengers to all the knights renowned for great prowess, that they should come joust against the Knight of the Pine. If anyone could defeat him through his prowess,® he could be sure to have whatever gift [258] he requested from King Orcant, if it was something the king could and should give. But if he was defeated, he would lose as much, for he would be disinherited for a year and a day. When the king’s countrymen heard this news and learned the truth about 7 Follow,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “see”). 8“That they should come joust. ... prowess” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 152 the twelve knights who had been felled, few came, for they feared being disinherited if they were defeated.® Once Peter, who was with the king’s daughter, was healed and regained his health from the wound he had received, he was more pensive than he had been. The girl asked him, “Peter, what’s the matter? You are more pensive than you used to be, and so it seems to me you aren’t as happy. Tell me what’s the matter, and if I can put your heart at ease, you can be sure I will.” “My lady,” he said, “you can do it easily, if you wish.” “Tell me,” she replied, “and I will do it if I can.” “Then I'll tell you,” he said, “since you give me this assurance. What has set me to thinking is the prowess of the knight whom your father has had proclaimed throughout his land. There was a time, not long ago, when if I heard about a knight in our country, as esteemed in arms as he is, not even the promise of a kingdom would keep me from going to joust with him. Nor would I hold back for anything in the world, even here in this foreign land, if I had arms and a horse. But having neither, I am as sad and pensive as you now see me.” [259] When the king’s daughter heard this, she thought at once that if he did not feel capable of great prowess, he would not have the heart or courage to speak of such a great undertaking as to joust with the knight no one could defeat. Then the girl said to him, “Peter, don’t be uneasy for lack of a horse or arms, for I will furnish you with all this by tonight as splendidly as if you were a king’s son. But certainly, my advice would be not to go joust against this knight at this time, for I don’t think you can hold out against him.” “My lady,” he answered, “lend me what you have promised anyway, and don’t be afraid, for I don’t think he'll be able to knock me from my saddle now.” When she heard him speak so confidently, she was happy. So she obtained good arms and a good horse for him. And once night had fallen, she took him out through the courtyard and led him up to a garden, where she explained how to find the pine. He left the young woman at once and rode until he neared the pine. He went into!® the forest to rest until the next morning, dismounting under an oak tree and removing his helmet. Then he took off the horse’s reins and saddle, letting it graze until daybreak, for he did not want to go any farther until day had dawned [260] clear and bright. The next day at daybreak Peter awoke and went to his horse. He put on the saddle and reins and laced his helmet, took up his shield, mounted his horse, and left the forest. Reaching the forest’s edge on the side near the castle, he looked toward the pine and saw King Orcant, who had. already come to see whether anyone would come forward to joust. Peter dismounted to see to his arms,!! making sure nothing was missing. After looking them over carefully and 9“Few came... defeated” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 10“Went into,” as in Hucher variants (Hucher has “stopped outside”). His arms” supplied from Hucher variants, Sommer, and Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail preparing them as best he could, he quickly remounted and returned to the pine, greeting the king in his language. Then he took a lance, telling the king he must joust. And the king said this pleased him greatly. With that they!* charged each other, approaching as fast as the stag fleeing before the dogs. They struck one another with such great blows that the shields did not protect the tender flesh from being pierced by the sharp iron points, and they gave each other gaping, deep wounds. The king shattered his lance, while Peter struck him so fiercely [261] that he flew over the horse’s crupper to the ground, so wounded that he could barely get up from the place where he fell. When Peter saw him fall to the ground, he dismounted and drew his sword. The king had got up, distressed and in pain. And Peter said to him, “My lord knight, you have lost your joust; now try to see if you can win anything in a sword fight.” Then he drew his sword from the scabbard and put his shield over his head. When the king saw it had come to hand-to-hand combat, he prepared himself to show his greatest prowess. He immediately drew his sword and covered himself with his shield as best he could. And yet he was so badly wounded that he needed to rest more than to fight. Then the melee began again between them, so cruel and dangerous that blood was streaming profusely from both of their bodies in more than a hundred places. Each was surprised by how brave he found his opponent. The king never thought he would find someone who could hold out against him as long as this man had, nor did Peter think he would find in any kingdom a knight as good as the king, whom he found to be tough and strong. However, in the end the king could put up no more resistance, for Peter was so valiant that before the fight was over the king could no longer stand up, [262] but fell on his face before Peter, so wounded and grief-stricken that any man who saw him would take pity on him. Peter, who never imagined it was the king, pulled at his helmet and tore it from his head, saying he would kill him if he did not give himself up. The king raised his eyes, looked at him, and said as best he could, “You can certainly kill me if you wish, for you have indeed defeated me.” “By my faith,” said Peter, “you will certainly die if you don’t give up.” “I would rather die,” said the king, “than do what you ask of me or say such shameful words of cowardice, for I and all earthly kings would receive too much shame. Because of this, I would rather die thirteen times over, if I could die that often, than say something that would cause shame and reproach to so many worthy men.” When Peter heard he was a king and not the simple knight he thought, he said, “Oh, my lord, for God’s sake, tell me who you are, because from your words it seems to me you are a king!” “Certainly,” said the king, “lord knight, I am a king, and my name is Orcant.” When Peter realized he was King Orcant, he became so grief-stricken and upset about having done him so much harm that he did not know what to do. He tendered his 12Corrected to plural, as in Ponceau and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail sword to him, saying, “Oh, my lord, for God’s sake, pardon me for the wrong I have done you. [263] Truly, I did not recognize you. Here is my sword, which I tender to you, and I surrender!® my body to you to do with as you wish to avenge the wrong I have done.” When the king heard his offer, he said, “Say, who are you, who have defeated me and yet request mercy from me? I've never heard of such a thing—the winner requesting mercy from the loser!” “My lord,” said Peter, “I am a man born in a faraway land, in the city of Jerusalem. My name is Peter, and I am a Christian. The truth is that not long ago chance brought me to your castle, mortally wounded. But, thanks be to God, your daughter’s pity, and a Christian you are holding in prison, my wound, which had made me lose all hope of living, has been healed. Once I was healed, through the help of God and this worthy man, I heard you say that you had proclaimed throughout all your land a joust with the Knight of the Pine. And I came as soon as your daughter loaned me arms and a horse. But you can be sure that I would not have come for anything in the world, if I had thought it was you, for I would have abandoned the project because of the good things I’ve had in your home and that your daughter has done for me. However, because I harmed you through ignorance, I beg you to pardon me.” The king pardoned him willingly, [264] on condition that he enter the field against Marahant for him. Peter said that in order to win the king’s love, he would gladly put himself at risk. And the king granted that afterwards he would have anything he requested, even his kingdom. “But,” he said, “until the battle you must stay hidden, so that no one will know more about you than they do now. Do you know why I say this? Because if Marahant knew you were a Christian, he could legally refuse to fight against you, since you aren’t of his faith.” Peter swore that he would not reveal his presence to anyone. With that they put their swords back in the scabbards and went to rest under the pine until deep night, uncomfortable and wounded as they were. Once night had fallen, they took up their arms again, mounted their horses, and returned to the castle they had!‘ left that day, so secretly that no one saw them enter except the seneschal, who was faithfully waiting for the king in the garden. When he saw them coming, he ran to their stirrups and helped them dismount. And the king took Peter with him and had his armor removed. Then the king sent for his daughter; once she had arrived, he said to her,!> “Child, do you know this knight?” pointing to Peter. She was afraid, so she wanted to hide it from him. And he said, “Dear daughter, you don’t need to hide it, for you have done well. Now I implore you to do a hundred times more than you have, for I can assure you that he is the best knight [265] in the world, having vanquished and beaten me today. And he has even promised to combat Marahant for me.” 13] surrender” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 14Once night had fallen... had” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. lier,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “them”). 153 The girl said she was very happy about this turn of events and that if she had served him before, now she would serve him doubly. Then they sent for the doctor, to look at their wounds, for they had quite a few, both small and large. Once the doctor had examined them and seen where they were wounded, he told them not to be afraid, for he would restore them completely to health within five days, before the date set for the combat. Thus Peter became acquainted with King Orcant and was served and honored by one and all as sumptuously as the king was. When the day of the combat approached, King Orcant had Peter mount and took him to London, along with a large retinue. When he came before King Luce, they found Marahant, who had already proposed to the king to take up the accusation he had made. Upon seeing King Orcant, the king asked him if he would do battle or if someone would fight for him. Peter, who seemed to be a good knight and a worthy man, stepped forward and tendered his gage against Marahant for Orcant. And King Luce took both of them. Then people in the palace began to ask who this was who was to fight Marahant, but no one at court knew the answer, except that they said he was truly one of King Orcant’s knights. [266] “In faith,” said those looking at Peter, “this knight has done a foolhardy thing in undertaking to combat Marahant, the best knight in this land. I think it would be better for him to desist.” This is how they spoke about Peter, not knowing his merits. When the time came for Marahant and Peter to meet, the combat between them was without a doubt fierce and cruel and remarkable to watch, for both knights were full of prowess. And this combat lasted from the hour of prime until the hour of nones, for Marahant began to defend himself extraordinarily well when he recognized Peter’s great valor. And yet in the end!® his defense was worth nothing to him, for Peter killed him, cut off his head, and brought it before King Luce. And he said to him, “My lord, have I cleared King Orcant of the treachery he was accused of?” “Certainly, my lord,” said the king, “he is cleared, and because of what you have done before my lords, I recognize in you the best knight I have ever seen. That is why, if it pleases you, I wish to be your friend.” Peter said he would very much like to be his friend, but that at that time he could not stay in the country. When King Luce saw he could not detain Peter, he pulled King Orcant aside and said to him, “Make the necessary arrangements so that in a week I can find you in your castle with this knight and be able to speak with him and get to know him, for [267] I greatly desire his companionship, friendship, and love.” And King Orcant said he would find them there without fail. Thereupon they left London, and King Orcant returned to his castle. The king was happy to have resolved his difficulty so well at court. Once he had returned to his castle, you never saw so much rejoicing as that made over Peter by the people of the king’s land, for they all shouted, “Welcome to the best of the good knights!” 16In the end,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “the next day”). 154 On the third day, when they were somewhat rested, King Orcant said to Peter, “Peter, you have served me so well that I could never reward you. And yet I'll do my best to do so. Ask, and I will give you what you request, if I can.” “My lord,” said Peter, “I want only one thing. I would ask for it if I thought you would give it to me. And you can be sure that there is more honor in it for you than you think.” The king replied that there was nothing Peter could request that he would not do. “Then I ask you,” he said, “to become a Christian and leave the false religion you have held to until now.” He began to show him in what way he should realize that his religion was false. After that he showed him the articles of faith of the Gospel and the root of the true faith. Within two days he exhorted the king and his countrymen so much that they agreed to receive baptism and abjure the Saracen faith. Immediately he sent someone into the forest to seek a hermit, who baptized them all. The king, who was called Orcant, was named Lamet in baptism, and his daughter took the name Camille. And for love of him who [268] was called Orcant before, the people of the country made his castle!” into a beautiful and rich city, which was henceforth called Orkney. Once everyone in the country had become a Christian, King Lamet said to Peter, “Peter, my dear friend, I have done what you asked of me. Now I’m asking you to do what I'll ask of you.” The latter said he would gladly do so, if he could. “I’m asking you,” said King Lamet, “to take my daughter Camille, a gentlewoman descended from kings and queens, as your wife, with the understanding that I will invest you with all my land. I assure you that if she pleases you, nothing has ever happened that would make me as happy as I would be!® if I saw you two joined together in marriage.” “My lord,” said Peter, “you have done as I asked in the thing I most desired. Because you did as I wished, I will do as you wish.” The king thanked him profusely and kissed him as a sign of fidelity and love. The maiden, who was called Camille by her baptismal name, was immediately sent for. Peter pledged his faith and took her as his wife. On the day of the wedding, King Luce came, surprised that Peter was a Christian. And yet he wanted so much to see Peter and be his friend that, even though he was a Christian, King Luce would not leave his company, but loved him deeply. The wedding was celebrated grandly and lavishly in the city of Orkney, and King Luce stayed there for a week [269] to keep Peter company, for he esteemed him for his beauty and chivalry above any other man he had ever seen. During the week that King Luce remained in Orkney, Peter and others taught him so much about Jesus Christ’s religion that he became a Christian, on condition that Peter would henceforth be his companion in arms and knighthood as long as he lived. Peter promised this willingly and faithfully, and he kept his promise as long as he lived, keeping him 1441s castle” supplied from Ponceau. 184s | would be” supplied from Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail company and loving him more than anyone except his own relatives. Thus King Luce and his men became Christians through Peter’s exhortation. And my lord Robert of Boron, who translated this chronicle from Latin into French, agrees with this, as does the Old Chronicle, which attests that it was thus. And yet the Chronicle of Brutus does not say this, nor does it agree with this at all, for doubtless the one who translated it into vernacular French did not know anything about the High History of the Holy Grail. Therefore, no one should be surprised if he does not mention Peter. And because he did not know anything about it, he excused himself through others by lying and saying, “Thus say some people.”!9 For a long time Peter lived this way, strong and powerful. And he fathered an heir whose name was Herlan, who was a valiant knight when he began to bear arms. When Peter died, his son ordered that he be buried in [270] Orkney, in a church he had founded and had built in honor of Saint Philip. His son inherited the land and was thus crowned king of it. A worthy man and faithful to God, he married the daughter of the king of Ireland, and they had a brave and valiant son named Meliant. From Meliant descended another king called Argistes, who was very wise and whose wife was a young woman from Saxony, a gentlewoman of high lineage. With this lady he fathered an heir named Hedor, who later became king. This Hedor was one of the best knights who ever entered Orkney. His wife was the daughter of the king of North Wales, and they had an heir named King Lot of Orkney, whose wife was King Arthur’s sister,*° a beautiful and pleasant young woman with whom he had four sons, one of whom was named Gawain, who was a good and valiant knight, but too lustful. And the second, who was not a good knight and whose name was Agravain, was overly proud. The third was named Guerrehet, a very good knight who was valiant and brave and who underwent great travails as long as he lived. But in the end he died basely by the hand of Bors of Gaunes or Lancelot. The fourth was named Gaheriet. A good, valiant, and loyal knight, he was without doubt esteemed as the best of his four brothers; he was worth no less than Sir Gawain, whatever the Chronicles of Great Britain [271] may say. And may all those who have heard of Mordred and think he was King Lot’s son know that he was not; without a doubt he was King Arthur’s son. And the king fathered him with his sister one night, when he thought he was lying with the beautiful woman from Ireland. When he recognized his sister and realized?! he had lain with her, both of them were grief-stricken and repentant. And all of this happened before King Arthur knew Guenevere. 19Did not know anything about it... people,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “because of this, he did not excuse himself about Peter, and people lie if they speak of it”). 20-King Arthur’s sister” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. Although she is not named here, Arthur’s sister who married Lot is traditionally called Morgause. 21 “And realized” supplied from Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail Thus you can see that Gawain, who was considered such a good knight, descended through the generations directly from Joseph of Arimathea. And yet many people do not believe it. But now the story leaves off speaking of this lineage and returns to the chronicle it started, that is, the Chronicle of Josephus,”? for if it did not return to it, all those who listened to the chronicle could consider it foolish. That is why it returns to Josephus and begins the chronicle and his story again, as follows. 38. Josephus’s Brother Galahad Is Made King of Hoselice; He Lightens Simeon’s Torment.! Now in this part the story says that when Josephus left Peter and the man who remained with him, he and? his companions wandered many a day without finding anything but forest and wild animals. The country was full of animals, and they harmed many of the people who passed through there, for at that time Great Britain did not have many inhabitants, especially in the parts near Scotland and Ireland.3 In all the places Josephus and his followers went, they preached [272] Jesus Christ’s true faith. And wherever Josephus found large groups of unbelievers, in all the foreign lands he came to, he was able to convert* them because of the skills God granted him. In this way Josephus worked in foreign lands until he had been to Scotland, Ireland, and Wales. Finally, after he had traveled so much, scattering his relatives throughout the foreign lands, some here and others there, in order to preach and announce Jesus Christ’s faith, he was overcome by the desire to return to Galafort. As he approached it, he saw that the castle was twice as large as it had been when he left. This was not surprising, for he had been gone for more than fifteen years. And around the castle there were several abbeys that worthy men had founded since his departure. When he reached Galafort, he learned that his mother had died and was buried in an abbey next to the castle. He found that his brother Galahad, who had been a small child when he left, was a grown man, strong and valiant and brave, and a wondrous knight who had received the order of chivalry from Nascien’s own hand. Josephus marveled at seeing him so grown-up. The people of Galafort rejoiced over Josephus and his father and his companions and received them with great honor. But no one rejoiced as much as Duke Ganor, for he 22"That is, the Chronicle of Josephus” supplied from Ponceau. 1 Corresponds to Hucher III: 271-279; Sommer I: 281-284; Ponceau §406—410. 2“In whose keeping ... and” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 3“Treland,” as in Ponceau (Hucher has “Brittany”). 4“Convert” supplied from Ponceau. 5«And the lord of the castle received” omitted, as in Ponceau and Sommer; “received” (plural) supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. i) was sorry that they had stayed out of the country for so long. Once Josephus was settled, he [273] inquired about his brother Galahad’s qualities. And Duke Ganor told him that® Galahad was undoubtedly the best knight in all the land and the worthiest man known. Josephus was very happy about this news and held Galahad dearer than he would have if he had heard bad things about him. During the first month’ after Josephus’s arrival in Galafort, news came from the people in the kingdom of Hoselice—which was later called Wales—that they had no lord, for the king had recently died. Therefore, they beseeched him to send them a lord who would be worthy of wearing a crown and who could rule over the land as a king should; he must not fail to do so, for otherwise the land could quickly be devastated. Upon hearing this message, Josephus discussed with Duke® Ganor and Nascien what to do, “for if the land remains without a lord,” he said, “it will certainly go to rack and ruin. That is why I implore you, for God’s sake and your souls’ salvation, to recommend a worthy man I could send them, one worthy of having such a great land as Hoselice under his authority.” “Let us discuss it,” said they, “and we will tell you tomorrow.” The next day they came to Josephus and said, “My lord, upon our souls and everything we hold from God, we tell you that neither in this land nor any other do we know of any man? as worthy of having a great [274] kingdom as your brother Galahad. So do what pleases you, for we are not saying it only for love of him but for God and right.” “Now keep this to yourselves,” said Josephus, “for I'll ask other people about this same thing.”!° Then he sent for the twelve most worthy men he knew of in all the country. Once they had come before him, he told them exactly what he had told Ganor and Nascien. And they said they would discuss it and have an answer the next day. The next day they came before him and said the very same thing as the others had. Once they had spoken, Josephus called his brother Galahad before him and said, “Dear brother, I am investing you with the kingdom of Hoselice, on the advice of the worthy men in this land, for I have not made this decision alone, since you are my brother. And yet I thought there were certainly enough good qualities in you to merit such a great honor.” And Galahad knelt before him and received the gift. The third day after that Josephus, Nascien, Ganor, and Galahad left Galafort, taking with them a large party of knights. They rode until they came to Hoselice, where they were received with all the joy imaginable. On Pentecost, [275] in a city called Palagre, which was the best in the kingdom, Galahad was!! crowned, anointed, and consecrated by the hand of his brother Josephus. After the coronation festivities had ended, Galahad remained in the 6“Ganor told him that” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 7Month,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “year”). 8“Duke,” as in Sommer (Hucher has “King”). 9“Or woman” omitted, as in Ponceau. 10About this same thing,” as in Sommer (Hucher has “about some things I won't ask you now’). NCorrected to singular, as in Ponceau. 156 land. Ever after he was such a worthy man, and he was loved so much by his lords that after his death they changed the name of the kingdom and called it Wales!? in his honor. This name was never changed, nor will it ever be, as long as the world lasts. Galahad took as his wife the daughter of the king of the Distant Isles and fathered Lyanor,}9 who ruled after Galahad. And from Lyanor!4 issued in direct descent King Urien, from whom Wain was born, the very Wain! who performed so many valorous deeds in the time of King Arthur, for he was a companion of the Round Table, and he died on Salisbury Plain in the great battle that took place between Mordred and King Arthur, when Mordred was killed and King Arthur was mortally wounded.!® One day Galahad was riding across a great plain, having been hunting all day long, and it happened that he lost his men and all his dogs, for he had left the forest [276] after nightfall, and he could only see his road by the light of the moon.!” Therefore, he lost his way and began to cross a wasteland. After riding that way until about midnight, always going farther away from what he thought he was approaching, he looked and saw a fire burning in a wide pit, as if a great many logs were alight. He approached the fire and stopped, for he wondered who had lit it. While he was thinking about this, he heard a voice say to him, “Galahad, I am your close relative, and if I had been good, I would not have been delivered over to such torment. Have you ever seen a man tormented as much as I am?” When Galahad heard him call himself his cousin, he was astounded, and yet he said, “Say there, creature that talks to me, saying that I am a relative, tell me who you are and why you are subjected to the torment of fiery pain, for I would very much like to know.” “I am Simeon,” said he, “a relative of yours whom I know you have heard spoken of many times. My body has been placed in this torment to expiate a wrong I once did to Peter, one of my relatives. [277] You have certainly heard what this was; therefore, I won't tell you. But for God’s sake, in order to lighten my burden somewhat, do what you can to establish a religious community here, where people will pray to Jesus Christ in His sweet pity to have mercy on me in some way.” , “Simeon,” said Galahad, “truly, I have heard about you often enough. You are my close relative. But tell me if your torment will ever end.” “I will tell you,” he replied, “if you promise to do what I ask of you.” “I promise,” said Galahad. “And I will do still more, since you are my relative: after I have built a richer abbey here than you imagined, where people will pray for your 12«Galles” in French; this of course is suggestive of “Galahad.” 134 vanor,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “an heir”). 144 yanor,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “lineage”). 15«From whom Wain . .. Wain” supplied from Ponceau. 16These events are recounted in The Death of Arthur, Chapter 23. VMfoon,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “night”). The History of the Holy Grail soul!8 every day, I will ask to be buried here as soon as I have passed from this world. This will lighten your soul’s burden, for I know that this place will be enhanced because of me, as soon as I am put here.” Simeon thanked him profusely. Then he said, “You can be sure that this pain will not last forever but will cease as soon as the good knight, who will be called Galahad by name,!9 comes to visit me in this land. As soon as he enters this pit the fire will be extinguished, and this will be a sign that in him there was never any fire of lust or burning of the flesh. And at that time the adventures [278] that will happen in this country through the great marvels of the Holy Grail will end.” Thereupon Simeon left off speaking and said no more. King Galahad continued to address him, but he could not get a word out of him. Seeing that he would learn no more, the king set out on his way again, wandering until by chance he came to”? the road he had left the day before. When he got there, he found his household greatly discomfited for love of him, for they feared that some mishap had befallen him. Their happiness at seeing him arrive safe and sound was as great as the depth of their previous unhappiness. The next day the king had masons and carpenters sent for throughout the land, and he had an abbey founded in honor of the Trinity there where Simeon was. Then he sought all the provisions for sixty monks. Once this was done, he placed there those he thought fitting to pray for a sinner’s soul. He honored and glorified the place as long as he lived. And when he died, his body was prepared in such a way so that it would last two hundred years before it would begin to decay. Then his body was clad with a hauberk and iron leg coverings and was put in a golden casket. His helmet and sword were placed next to him, while his crown was placed at his head. Then they put over him a very beautiful, rich tombstone, which could not be raised [279] by any man until Lancelot of the Lake came and raised it with difficulty.! Now the story leaves off speaking about King Galahad and returns to Josephus, to tell how he left Joseph and his brother Galahad. 39. Josephus Makes a Cross on the Shield Mordrain Used in Battle Against Tholomer and Then Dies.? Now the story says that when Josephus left, after having crowned Galahad, he traveled until he returned to Galafort. Upon arriving, he was distressed to learn that King 18«Your soul,” as in Ponceau. (Hucher has “my soul and yours”). 194 reference to the other Galahad (Lancelot’s son); for the accomplishment of this prophecy, see Pauphilet, The Quest for the Holy Grail, Chapter 80. 20-Wandering . .. to” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. 1 This prophecy is accomplished in the Lancelot, Chapter 108, 2Corresponds to Hucher III: 279-282; Sommer I: 284-285; Ponceau §411-412. The History of the Holy Grail Mordrain had asked for him,? wanting very much to see him and speak to him. Joseph had already died and was buried in Scotland in an abbey called the Abbey of the Cross, which made Josephus very unhappy, for he loved his father dearly. He himself was very weak from fasting and lack of sleep and from the hardship he had suffered. So he went, ill and suffering, to see King Mordrain in the abbey, the very one the king had had built. Once Josephus arrived, the king, who could not see anything, said after greeting him, “My lord, you are most welcome, for I have longed to have you near me, because you have stayed away from this [280] country for so long. That is why I would like very much to know how you are.” “I am better than I was before,” said Josephus, “for it has been a long time since I have been as joyful as I am now.” “Over what, my lord?” asked the king. “Is it possible for me to know?” “Yes,” said Josephus, “I will tell you. You can be sure that I will pass away tomorrow at the hour of prime, for the Sovereign Master has told me this.” When the king heard this, he began to weep bitterly. As he wept, he said to Josephus, “Oh, my lord, since you are leaving me, I will stay here all alone, I who for love of you and because of the good qualities I found in you, left my land and the sweetness of my nation. For God’s sake, since you must quit the world so soon, I beseech you to leave me some sign of yourself at your passing to comfort me and remember you by.” Josephus said he would certainly do so. Then he began to think about what he could leave him. After thinking for a long time, he said, “Ah, King Mordrain, have the shield I gave you when you went to battle against Tholomer brought to me.” And the king said he would gladly do so. He had the shield brought at once. It was near at hand, because he loved it so much that no day passed without his having it brought before him and kissing it two or three times. At the moment when the shield was brought, Josephus’s nose happened to be bleeding so profusely that it could not be stanched. He [281] took the shield at once and made a cross in the middle with his own blood. After having done this, he gave the shield to King Mordrain, saying, “Here is what I leave you to remember me by.” “What is it?” asked the king. “My lord, I have made a cross on the shield out of my own blood, so that whenever you hold the shield you will remember me, for the cross I made will always last, as fresh and new and red as it is now, as long as the shield lasts. And it will last a long time, because henceforth any knight who hangs it around his neck will repent of it, until Galahad, the very good knight, the last in Nascien’s line, comes and hangs it around his neck. Therefore, may no one be so bold as to hang it around his neck except the one for whom God has destined it. And there is a very good reason, my lord king, why it cannot be otherwise: just as this shield has performed greater marvels than any other shield, likewise Galahad will perform more marvelous deeds of prowess and higher chivalric exploits than any other knight.” 3“t1ad asked for him” supplied from Ponceau. 157 Then the king took the shield and began to kiss it very tenderly, and he said, weeping, “Oh, God, blessed be You who have taken from me the power of seeing this cross.” Then he said to Josephus, “My lord, since you are leaving me such a good thing to remember you by, tell me, please, where I can put [282] this shield and keep it, for I would very much like to put it where the good knight will find it.” “I will tell you what to do,” said Josephus. “Have the shield placed where Nascien will have himself put after his death, for the good knight will come there on the fifth day after receiving the order of knighthood.” The king said he would do this. Then he had the shield put back where it was usually kept. The next day Josephus died, just as he had said the day before, and was buried in this very abbey. But later Scotsmen came and carried the body away to the kingdom of Scotland, because of a great famine there. It is proven truth, and the Chronicle of Scotland itself attests that upon the arrival of this holy body, so many good things and such a great blessing in everything came to the land, that they said Our Lord had truly done this for love of the body that had been brought there, to the Abbey of Urglay. But now the story stops speaking about him and returns to Alan, the son of Bron. 40. The Holy Vessel Is Passed on to Alan.! Now the story says that when Josephus saw he was about to die and that his payment of the natural debt could not be postponed, he saw Alan before him, weeping night and day. This troubled him, [283] and he asked, “Alan, why are you crying?” “My lord,” he said, “I am crying like the sheep that should grieve when it is left without a shepherd. The wolf can easily attack and strangle it. My lord, I am saying all this because of you, who are a shepherd, while I am your sheep. You are going away now and leaving me alone. Who will watch over me?* Who will be my shepherd from now on?” “God will watch over you and be a good and loyal shepherd—not a bad one, who leaves his sheep in a dangerous place,” said Josephus. “He is a true shepherd who, in order to bring the sheep back from exile, let His body be delivered over to death. This shepherd, my dear friend, will protect you from the wolf, for He takes care of you so that the enemy cannot lay a hand on you.” Then he had the Holy Vessel brought before him and said to Alan, “Alan, I entrust you with this, as Jesus Christ entrusted my father. When you pass from this world, you can invest the person you wish. And henceforth he will be entrusted with it in this kingdom, and you will be the one who will invest him.” Alan took the Vessel, very happy and joyful about the gift he had received. As soon as Josephus died, Alan left Galafort, taking with him his brothers, who were all married except one called Joshua. He was not yet married, and he Corresponds to Hucher III: 282-296; Sommer I: 286-291, Ponceau §413—420. 2“And leaving me alone. .. . me?” supplied from Ponceau. 158 was one of the good knights in the world, and he was the one whom Alan loved the most of all his brothers. When Alan left Galafort, his relatives began [284] to ask where he was going. “Certainly,” he said, “I don’t know, except where God and chance take me.” Then he and his brothers left, taking with them one hundred other relatives. And he said that with this lineage he would populate some uncultivated land if he found one, and there he would have Jesus Christ honored and served to the best of his ability. He wandered in this way until chance brought him to a foreign kingdom where there were many humble people who knew little except how to cultivate the land. This land was called the Land Beyond, and the king of the country was so leprous that hardly anyone had the heart to look at him or keep him company. This king was called Calafes, and he usually stayed in one of his cities called Malta. And this king and all of his countrymen were pagans. When Alan came to the city called Malta, the unbelievers who saw him and his companions wondered who these people were, because they were barefoot and poorly dressed. And when Calafes, to whom the news was soon brought, heard there were new people in his city, he ordered them brought before him in order to see them. His orders carried out, he began to ask them about themselves. And they said they were Christians [285] from the land of Jerusalem. He then asked who their lord was, and they pointed Alan out to him. And he asked, “Alan, can you advise me about my illness?” “My lord,” said Alan, “yes. If you do what I tell you, I think I'l] restore you to health within three days.” “Can it be possible that I’ll be cured somehow?” asked the king. “My lord,” answered Alan, “if you follow my advice, I assure you that you will be cured.” “Then I swear to you, as a king,” said Calafes, “that I will do whatever you command.” “How can I believe you?” asked Alan. “You can believe me with certainty,” he replied, “for there is nothing I wouldn’t do to® regain my health.” “By my faith,” said Alan, “I will tell you then what you must do to be healthy. And if you don’t do it, you can be very sure that you will never be healed.” ; “Tell me then,” said the king, “and you can be sure that I will do it.” So Alan said, “If you ever want to be cured, you must first abandon your Saracen faith [286] and have the idols that you have worshiped for so long knocked down. Once you have abjured the devil, whose servant you have been for such a long time, you will receive Jesus Christ’s religion and be baptized, for otherwise you cannot be a loyal Christian. Once you are a Christian, I will show you a holy vessel; simply by looking at it, you will be so completely cured and cleansed of the leprosy you have that it will seem that you never had it. And if I don’t do what I have told you, and if you aren’t immediately cured, I want you to have my head cut off, as well as those of my companions.” 3“tiow can I believe you. ...do to” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail When the king, who longed to be healed, heard Alan’s promise, he marveled and said, “I will do what you command, but you can be sure, truly, that if I am not healed as you promise, I will punish you so severely that no one will ever forget it. But now be sure’ that you aren’t lying to me or telling me anything you can’t accomplish.” “King,” said Alan, “if you are not cured the day you become a Christian, do with me as you wish.” At once the king had the temples knocked down where the gods were worshiped and adored. After that he had the idols broken into pieces and burned. Once all the things connected to the pagan religion were broken and knocked down, he said to Alan, “Do you want me to do [287] anything else?” “Yes,” said Alan. “You must become a Christian.” Then Alan® had a tub filled with water; once it was blessed and sanctified, and the cross made over it as it should be, King Calafes got in and received baptism from a priest whose name was Alphasan, a worthy and holy man. After being baptized, the king was named Alphasan for love of the worthy and holy man who had baptized him.® When the king came out of the water, Alan brought the Holy Vessel and uncovered it. As soon as the king saw it, a wonderful thing happened to him, through Jesus Christ’s will, for he was healed and cleansed so completely of the leprosy that had sullied him that no one would have thought he had ever had it. When he saw he had been cured—something he never thought would happen—he said, “This vessel is truly holy,” and that it was blessed with Jesus Christ’s qualities.’ That is why he became such a worthy man and strong believer that he had all those who did not want to become Christians killed. [288] The land was converted to God in less than a week, when people saw the beautiful miracle that Our Lord had worked for the king. And this was what made them become Christians so quickly. After the kingdom of the Land Beyond was thus converted in this way to Our Lord, the king said to® Alan, “My dear Alan, I ask you for God’s sake? to do something for me.” “My lord,” said Alan, “tell me, and if I can, I will do it.” “Alan, my dear friend, I am asking you to leave the Holy Vessel, with which you are entrusted, here forever. You can be sure that if it pleases you to do so, in its honor I will build the most splendid and best-situated stronghold possible. And I will do even more!® for love of you, something that should honor you, for I will give my daughter to your brother Joshua as his wife and leave him 4“Be sure,” as in Hucher variants and Ponceau (Hucher has “tell me”). 5Alan,” as in Sommer (Hucher has “the king”). 6The king was named... baptized him” supplied from Hucher variants and Ponceau. "This clause is ambiguous; it could also mean “and that its powers came from Jesus Christ Himself.” 8Mans has lost a folio here; both Hucher and Ponceau use Paris, BN 770. 9“God’s sake” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 10Most splendid” and “possible. ... more” supplied from Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail all my land, crowning him during your lifetime, with the agreement that this vessel will stay in this land.” Alan said he would be pleased for it to remain, for it was his intent to entrust Joshua with it after his death. The king had his daughter brought at once and gave her to [289] Joshua and invested him with all his land. Then the king had a beautiful stronghold built above rapid-running water.!! He had many sumptuous palaces and large houses built, as well as a manor as splendid as any that existed. Once it was finished and prepared, they found on one of the gates a miraculous inscription in Chaldean saying, THIS CASTLE SHOULD BE CALLED CORBENIC. And in that language “Corbenic” means the same as “Holy Vessel.” When they saw the name in writing, they said it did not please Our Lord that it be called by any other name, so they called it that right away. And they had people come at once to inhabit the castle. Once this was done, they brought!* the Holy Vessel and put it in a high room next to the main palace. The Sunday after the Vessel was brought to the palace, the king ordered the wedding celebrated between his daughter and Joshua. This was done, and the people of the country did homage to Joshua. He was crowned that day in Corbenic Castle [290] and married King Alphasan’s daughter. That day everyone who ate was filled with the grace of the Holy Vessel,}5 so that there was no one who did not have whatever he could describe to eat. That night Joshua and his wife lay in a room below and conceived Aminadap, who was king after Joshua and held the kingdom of the Land Beyond. That night King Alphasan slept in the main palace; in the middle a very beautiful, sumptuous bed was made up. During the night, around midnight,!+ he awoke, and looking before him, he saw the Holy Vessel sitting on a silver table; in front of it was a man he did not know, who looked like a priest when he is saying Mass. Around him there seemed to be more than a thousand voices, giving thanks to Our Lord. He did not see the bodies from which the voices came, and yet he heard around him the noise of feathers and beating of wings as loudly as if all the birds in the world were there. [291] Once the song of praise was over and the Holy Vessel was carried back into the room it had come from, a man who seemed to be enveloped in flames came to King Alphasan and said, “King, no man should lie in this palace—neither you nor anyone else—for scarcely could any man, through a good life, be worthy of remaining in the place where the Holy Vessel was honored as you saw. You did a very foolhardy thing in coming to sleep here; Our Lord wants vengeance taken.” Then he released a lance he was holding and struck the king through both thighs so that the lance appeared on the other side. And he said to the king, “Now may others refrain from staying in the Palace of Adventures, for they 1l“Above ... water” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 12«Brought,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “prepared”). Holy Vessel,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “Jesus Christ”). 14«around midnight” supplied from Ponceau. 159 can be sure that anyone who stays here will die or leave in shame, unless he is definitely a good knight.” Then he pulled his lance out and left at once. The king fainted from the pain and lay the rest of the night in such distress that he thought he was certainly going to die before day came. The next day, when the lords came to the palace and saw the king so badly wounded, they were more than a little frightened, and they asked him how this had happened. He told them, “Ah, for God’s sake, don’t ask me to talk, but take me quickly out of this palace, for the place is so praiseworthy because of the [292] Holy Vessel’s presence that no knight should stay here, especially at night, when the Holy Vessel is brought in. You can be sure that the palace has a nobler name than any I have ever seen.” They asked him what its name was, and he said it was the Palace of Adventures, because greater adventures and marvels would happen there than anywhere in the world. Thus the king taught the name of the palace to those who did not know it before. And henceforth it was always called this. Because of the adventure that befell the king, many knights came and stayed there at night, but none stayed who was not found dead in the morning, until Arthur’s nephew Gawain came. He did not die, and yet he was so shamed and injured that he would not have wished!® to undergo this in return for all the kingdom of Logres.!® King Alphasan lived ten days after being wounded, sick and unable to be healed. He and Alan passed away on the same day and were buried next to each other in the Church of Notre Dame at Corbenic. Thus the Holy Grail remained in Corbenic Castle. King Joshua ruled his land with a firm hand. After him reigned his son Aminadap, who married one of the daughters of Luce, the king of Great Britain. [293] This young man!” and woman had a son named King Carcelois, a valiant and brave knight and a worthy man in God’s and the world’s eyes. King Carcelois fathered King Manuel, and he fathered King Lambor. They were all kings and held land and were called the Rich Fishermen. This Lambor was a good knight who loved God so much that it was believed there was no more worthy man than he in all of Great Britain, either in a religious house or any other place. He had a neighbor called Varlan, a rich king!® whose lands bordered on his. He was a Saracen recently converted to Christianity, and the two were at war against one another with all of their forces. One day it happened that King Lambor and King Varlan had assembled their men above the seashore, and a great and wondrous battle had begun between them. In it King Varlan was defeated, and all his men were killed, so that he fled alone toward the seashore. When he reached shore, he found a ship that had just landed. This ship was the most beautiful and sumptuous he had ever seen or ever would see in all his life. And if anyone should come forward 15Mans picks up here again. 16For the realization of this prediction, see Lancelot, Chapter 137. Wefan,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “woman”). 18«Called Varlan” supplied from Ponceau; “king” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 160 to ask what ship this was, I [294] would reply at once that it was the one Nascien saw at the Turning Isle. Upon reaching shore, the king jumped into the ship. After looking at the sword, he drew it from the scabbard and turned back. Finding King Lambor in his path, he struck him on the helmet. The sword was so sharp that it split the king from the top of his helmet, through the horse, right down to the ground. This was the first!® blow of the sword in Great Britain.?° There resulted such great persecutions to both kingdoms—the kingdom of the Land Beyond and that of the land of Wales—to avenge King Lambor, whom God loved so much, that for a long time afterwards the lands that should have been cultivated were not. Nor did wheat, oats, or anything else grow, nor did the trees bear fruit, nor were any fish to be found in the waters except very little ones. And for this reason, the land of the two kingdoms was called the Waste Land. When Varlan saw that the sword cut so well, he decided to go back and take the scabbard. So he returned to the ship and put the sword into the scabbard. As soon as he had done so, he fel] dead [295] before the bed. All those who saw”! this then said that he died because he had drawn the sword. He remained there until a maiden removed him, for there was no one in the country brave enough to board the ship because of the forbidding words on the side, which the story told about earlier,?* for those who knew them were very frightened. Through this adventure that I have told you, the two kingdoms that bordered on each other were completely devastated and destroyed. After King Lambor, his son Pellehan?? reigned, who was wounded in both thighs in a battle in Rome. Because of the wound he received in this battle, everyone who knew him called him henceforth the Maimed King, since this wound could not be healed until Galahad, the very good knight, came to visit him. And then without fail he healed ia. From Pellehan descended a king named Pelles, a very handsome, brave knight, and a worthy man. The latter had a daughter whose beauty surpassed that of all the women who [296] ever lived in Great Britain, except Queen Guenevere, King Arthur’s wife. With this young woman, who was so beautiful and noble, Lancelot fathered Galahad, the good knight who brought the adventures of Great Britain to an end.”° Although he was conceived in sin, Our Lord did not consider this, but rather the high branch of 19First” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 20This blow corresponds to what will elsewhere be called the Dolorous Stroke. In Malory, for example, Balin wounds Pellam with the spear of Longinus, resulting in the infertility of the Waste Land. 21«saw” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 22See Chapter 20. 23“His son Pellehan,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “Pellehan and his son”). 24See The Quest for the Holy Grail, Chapter 80. 25Galahad's conception is described in the Lancelot, Chapter 149. The History of the Holy Grail worthy men from whom he was descended,”° and his good life, and the good purpose he had in life. So He granted him in His graciousness so much grace that he brought to an end all the adventures the other knights had failed in or were unable to finish. The story now stops speaking about Alan’s branch, for it has very well told what it should, and turns back to speak about Celidoine and his lineage. 41. Nascien’s Death; Celidoine’s Lineage.! Now the story says that when Josephus left this world, Nascien, Celidoine, and Narpus, King Celidoine’s son, who was already a tall and handsome young man, were present. After Josephus was buried, Nascien remained with King Mordrain to keep him company. And it so happened that Nascien and his wife and King Mordrain’s wife all died on the same day. The two ladies were buried [297] in the same abbey where King Mordrain was. But it did not please Nascien to be laid there; rather he was put in another abbey far from there. The king had the shield carried with him and left in the abbey; since then many knights have come, wishing to carry the shield away with them. But none of them hung it around his neck without repenting of it, for some of those who put it on died a cruel death, while others did not go far before they were wounded by happenstance or some other thing. Thus the shield stayed in the abbey until Galahad, the very good knight, hung it around his neck.? But now the story leaves off speaking about the shield and returns to Celidoine. Now the story says that when Celidoine left his father, he went with Narpus to the land King Mordrain had given him. That same year he made his son a knight. And he lived twelve years, holding his land so peacefully that he never had a neighbor who dared make war on him. He loved and feared God more than any man around him. He was so charitable and gave so gladly for God’s sake that he would have given the whole world to the poor if it had been his. He knew a remarkable amount about the course of the stars and astronomy, and so he was able to foresee a great many of the things that were to come. [298] As a result, a marvelous adventure happened to him. One evening when he was looking at the course of the stars and the firmament, he saw clearly that such a great famine would come to Great Britain that many people would die of hunger. Then he said to his seneschal, “Go take all my riches and buy wheat wherever you can with all of it” “My lord,” said the seneschal, “you already have twice as much as you need.” “Don’t fret about it,” the king said,> “for it is my pleasure that you do this.” 26“From whom... descended” supplied from Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer. 1Corresponds to Hucher III: 296-308; Sommer I: 291-296; Ponceau §421-428. 2A reference to events in The Quest for the Holy Grail; see Chapter 10. 3“To himself” omitted, as in Ponceau. The History of the Holy Grail The seneschal did what the king had told him, arranging to buy and store all the wheat he could find, far and near. The people of that land talked quite a lot about what the king had done, saying among themselves, “This king thinks he’s going to die of hunger!” And they joked about it a great deal in private. But later they considered‘ themselves fools, and him wise, for before the year had passed, a great famine came to all of Great Britain, with such a lack of all commodities that nearly half the population died. Then a messenger came to the Saxons? and said, “If you care to go to a land in Great Britain ruled by King Celidoine,® you'll find commodities and food in great plenty.” [299] Hearing this, they discussed among themselves what to do, until they agreed to go, armed and in strength, to this kingdom, where they would destroy the country, its men and women, and take’ all the goods they found. Having decided this, they set out to sea with a large number of armed men and horses. The very night they put to sea, it happened that Celidoine, who was looking at the stars, saw by the signs that the Saxons® were coming against him with an army to disinherit him and take his land. Then he quickly sent word everywhere, summoning all the barons and knights who held land from him to meet him in three days at one of his castles on the sea, where he thought the ships would land. They could not imagine what the king wanted, so they rode hastily, arriving on the given day at the hour of prime at the castle where the king, who had come there the day before, was awaiting them. Once they were all assembled, he said to them, “My lords, do you know why I have sent for you in such great haste?” “My lord, we don’t,” they replied, “but you'll tell us if it pleases you.” d “T will tell you,” he said. “You can be sure that tonight, around the time when people first fall asleep, the Saxons will arrive [300] at this castle in such great numbers and with so much strength that if they can reach land safe and sound, I tell you that they will waste and devastate our land in very little time, for they have three men for every one of ours. Now consider what we should do, for defeat or victory lies in the balance.” When Narpus, who did not yet know anything about this, heard his father’s words, he replied, “My lord, it’s easy to advise you. Before us is a huge and wondrous forest, where we will withdraw, completely armed, as soon as night falls, and wait for them until their ships land. Once they are at port, I know they won’t wait to arm themselves, but will take their things out of the ships, because they don’t think we know anything about their landing. Once they have disembarked and are a certain distance from their ships, we 4“Considered,” as in Hucher variants, Ponceau, and Sommer (Hucher has “became”. 5“Saxons,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “the seneschal”). 6 Ruled... Celidoine” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 7Take” supplied from Sommer. 8«That the Saxons,” as in Hucher variants and Sommer. 161 will attack from two directions, some from the front and some from behind, so that they can’t return to their ships, while those remaining here will attack from the castle. Then you will see them become so frightened and lost that they won't be able to defend themselves. In this way, we’ll be able to overcome them easily.” They all agreed to this plan, saying that Narpus had spoken well and that they did not see how they could save themselves any other way. In the evening as soon as night fell, they took up their arms and, wearing full armor, left the castle and settled [301] in the forest as close to shore? as possible, leaving part of their men in the castle. A litle after the time when people fall asleep, the Saxon ships landed directly in front of the castle. Once the Saxons had disembarked and set foot on land, they headed toward a large plain below the castle, ordering their men to bring their arms. The latter returned to the ships to fetch them. When the men who were in the forest, only waiting for their moment, saw they could harm their enemies, they charged on their horses, assailing them on all sides with lances and swords so savagely that they threw them to the ground. Caught by surprise, the Saxons tried to return to their ships but could not, for they found others who came upon them, dealing such great blows with their sharp swords that they quickly sent many a head flying. Seeing this, they headed for the castle, for they thought the castle’s inhabitants were outside. Approaching the gate, they encountered still others, who came forth fully armed. And the moon was shining clearly, allowing them to see one another well. So the Saxons, having been caught unarmed and frightened, were so completely routed that not one remained undefeated. Thus Celidoine’s land was protected by his wisdom [302] from two things: famine and enemies. When Celidoine died, he was buried at Camelot. Narpus was crowned after his father and held the land. He had a son called Nascien in baptism, in memory of the first Nascien, and who reigned after his father. Our Lord was so wonderfully housed in him that in his time no more worthy man was known than this Nascien. From him was born a king named Alan the Fat. If his father was a worthy man in God’s eyes, the son was even more so. Alan would rather have been dead than do anything against Our Lord’s will. The next king, who descended from Alan, was named Isaiah. He was a loyal, worthy man who honored his Creator and never angered Him knowingly. The fifth king, who descended from Isaiah, was named Jonah, a good knight, more valiant and brave than any man. He honored Holy Church and glorified her to the best of his ability. He left Great Britain, giving his land to one of his brothers,!° and went to Gaul, where he took as wife the daughter of Maronel, from whom he obtained the kingdom of Gaul. He lived for a long time and had a son named Lancelot. The latter left Gaul and came to Great Britain, where he took as wife the daughter of the king of Ireland, and he held the 9“As close to shore” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 10“Giving ... brothers” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. 162 land that had been her!! father’s. This king called Lancelot had two sons, both kings, one named Ban and the other [303] Bors. Ban of Benoic had two sons, one of whom was a bastard child named Hector, while the other was named Lancelot. And Bors, who was king of Gaunes, also had two sons, one named Lionel and one named Bors. A great marvel happened to this Lancelot who was King Ban’s father, one which should not be forgotten, but is good to remember. And I will tell you what it was, for it is good to hear. It is true that in God’s eyes Lancelot was the most worthy man in all his kingdom. Below the city where he lived was Bellegarde Castle, and in it a lady who was the wife of one of Celidoine’s first cousins. She was the most beautiful lady known in Great Britain. Besides that, she was such a good, pious woman and led such a noble life that she always wore a hair shirt next to her skin. Just as the light of a candle cannot be hidden from sight when it is in the candlestick, the lady’s goodness could not be hidden for long from the knowledge of those who had placed their hearts in Jesus Christ. Thus King Lancelot met her and {304] became acquainted with her. The king loved the lady deeply, and she reciprocated his love. And they often went to see one another, until foolish people, full of bad will, noticed this and put it in the worst possible light, saying that the king loved the lady passionately. They spoke so much about this that the lady’s husband, who was a cousin of the king’s, heard about it. And one of his brothers said, “My lord, you are wrong to allow King Lancelot to dishonor you with your wife. Certainly, if I were in your situation, I would avenge myself.” “Surely,” said the duke, !? “I would be very surprised if the king were doing this, and if I truly thought he was seeking my shame, as people say, I would never rest until I had avenged myself.” “Then you can certainly avenge yourself,” said his brother, “for I am telling you truly that it is so.” “And I tell you in truth,” said the lord, “that I will take vengeance, as soon as I find the time and the place.” Things were left this way. It was Lent, and Easter was so near that the time of the Passion had come. And then the king came to see the lady every day, and if he did not, the lady came to him. They took such pleasure in the service of Our Lord that it was remarkable. On the day of the Holy Cross!® it happened that the king went into the Perilous Forest barefoot and in humble woolens with two companions to hear the service given by a hermit. [305] When they reached the hermitage, the duke was following them with two companions, completely armed, planning to avenge himself for the evil he thought was being done. And it happened that the king had confessed to the hermit and had heard the day’s service. He left and, intending to take a drink, turned toward a spring in front of the hermitage. As he leaned over to drink, the duke came up behind him with his sword drawn and struck him so fiercely that he made his head fly 1 The referent is ambiguous; it could be his father’s, but the context suggests that it is hers. 12Duke,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “king”). 13Phat is, Good Friday. The History of the Holy Grail into the spring. When he saw the head in the spring, it seemed to him that he would be fully avenged only if he made the head and body unrecognizable. Then he put his hands in the spring to pull the head out. At once a miracle happened: the water, which had been cold before, began to boil hard, becoming so hot that the duke’s hands were burned all over before he could pull them out. Seeing this, he knew he had acted badly and that God was angry with him for having killed the worthy man. So he said to those with him, “Bury this body quickly, for if it were known that I killed him, no one could save me from dying.” After hearing this, they buried the body at once before the hermitage and returned to their castle. Once they were nearby, they met a child fleeing, who said to the duke, “My lord, I have wondrous news for you: such darkness has come over your castle [306] that nothing can be seen, and this happened just now at the hour of noon.” Hearing this, the duke said, “Truly, I have acted badly.” “My lord,” said his companions, “let’s go away somewhere.” The duke replied, “I will go see if this is true.” Then he went straight to his castle; there he saw the great darkness diffused inside. As he came through the gate, a great many of the stones fell on him, crushing him completely, along with those who had been with him when the wicked deed was done. Thus Our Lord avenged King Lancelot against the duke, who had killed him treacherously. And the fountain boiled for a long time, until Galahad, Lancelot’s son, came there. !4 Another miracle occurred as a result, and it was no less beautiful: once a tomb had been placed over!> King Lancelot, every day at the exact hour of his death, drops of blood came from the tomb with such great power that any wounded knight who could touch them with his wounds was immediately healed. This marvel was announced throughout the country so that whenever knights were wounded, they all came, poor and rich alike, and were healed as soon as they touched the blood. One day it happened that a lion chased a stag past the tomb. The lion captured the stag and killed it. But when it wanted to eat the stag, a second ravenous lion came along and tried to take the quarry away. The lion that had come earlier did not want to allow this, but defended its food with all its strength. A fight began at once [307] between the two lions. The battle lasted a long time, as the two so beset each other with their claws and teeth that both had more than ten wounds in their bodies. Once they had wounded each other badly and fought as long as they could, one of the lions went to the tomb, from which drops of blood were flowing at the time, for it was around noon. When it came to the tomb, it began to lick the blood and touch its wounds, for it was badly injured. So it happened that the lion was immediately healed and as healthy and sound as it had been before. And when the other!® lion saw this, it immediately did the same thing as its companion had done 144 reference to events in The Quest for the Holy Grail, see Chapter 80. “Over,” as in Ponceau and Sommer (Hucher has “under”). 16“Other” supplied from Ponceau and Sommer. The History of the Holy Grail and, like the first one, was quickly healed. And then the lions made a compact between them, so that they never fought again. One of them lay at the foot of the tomb and the other at the head, guarding the tomb as if they were afraid that someone would move it or take it away. Many a time it happened that when a knight came!” to heal a wound, he could not touch the tomb because of the two lions guarding it. And when some knight tried to force his way there, the lions would quickly kill him. The tomb was never without one of the lions, night or day, for when they were hungry, one of them went hunting, while the other remained to guard the tomb, just as you have heard. 17Corrected to singular, as in Ponceau. 163 And this marvel of the two animals lasted until Lancelot of the Lake came and killed them both, just as the story will tell clearly later on.!8 Now the story is silent about all the lineages that [308] came from Celidoine and returns to a branch called the Story of Merlin, which should be joined carefully to the History of the Holy Grail because it is a branch of it and belongs to it. And my lord Robert of Boron begins the branch in the following way. The End. Walter of Kayo wrote this book. 19 184 reference to events in the Lancelot, see Chapter 164. 19*The End .. . book” in Latin in the text. THE STORY OF MERLIN translated by Rupert T. Pickens The Story of Merlin 1. Merlin’s Conception and Childhood Deeds. [3] In this part the story says that the devil grew very angry after Our Lord had gone to Hell and freed Adam and Eve and as many others as He pleased, so that when the devils saw it they were very much afraid and they were greatly astounded by it. So they met and said, “Who is this who so overwhelms us that no power we have can stop Him from doing whatever He pleases? We did not believe that any man born of woman could fail to belong to us, yet He overwhelms us! How can He have been born? For we have not seen in Him any leanings for earthly delights such as we have seen in all other people.” Another devil then answered them and said, “He has been able to harm us because we thought that we could overcome Him. Remember, the prophets said that the Son of God would come to earth to save sinners, descendants of Eve and Adam, as many as He pleased. And we went and took those who said this and tormented them more than the others. Yet, it seemed that our torture did not hurt them, rather they brought solace to the other sinners by telling them that the One who would deliver them would come down to earth. “What the prophets said has now happened, and He has taken from us all those we had won for ourselves, so that we cannot lay claim to any of them, and He has also taken away all the others with such might that we cannot understand it. Don’t you know that He washes them in water in His own name and that they are baptized in that water in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost? By this we should know that we have lost them, and we have no power over them until they come back to us through their own deeds. So our strength fails, for He has taken it from us. What’s more, He has left ministers on earth who will go on saving souls, so long as they do not do our works, if they are willing to repent and give up our works and do what their teachers command. This is how they are utterly lost to us. “He has indeed provided spiritual substance who came down to earth to save humankind and lowered Himself to be born of a woman and suffer the torments of the world. He came without our knowledge and not through the 1 Corresponds to Sommer II, 3-20. This translation is based primarily on the second volume of Sommer’s edition of the Vulgate (see bibliography following introduction), but it also makes use of Micha’s edition of Merlin, which includes the material contained in approximately the first eighty-eight pages of Sommer. The main source is cited in the notes simply as “Sommer,” with vol. II understood. fleshly lust of a man or a woman, though we saw Him and assailed Him in every way we could. When we had put Him to the test and seen that we could not find any of our works in Him, He was willing to die to save human creatures. He loved them greatly indeed, [4] since He wanted to undergo such great suffering to have them for Himself and take them from us. “And we must work very hard to get them back,” so that He will not have taken anything from us that is ours by right, and we must trick Him and work our way so that they cannot find their way back or even speak with those through whom they might have forgiveness.” Then they all said together, “We have lost everything, since He can forgive sins until the end of humankind, if He can find people doing His works, whereby they are His. And even though they do our works all the time, they will be lost to us if they repent. Thus, we have lost everything!” Then they began talking all at the same time and said, “The ones who have hurt us most are those who tell the news of His coming down to earth: they are the ones through whom the great harm has come to us. The more they said it, the more we tortured them, so it seems that He came all the more quickly to help them and to save them from the torments we worked on them. But how can we have someone who might speak out and tell about our aims, our deeds, and our ways of life—who might have the power, like us, to know things done and said and past? If we had someone who had that power and who knew those things, and if he were on earth with other folk, then he could help us trick them just as the prophets who were with us tricked us, those who told us what we did not believe could happen. And he could also foretell things that were to come about and be said soon and far in the future, so that he would be believed by everybody. Anyone who can bring about such a thing will have worked wonders!” Then one of them said, “I don’t have the power to conceive or to cause a woman to conceive. But if I had that power, I would do it well! For I know of a woman who gladly does everything I want. And there is among us,” he went on, “one who can take on the likeness of a man and lie with a woman, so long as he does it as secretly as he can.” They undertook to engender a man who would teach the others. The devils were mad for thinking that Our Lord did not know this plan. 2Avoir (“to have”) in Sommer’s text (4, 1. 1), ravoir (“to get back”) in Micha (1, |. 47). 167 168 Thus the devil undertook® to engender a man in his likeness and mind in order to ensnare the people’ of Jesus Christ. We can be very certain that the devil is evil and deceitful. So the council ended, and all of them agreed to the plan. The one who said that he had power over the woman did not tarry, but came to where she was as fast as he could, and he found her just as he had hoped. She granted the devil what belonged to him: everything she had and all she did. She was the wife of a very rich man who had a great plenty of livestock and other goods. He had three daughters and one son by the woman of whom the devil had his share. The devil did not forget what he was about. He yearmed to trick the man, so he went to the fields. He had asked the woman how he might ensnare him, and she said that he could not do so in any way unless he upset him: “If you take what belongs to him, he will be distraught.” The devil then went straight to the fields where the good man’s cattle were, [5] and he killed quite a lot of them. And when the herdsmen saw the livestock dying in the fields, they were quite astonished, so they went to their lord and told him about their livestock’s sickness. And when the gentleman heard that, he was bewildered that his animals were dying, and he asked the herdsmen if they knew why this was, but they did not. Thus ended what happened that day. And when the devil saw that the man was so upset for so little, it seemed to him that if he could do him such great harm that he was truly distraught, then he could do with him as he wanted. So he came back to the livestock. There were ten beautiful horses belonging to the worthy man; he killed them all at once. And when the good man saw that things were going so badly for him, he was deeply shaken, and, overcome with grief, he said something very foolish, for he commended to the devils all he had owned and all he had left. When the devil learned that he had bestowed such a gift, he was very happy. And he tried all the more to do him worse harm, so that the worthy man was bereft of all his livestock and became utterly distraught. And in his great anger, he fled human fellowship and cared nothing for anyone. ‘ When the devil saw that he had taken from him the companionship of his fellows, he knew that he could do with him what he wanted. Then the devil visited the good man’s most fair son and strangled him in his bed, and when morning came he was found dead. When the father saw that he had lost his little boy, he lost all hope and went grievously awry in his beliefs. The devil then saw that the gentleman had lost his faith and that he could not get it back, and he was very glad about it. And the devil made the woman through whom he had won everything climb upon a chest in her cellar. She lashed a rope about the joist and tied it around her neck; she then jumped down, hanging herself and strangling herself to 3Supplied from Micha (1, l. 89); Sommer’s text has aprinst (‘learned, taught”) (4, |. 29). 4Sommer'’s text, along with several manuscripts consulted by Micha, has lomme ihesu crist (“the man Jesus Christ” or “the man of Jesus Christ”) (4, 1. 30), while Micha’s text bears le Jhesu Crist (1, Il. 90-91), unusual because of the article “the.” The Story of Merlin death. In the morning she was found hanging, and when the worthy man learned that he had lost his wife as well as his son, his sorrow was so great that he was stricken with an illness that killed him. The devil does such things to those whom he wants to trick into doing his will. And when he had done all that, he was quite gladdened, and he began thinking how he might beguile the three daughters who were left. There was a young squire who very often did this devil's bidding. He took him to where the maidens were, and he became acquainted with one of them. He spent so much time with her that, by his deeds and words, he was at last able to seduce her. When he had done so, he was very happy. And the devil did not want to hide his victory; rather, he wanted to flaunt it openly before people so the shame would grow; thus the devil made known what he had done by his efforts alone, and many people found out about it. In that time it was a custom that a woman taken in adultery would be brought to justice unless she yielded herself fully to all men. And because the devil always wants to shame those who belong to him, he made what had happened known far and wide. The squire fled, and the woman was seized and brought to trial before the judges. The judges were filled with sorrow because of the love they bore the worthy man whose daughter she was, and they said, “You can be amazed at what has happened to the good man whose daughter this was, how she has fallen in such a short time! Not long ago he was one of the wealthiest men in this country, and what dreadful things have befallen him!” They said that they would have her buried [6] alive at night for the shame she had brought to her friends. This is how the devil treats those who consent to do his will. In that land there was a good confessor, a worthy man, who heard about those wonders. He came to the two sisters who were left, the eldest and the youngest, and he comforted them and told to them how what had happened to their father, their mother, their brother, and their sister had come about. And they answered that they did not know anything about it, only that “we believe God hates us, so He allows us to undergo this torment.” And the worthy priest said to them, “What you say is not true or fitung. God hates no one, rather He is sorry when sinners hate themselves. You must understand that what has happened came about through the devil’s work. And did you know that your sister, whom you have lost so shamefully, was as she was?” They answered, “We knew nothing about it.” The good priest said to them, “Keep yourselves from evil works, for evil works take the sinner to a bad end.” The good man taught them a great deal and instructed them in many things. The youngest daughter wanted him to be burned to ashes, but what the worthy priest had said meant a great deal to the eldest. He taught her the creed and how to believe in the powers of Jesus Christ. She put great stock in it and bent her mind to what the good man taught her. He said to her, “If you believe truly what I teach you and tell you, many good things will come to you. You will be my daughter and my friend in God. As long as you behave in accordance with my advice, I’ll never fail to help you in any hour of need, with the aid of Our Lord. Don’t be The Story of Merlin afraid, for God will help you if you stay with Him. Come to me often, for my abode will not be far from here.” Thus the wise priest counseled the two daughters; he set them on the right path, and they put their faith in him because of the good words he spoke to them. And when the devil became aware of this, he was sorely grieved and feared that he might lose the two daughters. So he worked out a way to ensnare them. Nearby lived a woman who many times had done what he wanted. The devil took that woman and sent her to the youngest daughter—the woman did not dare speak to the eldest because she saw that she behaved so humbly. She took the younger sister aside to speak to her and asked her a great deal about the way she lived and what she did. She also asked her, “What kind of life does your sister lead? Is she happy or sullen?” And she answered, “My sister is so worried about the misfortunes that have befallen us that she does not show a cheerful face to me or to anyone else. And a good priest who always speaks to her about God has so turned her to his ways that she does nothing but what he wishes.” The woman then said to her, “What a waste that your fair body was ever born! For it will never know delight as long as you are with your sister. God! if you only knew, dear friend, the joy that other women have, you would scorn what you are now! For we have such joy when we are with our lovers that, if we lived only on handouts, we would be happier than you are even if you had all the wealth in the world. God! a woman’s pleasures are worthless if she does not have a man’s company. Dear friend,” she went on, “I tell you this because otherwise you will never [7] have that or know what it’s like to take delight from a man. And I will tell you why. Your sister is older than you, and she will have a man first. And when she has one for herself, she won’t care about you. So you have lost all chances of knowing the pleasures of your lovely body, and that’s a shame!” When the maiden understood the meaning of what the woman had told her, she answered, “How would I dare do what you say? My sister was put to death!” And she answered, “Your sister behaved very foolishly. But if you trust me, you will know your body’s every delight and not be condemned for it.” ‘T don’t know how,” said the maiden, “nor would I ever dare talk about it.” When the devil heard this, he was glad indeed, he was sure that he would have her just as he wanted, so he sent his woman away. When the woman had gone, the girl thought about what she had said. That night, as she was going to bed, she looked at her lovely body and said, “The good woman indeed told me the truth when she said that I was being wasted.” In the morning, when she got up, she did not dally, for the devil had taken hold of her, and she sent for the woman. When she came, she said to her, “You told me the truth when you said that my sister doesn’t care about me.” And she answered, “I was sure of it, and she will care even less about you when she has fulfillment. We women are made for just one thing: taking our delight from men.” Then the girl said, “I would very willingly do so if I were not afraid of being put to death.” “They would do that only if you behaved as foolishly as your sister. But I will teach you how to do what you want.” 169 Then she answered, “Tell me and I will believe your counsel.” The woman said to her, “You will give yourself up to all men, this is how you will avoid your worries. And you will say that you can’t live with your sister any longer. You will do what you will with your lovely body; no judge can say anything about it, and you will be out of harm’s way. But after you have led such a life for a while, you will find a good man who will be very glad to have you because of your great inheritance. Thus you will have every kind of enjoyment in this world.” The girl promised her that she would do just as she said, and she did. She left her sister and gave her body up to all men at the bidding of that woman, and the devil was very gleeful about it. When her sister found out that she was behaving so, she went to the wise priest, sure that he would tell her what to think about it, for she was quite worried and felt great sorrow for her sister whom she had lost in such a way. When the good man saw how sorrowful she was, he felt great sadness and said to her, “Cross yourself and commend yourself to God, for I see that you are very much afraid.” She said, “I have a right to be, for I have lost my sister.” She told him what she knew and said to him outright that her sister had given herself up to all men. When the good man heard this amazing news, he grew frightened and said to her, “The devil is still around you, and he will not stop until he has ensnared both of you, unless God takes care of you.” She asked him, “Sir, how could I avoid it? There is nothing in this world that I fear more than being tricked by him.” The good man said to her, “If you believe me, he will not trick you.” _ She answered, “I will believe everything you [8] tell me.” And he said, “Then don’t you believe in the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost? Don’t you believe that these three Beings are one and the same in God and in the Trinity? And that Our Lord came to earth to save the sinners who wanted to believe in baptism and in Holy Church’s and her ministers’ other sacraments that He left on earth to save those who would believe in His name and to keep them on the right path?” She said, “Just as you have taught me, so I believe it, and may He truly protect me so that no devil can entrap me.” The good man said, “If you believe it as truly as you say, no kind of devil or evil thing can harm you. And I bid you, do not let yourself be wrathful, for the devil likes most to be where wrath is. This is why you must guard against evil deeds and all stumbling blocks that come your way, and against every kind of anger. My dear friend, come to me and tell me everything, just as it happens to you, that makes you guilty before Our Lord, before all saints, and before all creatures who believe in God. And every time you go to bed and get out of bed, cross yourself in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, and in the name of that cross where He suffered death, because of the devil, to keep sinners from the death of Hell. 170 “If you do this,” said the good man, “you will not have to worry about any devil. And make sure that there is light wherever you lie down, for a devil does not willingly come where light is.” Thus the wise priest taught the maiden, who was very much afraid that the devil would ensnare her. Afterwards the young woman went away to her house, strongly believing” and lowering herself before her Creator and before the poor of the land. And the good men and women came to her and said, “In faith, dear friend, you must truly be worried about your dead brother and the torment that has befallen your father and mother and sisters. But take our counsel to heart, for you are a very wealthy woman and you have a very good inheritance, and some gentleman will be very glad to have you. And she answered them, “May Our Lord uphold me according to what He knows I need.” This is how the young woman behaved for two good years or more, so that the devil could not trick her, nor did he learn of any evil thing she might have done, and he was most distraught. He knew that he could not entrap her unless he made her forget what the worthy priest had taught her and become upset, for she did not care about doing such things. Then it happened that on a Saturday night her sister went into the house where she was in order to upset® her and to see if she could ensnare her for the devil. And it was very late in the night when she came, and she brought with her a crowd of lowborn young men, and they all came into the house. When the elder sister saw her, she grew very angry and said to her, “Dear sister, as long as you want to lead this kind of life, you must not come here, for people would cast blame on me, and I don’t need that.” When the younger heard her sister say that she would be blamed because of her, she grew angry in turn [9] and spoke like a woman in whom the devil dwelled. She threatened her sister, and she said that the good priest loved her in sin and that, if people found out about it, she would be burned alive. When the elder heard her sister accuse her of such devilry, she grew even angrier and told her to leave the house, but the younger said that she was as much her father’s daughter as her sister was and she would not leave. The elder saw that she refused to leave, so she took her by the shoulders, meaning to throw her out, but she defended herself, and the young men who had come with her took hold of her sister and beat her dreadfully. But as soon as she could get away, she ran into a room all by herself, lay down on her bed with all her clothes on, and wept bitterly. When the devil saw her alone and so upset, he was very glad and said, “Now this woman has turned out well!” And he reminded her of time before the deaths of her father and mother and sister’ and brother. When she 5Supplied from Micha (5, Il. 51-52), not in Sommer’s text (8, 1. 23). 6 Concheuoir (“conceive”) in Sommer’s text (8, 1. 26), couroucter (the reading adopted) in the other manuscripts. ’The text has the plural ses suers (9, 1. 11), but the death of only one sister is actually depicted. The Story of Merlin recalled all these things, she began to weep and to show her deep sorrow and great anger, and in this distress, she fell asleep. When the devil was sure that she had forgotten everything the good priest had told her, he said, “Now has this woman been led away from her teacher’s watchful eye. Now we can put our man into her.” This one devil had the power to lie with a woman and get her with child. Then he was all ready, and he lay with her carnally as she slept, and she conceived. After this had been done, the young woman awoke. As she was awakening, she remembered the wise priest, so she crossed herself and said, “Holy Lady Mary, what has happened to me? I feel so much worse than when I went to bed. Fair, glorious Mother of God, pray your dear Son to keep my soul and defend my body from torment and from the might of the devil.” Then she got up and began looking for the one who had done this thing to her, for she thought she could find him. She ran to the door of the room, but found it locked; she looked everywhere in her room, but found no one. It was then that she understood that she had been tricked by a devil. She began wailing, softly calling out to Our Lord and entreating him not to allow anyone to shame her in this world. Night went by and day came. As soon as it was light, the devil took the younger sister away, for she had done well in what he had brought her there to do. When she and the young men had gone, the elder sister came out of her room in great distress. She called her manservant and told him to bring two women. As soon as they had come, she left and made her way until she found her confessor. When he saw her he said to her, “You are in trouble, for I see that you are very frightened.” “Sir,” she told him, “something has happened to me that has never happened to any other woman. I come to you so that you'll tell me what to do, for you have said to me that people cannot commit such a great sin that, if they confess it and repent of it and do whatever their confessor tells them, it will not be forgiven. Sir,” she went on, “I have sinned, and you should know that I’ve been ensnared by a devil.” Then she told him how her sister came to the house, how she grew angry with her, how she and the young men beat her, how she went to her room burning with wrath and closed the door against her, and how, because of her great anger and the distress she felt, she forgot to cross herself “and all the commands you gave me as well. When I awoke I found myself shamed and deflowered. My room was closed as fast as when I locked it myself, and I did not find a soul there, [10] so I do not know who did this to me. Sir, I have been betrayed, and I beg you, have pity. If my body suffers torment, please pray for my soul so that it will not be lost.” When the good man had heard everything she had to tell him, he was greatly astounded, and he did not believe anything she told him, for he had never heard tell of such a wonder. So he answered her® and said to her, “You are all full of devils and devils dwell in you! From what you tell me, how can I hear your confession and give you penance, since Ssupplied from Micha (7, Il. 22-25); Sommer’s text omits everything after “heard” (10, 1. 3). The Story of Merlin I truly believe that you are lying?? For never was a woman deflowered when she did not know by whom, unless she could not see the man who did it to her. And you want me to believe that such a wonder happened to you!” She answered, “May God keep me from torment, I’ve told you the truth.” And the worthy priest said to her, “If it is as you say, you will find out well enough. Yet you did a great sin when you broke the vow I gave you to take. And because you transgressed, I will impose a penance on you today: that for as long as you live you will eat only once on Fridays. And for what you tell me about lustful behavior, although I do not believe you, I must impose another penance for all the days you will live henceforth, if you are willing to accept it just as I say.” She said, “Sir, you will never order me to do anything that I won’t do my utmost to do.” And he answered, “God grant it to you. Do you mean,” he went on, “to abide in the counsel of God and Holy Church and in the mercy of Jesus Christ, who redeemed us with the worthy ransom of His own precious blood and death? Is this a true confession and a sincere repentance, sworn to on your body and soul—everything you have told me by your own mouth? Do you hold it in your heart and body to be true in every way, in word and in deed?”!® She answered, “T will very willingly hold to everything just as you have said it, God willing.” “As I believe in God,” he said, “I believe that if what you have told me is true, you need not be afraid.” “Sir,” she said, “what I have said to you is true, may God keep me from an unworthy death and from any rebuke.” And the good man answered, “You have sworn to me to do your penance and to avoid sin.” “Sir, that is true.” And he said to her, “Then you have forsworn lasciviousness, and I forbid you for all time to engage in it, except for that which comes while you are asleep; no one can keep from that. Now see if you can.” She answered, “Yes, indeed I will. If you pledge yourself as a guarantee that I am not damned for that one time, then never will any other overwhelm me.” “For this,” he answered, “I will stand as your pledge before God by His command, just as surely as He put you on this earth.” The woman accepted her penance just as he imposed it, and she wept because she repented mightily. The worthy priest made the sign of the cross and blessed her, and he sent her on her way as he knew best, in the love of Christ Jesus. And he worried about how what she had told him could be true, and at last he understood that she must have been ensnared by the devil. So he called her and took her to the holy water and had her drink of it in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost; he also sprinkled it on her and said, “Do not forget the commandments I have given you. And any time you need me, come back.” 9supplied from Micha (7, ll. 27-28); Sommer’s text omits the reference to lying (10,1. 5). 10The last sentence is supplied from Micha (7, ll. 48-50), not in Sommer’s text (10, 1. 19). 17a Again he blessed her with the sign of the cross and commended her to God, and she set out on the way back to her house. And she led a very good and simple life. When the devil saw that he had lost her—and he did not see that she was behaving otherwise than she always had—he became very angry. So she was until the seed she bore in her body could no longer be hidden. She grew so big that the other women noticed it and stared [11] at her belly. They asked her if she was with child and who the man was that had done it to her. She answered, “May God bring me into joy, but I don’t know and I never knew.” They said to her, “Have so many men lain with you that you don’t know which one to accuse?” But she answered, “May it not please God that I give birth to the child if ever to my knowledge anything happened to me that should bring me to this.” When they heard this they crossed themselves and said, “Dear friend, that could not be, nor did that ever happen to you or anyone else. Perhaps you love the man who did this to you so much, as much as or more than you love yourself, so that you're not willing to name him. But what a shame for you that, as soon as the judges learn about it, you will have to die!” When she heard that she would have to die because of it, she was filled with great dread, and she said, “God save my soul, but I never saw or knew the one who has done this to me.” The women laughed at her!! and thought she was crazy, and they said, “What a shame about your lovely homestead, its good land and fine buildings, for it will soon be lost.” When she heard this she was greatly frightened, and she went off to her confessor and told him what the women had said to her. The good man saw that she was pregnant with a living child, and he was quite amazed. “Dear sister,” he said to her, “have you faithfully kept the penance I imposed on you?” “Yes, sir,” she answered, “and I have done nothing wrong.” . “And did this wonder ever happen to you more than one time?” She answered no, and he was astounded and wrote down the hour and the night just as she had told to him, and he said that she had to be quite sure about it: “And when the child who is in you is born, I am bound to know if you have lied to me. And I have strong faith in God that, if it is just as you have told me, you will not have to fear death. But you will have reason to be afraid when the judges find out, for they will arrest you just to have your buildings and your good land, yet they will say that they are bringing you to justice. And when you have been arrested, let me know and I will come to comfort you and help you if Ican. God will help you: He will be with you if things are as you say.” Then he said, “Go home and don’t worry; lead a good life, for a good life helps bring people to a good end.” Msupplied from Micha (8, ll. 27-28); instead of s’en rient (“laughed at her about it”), Sommer’s text has sen vont (11, l. 12): “go away.” HI So the young woman went back home that night and lived very quietly until the judges came to the region. And when they found out what had happened to her, they sent men to her house to get her; they arrested her and took her away with them. As soon as she was taken prisoner, she sent for the same good priest who had always counseled her; and when he found out about her, he came to her as fast as he could. When he had come there, they called for him, and he found that the judges had already had the young woman brought before them. The good man gave them the young woman’s testimony, and he said that she did not believe she needed to fear anyone. But the judges said to him, “Do you think a woman can become pregnant and have a child without lying with a man?” The good man answered, “I won’t tell you everything I know about it, but I can certainly tell you this: if you will believe me, you won’t bring her to justice until she has had the child. It would not be right or just otherwise: the child has not deserved death, since it did not commit the sin, and the child has done nothing wrong in the sins of the mother.” The judges answered, “We will do as you advise.” And the good man said, “If you follow my advice, you [12] will keep her well guarded and locked in a tower where she cannot do anything foolish. Lock two women up with her to help her give birth when she needs it, and don’t let them out either. My advice is to leave her there until she has the child and until the child can eat by itself and ask for what it needs. And then, if you are bent!? on doing something more, do what you please. If you have faith in me, you will do as I advise; if you want to do otherwise, I can’t do any more about it.” And the judges answered, “It seems to us that what you say is right.” They did everything just as the good man had set it forth. They put the young woman in a very strong stone house and had all the doorways walled up. And they locked up two women with her, the most skilled they could find for doing what had to be done. High up they left one window open through which they could pull up whatever they needed. When the good man saw this, he spoke to the young woman through the window and said to her, “When your child is born, have it baptized as soon as you can. And when you are put outside, the judges will want to try you, so send for me.” So she stayed a long time in the tower. The judges took care of everything she needed and had it brought to her. She was inside there so long that at last she had her child as it pleased God. And when he was born, he unavoidably had the power and the mind of a devil, and the cunning, because he was sired by one. But the devil had behaved most unwisely, for Our Lord had bought true repentance with His death. The devil had ensnared the young woman through deceit and trickery while she was asleep. As soon as she felt that she had been beguiled, she confessed and cried out for mercy where she 127) Sommer’s text (12, 1. 5), vaer/veer (“to forbid”) is confused with baer/beer (“to strive, be intent”). Sommer needlessly negates the verb (see his n. 1, and Micha, 9, |. 28, and note). The Story of Merlin ought. And when she cried out, she put herself under the mercy and the commandments of the Lord God and Holy Church. This is why God did not want the child to lose, because of the devil, anything that belonged to him; rather He allowed the child to have what was his by right. Therefore, He bestowed on him the devils’ art of knowing things that are done, said, and past—all this he knew. And Our Lord, who is all-knowing, knew, by the mother’s repentance, by her good confession, by the cleansing of confession, and by the true repentance he knew to be in her heart, that she had not wanted or willed what had happened to her. By the power of the baptism with which the child was washed in the font, Our Lord willed that the sin of the mother should not harm him. And He also gave him the sense and the power to know the future. This is the reason why he knew the things that were done, spoken, and past: he inherited this from the devil. Moreover, he knew things that were to come; Our Lord willed that he should know things contrary to those he knew from the other side. Now he could turn to whichever side he wanted, for if he wished, he could give the devils their due, or else His to God just as well. Thus was he born. And when the women had received him, they were all deeply frightened, for they saw that he was hairier than they had ever seen any other child. After they had shown him to his mother she crossed herself and said, “This child frightens me very much.” And the [13] other women said, “And we are so afraid of him that we can scarcely hold him.” She said to them, “Send him down and have him baptized.” They asked her, “What do you want him named?” And she answered, “The same as my father’s name.” Then they put him into a basket and sent him down with a rope, then they gave orders to have him baptized: “let him bear the name of his grandfather on his mother’s side; that good man was called Merlin by his father.” Thus the child was baptized and named Merlin after his grandfather. He was then given to his mother to be nursed, for no other woman dared do so. His mother nursed him until he was nine months old. The women who were with her told her many times that they were quite amazed that the child, who was so hairy, was only nine months old, yet he looked as if he were two years old or more. Then, some time later, after the child was eighteen months of age, the two women said to the mother, “Lady, we must leave this place; it seems to us that we have been here long enough.” And she answered, “As soon as you are gone they will bring me to trial.” “We can do no more, and we can’t stay here forever.” She wept and cried out for mercy: for God’s sake, could they not bear to stay awhile longer? They went off to a window while the mother held her child in her arms and sat and wept very bitterly and said, “Dear son, I will be put to death because of you, and I haven’t deserved it; no one knows the truth, yet I am not believed, so I will have to die.” She spoke these words to her son and said that it was a great shame that God had allowed him to be born. The Story of Merlin And while she wept and wailed to Our Lord, the child looked at her and said with a smile, “Never will you die for what has happened to you because of me.” When the mother heard him, her heart nearly stopped beating, and she became frightened. Her arms went limp and she dropped him; he fell to the floor and screamed. The women who were at the window ran to her, for they were afraid she wanted to kill the child. When they came to her, they both asked her, “Why did your child fall? I think that you want to kill him!” She answered, “I never meant to do that, but he fell out of my arms because of a great wonder. He spoke to me; my arms grew weak, and my whole body too, and that is why he fell.” They asked her, “Then what did he say to you?” “He told me that I would never be put to death because of him.” Very shaken, they answered her: “He will say yet other things.” Then they took him with them and began to speak to him in order to find out whether he would talk, but it did not seem that he would. He uttered not a word, until at length the mother said to the two women, “Threaten me and say that I will be burned because of my son, and I will hold him in my arms and you will hear whether he is willing to speak.” Then his mother took him, for she yearned for him to speak so that the women could hear him, and she began to weep and cry out. The women said, “It will be a great shame for you who are so beautiful to be bummed because of this creature; it would have been better if he had not been born.” And he answered, “You are lying. My mother has made you say this.” When they heard him speak, they ran away very frightened and said, “He is not a child, but a devil who knows what we have said.” Then they began to ask him things and tried to get him to speak, but he only said to them, “Leave my mother in peace, for [14] you are foolish and more sinful than she is.” When they heard this, they were greatly amazed and said, “This wonder cannot be hidden. We will tell the people down there that he talks.” They then went to the window, called the people, and told them what they had heard. And when they heard this wonder, they said that it was high time for the woman to be brought to trial. So they had letters written and summoned every judge to be there within forty days to hold court. When the letters had been sent out, and the mother knew the day of her execution, she became very frightened and sent word about it to the good man who was her confessor. And so things were until seven days before the time she was to be burned, when the child was walking about the tower and saw his mother weeping. He began to smile and to look very happy. And the women said to him, “Now you care very little that she weeps because within the week she will be burned on your account. It was a cursed hour, unless it was God’s doing, when you were ever born, for she is being put to death because of you.” 7S He answered, “Dear mother, they are lying. No one will ever be so bold as to dare lay a hand on you as long as I am alive, much less put you to death—except God.” When his mother and the women heard him, they were very glad and said, “The child who can say this will in time be very wise.” So it was until the day that had been set. The women were taken out of the tower, and the mother carried the child in her arms. The judges talked to the two women away from the others. They asked them if it was true that the child could speak, and they told them everything they had heard him say. When the judges heard this, they were very greatly amazed and said that he would have to know many words to save his mother. So they came back to where the others were. And the young woman's confessor had come. Then one of the judges said to Merlin’s mother, “Get yourself ready, for you must be put to death.” She answered, “Sir, please, I would like to talk alone with this good man.” And they gave her leave to do so. She and the wise priest went into a room while the child stayed outside (and many people tried to get him to speak, but he would have nothing to do with it). The mother spoke very pitifully to her confessor and wept. And the good man asked her, “Is it true that your child talks, just as they say?” “Yes, sir,” she said, and she told him everything she had heard him say. After the good man had listened to her, he said, “Something wonderful will come of this.” Then they came out and went over to the judges, and the young woman wore nothing but her shift, which had a mantle. She found her child outside the chamber, took him in her arms, and went before the judges. When the judges saw her, they asked her, “Who is the father of this child? Be careful not to hide anything.” And she said, “I see full well that I am condemned to die! May God never take pity on me or grant me mercy if I ever saw the father or knew him, or if ever I gave myself to any man so that I should have a child by him.” The judge answered, “We don’t think that could be true, so we'll ask the other women if what you would have us believe could be true. For no one has ever heard such a wonder!” The judges drew to one side and called the women over to meet with them (and there were many of them there that day), and one of the judges spoke out and said, “You ladies who [15] have come here, has it ever happened to any of you, or to any other woman you have ever heard about, that a woman could conceive and have a child without being with a man?” And they said that no woman could have a child or get pregnant unless she had known a man carnally. When the judges heard that, they went back to Merlin’s mother and told what they had found out from the other women and said that justice should be done. For what she would have them understand did not seem just or night. Then Merlin sprang forward and said that she would not be burned so soon, “for if all those who have been with someone other than their husbands or wives were brought to justice,” he went on, “then he would already have burned 1s half!3 or more of the men and women who are here. I know about their behavior just as well as they themselves do. If I wanted to talk about it, I would have everything brought out into the open right here. You can be sure that my mother is not guilty of what you accuse her of. The guilt she did have in it this good man took upon himself. If you do not believe me, ask him.” The judges then called the wise priest and asked him whether it was true “that she told you that it had happened to her in such and such a way.” He answered that she had done nothing in the world wrong: “She herself told me how she was tricked, and she told me about the wonder of this child with whom she became pregnant. It happened to her while she was asleep and with no feelings of pleasure, nor does she know by whom the child was fathered. She confessed everything and has been repentant for so long that it cannot by rights harm her, if her conscience is clear, before God or before the world.” The child then went forward and said to the good man, “You have written down the hour and the night when I was conceived, and you can reckon when I was born and at what time. By this you can show most of the things my mother has done.” And the good priest said to him, “I don’t know how you happen to know more than all of us together.” The two women were called, and they told before the judges when the conception happened, how long the pregnancy lasted, and when the birth took place. By this!4 and what the good man had written down, they found it to be as Merlin had said. But the judge answered that she would not be acquitted unless she said who the father was “in such a way that we can believe it.” The child grew angry and said to the judge, “I know my father better than you know yours, and your mother knows better who sired you than mine knows who fathered me.” The judge grew angry and said, “If you have anything to say about my mother, I will certainly hold it to be the truth!” He answered, “I can say enough about her so that, if you made the right judgment, she would deserve death more than my mother. And if I make you admit this, you must leave my mother in peace, for she is not guilty of what people blame her for, and everything she said about my conception was true.” And when the judge heard this, he became very angry indeed, and said, “You have truly rescued your mother from being burned! You can be sure that if you cannot say enough about my mother to make me believe you and leave your mother in peace, I will burn you with her!” Then they set a day to meet again in two weeks, and the judge sent for his mother. And he had the child and his mother guarded well; he himself went with the guards many times, and many times he tried to get the child to talk about his mother, but [16] never during the whole two weeks could they draw a word out of him. And when the 13sommer’s text reads «ii. pars (15, I. 11): “two parts”; the intent in the expression is to suggest a very significant portion. 14Not in Sommer’s text (15, I. 27), where the comparison is only implicit. The Story of Merlin judge’s mother came, they brought them out of prison and took them before the people. Then the judge said, “Here is my mother, about whom you must speak.” The child answered, “You are not nearly as clever as you think you are. Go, take your mother into a house by yourselves and call your most intimate counsellors, and I will call the counsellors of my mother, that is, the almighty God and her confessor.” Those who heard him were so astonished that hardly anyone could find an answer, but the judge recognized that he spoke wisely. Then the child asked one and all, “If I free my mother from this man justly, need she fear the others?” And they all answered, “If she is freed by him, no one else will ever hold her accountable for anything concerning this.” Then they went into a room: the judge took his mother there and two men among his closest friends, and the child took his mother’s confessor. After they had gathered, the judge said, “Now say what you will about my mother whereby your mother will be acquitted.” The child answered, “I will never say anything about your mother whereby mine should be acquitted—I will not say whether she has done any misdeed—for I am not willing to defend my mother against what is wrong. Rather, I mean to uphold the right of the Lord God—and hers. You can be sure that my mother has not deserved the torment you wish to give her; if you will believe my advice, you will acquit my mother and let yours be tried.” The judge answered, “You won’t get away from me like that, for you must say more.” The child said, “You promised me and my mother too that I could defend her.” “This is true,” answered the judge, “and we are gathered here to hear what you will say concerning my mother.” “You want,” said the child, “to burn my mother and me as well because she will not say and does not know who my father is. But if I wanted her to, she could say that better than you can say who your father is.” And the judge said, “Dear mother, was I not the son of your lawful husband?” The mother answered, “For God’s sake, dear son, whose son would you then be but my husband’s who is now dead?” “Lady, lady, you must tell the truth,” said the child. “Nevertheless, if your son were willing to acquit my mother and me, I would be satisfied.” But the judge answered, “J will not be satisfied!” “What you'll learn from your mother’s testimony,” said the child, “is that your father is still alive.” When those who were there heard him, they were amazed. Then the child said to the judge’s mother, “You must tell your son whose son he is.” The lady crossed herself and said, “The devil Satan, and I never told him!” The child answered her, “You know it’s true that he is not the son of the man he thinks.” The lady was abashed and asked him, “Whose then?” And he said to her, “By these signs you know very well indeed that he is the son of your priest: that the first time The Story of Merlin you had intercourse with him you said that you were afraid of getting pregnant, that he told you you would never have a child by him, that he said he would write down all the times he lay with you because he was himself afraid that you might go to bed with another man, and that your husband was estranged from you at the time. And when your son!® was conceived, hardly any time passed before you told him!® that you were pregnant by him. Now say whether it is true just as I have told you. And if you don’t admit it, I will tell you [17] still other signs.” The judge was very angry, and he asked his mother whether what he had said was the truth. The mother was terrified, and she said, “Dear son, do you believe that devil?” But the child said, “If you don’t admit this thing, I will tell you yet another that you well know is true.” And the lady fell silent. The child said, “I know everything that happened. It is true that when you felt that you were pregnant, you begged the priest to make peace between your husband and yourself)? in order to hide that you were already pregnant. He did his best, until in the end he got you two to lie together. You led your husband to believe that the child was his, and many people thought it was so, and your son, the very one who is here, thought it was true. From then until now you have led this life and you still do. The night you left to come here the priest 8 lay with you. In the morning he rode along with you quite a way, and before leaving you he said to you alone, smiling, ‘Take care to do and say whatever my son wishes,’ for he well knows that he is his son because of what he had written down.” When the lady heard him out, she knew well that everything he said was true, so she sat down and was very distraught. She knew full well that she had to tell the truth. Her son looked at her and said to her, “Dear mother, whoever iny father may be, I am your son and I'll treat you as a son should. Tell me whether or not he spoke the truth about what we have heard here.” The lady answered, “For God's sake, dear son, have mercy! Surely I cannot hide it: everything happened just as he has said.” When the judge heard her, he said, “This child told the truth, for he knew better who his father was than I mine. Therefore, it is not right that I should bring his mother to justice when Ido not condemn my own. But for God's sake, for your honor, and so that I might prove you innocent before the people, you and your mother, please tell me who your father is.” He answered, “I will tell it more for your love’s sake than because I fear your power. I want you to know and believe that I am the son of a devil who ensnared my 15The text has an ambiguous i! (“he”). 161¢ is unclear whether 4 (“him”) refers to the lady’s husband or her lover, however, the insistent “by him” (de lui) suggests it may have been the priest. 17From Micha’s text (15, ll. 84-85). In Sommer’s text, Merlin says that the mother made her husband make peace with the priest (17, |. 6). 18The text again has the ambiguous i! (“he”), which would logically, according to context, refer to the lady’s lover-priest, as is translated, but which has as an implicit antecedent the husband. t75 mother. Know also that one kind of devil is called incubi, and they live in the air. God allowed me to have their intelligence and their memory, so I know things that are done, said, and past; this is how I know what your mother has done. And Our Lord has permitted and wills me to have this in my memory because of my mother’s goodness. And because of her holy and true repentance, the penance that this worthy man imposed on her, and the commands of Holy Church which she believed, God has given me such power that I know the things that are to come. And this you can see by what I’m about to tell you.” Then he took him aside so that they were by themselves, and he said to him, “Your mother will go off and will tell what I have said to her to the man who fathered you. And when he hears that you know it, he will be so frightened that his heart will not be able to bear it, and he will run away out of fear of you. And the devil, whose works he has always done, will lead him to a spring, and he will drown himself. This way you can prove that I know the things that are to come.” And the judge answered, “If it happens thus, I will never doubt you.” Then they left their private meeting and went back before the people, and the judge said within the hearing of everyone that the child had indeed justly saved his mother from being burned: all those who would see him should know that “to my mind they will never see so wise a man.” And they answered, “Praise God!” This is how Merlin’s mother was saved and the [18] judge’s mother found guilty. Merlin stayed with the judges while the judge sent two men with his mother to find out whether what the child had said would turn out to be true. As soon as she reached her house, she spoke to the priest and told him about the wonder she had heard. When he heard this, he was so terrified that he could not utter a word. In his heart he imagined that the judge would kill him as soon as he came there. Thus brooding, he went out of the town, saying to himself that it would be better for him to drown himself than for the judge to give him an unworthy death. The devil, whose works he had done, egged him on until he made him jump into a pond and drown himself. The men who had been sent with the lady saw it. This is why this story forbids anyone ever to flee other people, for the devil abides more often with a man by himself than in a crowd.!9 Those who saw this wonder went back to the judge and told him what had happened just as they had seen it. The priest had drowned the third day they were there. When the judge heard it, he was astounded; he came to Merlin and told him. When Merlin heard it, he smiled and said, “Now you can know whether I say the truth. And I bid you, tell it to Blaise.” (This Blaise was the good man who was his mother’s confessor.) So the judge told him the wonder just as it had happened to the priest. 19¢ is worthwhile to recall that Merlin’s grandfather, in his despair, fled human company and that, having driven him to this, the devil pursuing him knew that he could work his will on him. 176 Then Merlin went away with his mother and Blaise while the judges went their separate ways elsewhere. This Blaise was a very good, sharp-witted clerk. When he heard Merlin saying those things, he was greatly amazed that such keen intelligence should come to one so young, less than two and a half years old. So he undertook with great earnestness to test him in many ways, until Merlin said, “Blaise, stop testing me. The more you test me the more astonished you will become. But do what I’ll ask, and believe as much as you can2° of what I'll tell you. I will teach you easily how to have the love of Jesus Christ and everlasting joy.” Blaise answered, “I have heard you talk, and I really believe that you are the devil’s son, so I am afraid that you will trick me.” Merlin said, “Evil hearts usually recognize evil rather than good. Just as you heard it said that I was sired by the devil, so you heard me say that Our Lord had given me knowledge and memory of the things that were to come. So, if you are clever, you should try to find out which one I would claim. You can be sure that since Our Lord willed that I should know these things, the devils have lost hold of me, but I have not lost their craft or their artifice, rather I hold from them what I ought. “I do not claim this to further their cause. They were unwise, when they sired me, to put me in a vessel that was never to be theirs, for the good life of my mother has hurt them a great deal. If they had begotten me in my grandmother, then I would not have the power to recognize that God exists, for she led a very evil life— through her came all the suffering my mother had because of her father and the other wrongs you have heard about. But believe what I'll tell you about the creed and the faith, and I'll tell you something that no one but God could tell you. Make a book out of it so that the many people who hear it will be the better for it and will all the more keep from sinning. Thereby you will do an act of charity, and you will put [19] your work to good use.” Blaise answered him, “I will do what you say, and I'll gladly make the book, but let it be done in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost—for just as truly I believe and know these three parts to be a single thing in God—and in the name of the blessed lady who bore the Son of God, all the holy apostles, all the angels and archangels, all the saints, all the prelates of Holy Church, all good men and women, and all creatures who love and honor God, so that you will not be able to deceive me or trick me or do anything that would displease Our Lord.” Merlin answered, “May all these creatures you have mentioned damn me before God if I have you do anything that is against the will of Jesus Christ my Savior.” “Now tell me what you will,” said Blaise, “for from now on I'll do everything good you order me to do.” And Merlin said to him, “Now run get ink and parchment quickly, for I will tell you many things that you would not think anyone could tell you.” Then Blaise went to get what he needed. And after he had looked for it and found it, Merlin began to recount the love between Jesus Christ and Joseph of Arimathea, just as it 20The text reads croi grant partie (“believe a large part”). The Story of Merlin had been, and to tell about Joseph and his offspring and those people who had the vessel called the Grail and all their accomplishments, just as they had been, of Alan and his companions, how he left his father’s house, how Petrus had departed, how Joseph disposed of his vessel, and how he died.?! Afterward he told him about the devils, how they had gathered together because they had lost the power they had enjoyed over humanity before, and he told him how the prophets had done them harm and how, for this reason, they had conspired to make a man. “And they said they would make me. You heard all about it and you learned from my mother and other people about their deeds and tricks—and then the foolishness they are all so full of, for they have lost me and every other advantage.” Thus did Merlin set out the plan for the work that he ordered Blaise to undertake. And Blaise was amazed at the wonders that Merlin told, but they seemed to be nonetheless true and good and beautiful, so he devoted himself to writing them down, so much so that one day Merlin said to Blaise, “You must suffer a great deal for this undertaking, and I will suffer more than you.” And he asked him how that was. “People will come from the west to seek me out. And those who will come to find me will have promised their lord that they would kill me and bring him my blood. But when they see me and hear me, they won’t want to kill me. But when I go away with them, you will go to the place where the people are who possess the holy cup, the Grail. Forever thereafter, your work and your book will be told about, and your book will be gladly heard everywhere. But it will not have authority, because you cannot be among the apostles, who never put anything down in writing about Our Lord that they had [20] not seen or heard, and you do not put down what you have seen or heard except as I tell you to. And just as I will remain obscure except concerning those things wherein I wish to reveal myself, so will your book remain hidden. In a short while it will come about that no one will thank you for it, and you will take it away with you when I go off with those who are to come for me. “You will go to Western parts, and the book of Joseph will be put together with yours. And when you have fulfilled your task, and when you are, as you should be, in the company of the Grail, then your book will be joined to Joseph’s book, and everything will have been proved true concerning my labors and yours, and God will bless it if it pleases Him. And those who hear it will pray to Our Lord on our behalf. And when the two books are put together, there will be one beautiful book, and the two will be one and the same thing, except that I cannot say or recount the intimate words between Jesus Christ and Joseph. “In England there had not yet been a Christian king, and about those who had come before, I do not care to tell anything except what has bearing on this story.” 2lThe preceding lines, beginning with “Joseph and his offspring,” are supplied from Micha’s text (16, Il. 65-71). Sommer’s text truncates. The Story of Merlin 2. Merlin Explains Why Vortigern’s Tower Will Not Stand.’ In this part the story says that there was a king in England named Constant, and this Constant ruled for a long time. He had children. One son was named Maine,” the second Pendragon, and the third Uther.> This Constant had a liegeman on his land called Vortigern; he was very shrewd in the ways of the world, clever, and a good knight. Constant was quite old, and in time he died. And when he was dead, the folk of the land asked whom they should make lord and king of the country. Many agreed that they would make the son of their overlord king. He was young, but it was not right to make anyone else king and leave him aside. Vortigern himself agreed to this, and they all deliberated until they made him king. After Maine became king, war broke out, and Vortigern was his seneschal. It was the Saxons who made War against Maine, and those who were of the pagan Roman religion also came often to fight against the Christians. Vortigern, who was seneschal of the land, did there as he pleased. The old king’s son and his brothers, all of whom were quite ignorant, were not so wise or worthy as they needed to be. Vortigern had taken for his own use much of the land’s wealth, and he had the hearts of the people. He knew that they held him to be worthy and wise, so pride rose up in him, and he said that, because he saw that no one could do what he could do, he would no longer take care of the king’s land, so he would withdraw from it. When the Saxons saw that he meant to leave, they gathered together and came upon the Christians in a great horde. The king went to Vortigern and said, “Dear friend, help defend the land, and I and all those who belong to it will do as you will.” Vortigerm answered, “Sir, let others go defend it, for I cannot now go there, as there are people in your [21] service who hate me. I want them to have this battle, for I will never commit myself to it.” When King Maine and those who were with him heard that they could accomplish nothing more, they left and made ready to fight the Saxons. And the Saxons moved against them and routed them. After they had been defeated, they gathered and said that they had lost a great deal, but they would not have suffered this loss if Vortigern had been there. The boy stood there, unable to defend the land as he needed to, so they greeted him with shouts of scorn and said that they would no longer put up with him. Then they came to Vortigern and said to him, “Sir, we have no king or lord, for he is worthless. For God’s sake, Corresponds to Sommer, 20-35. 2Named Constant like his father in Geoffrey of Monmouth (6, 5-8), he had withdrawn from the world as a monk (Old French moine/maind. Apparently an epithet such as “the Monk” attached to his name (cf. Geoffrey of Monmouth, 6, 6) became confused, in the French tradition, with a proper name. 3In Geoffrey of Monmouth (6, 5) the sons are, in addition to Constant the Monk, Aurelius Ambrosius and Uther Pendragon. In the French tradition the second name is dropped and the third divided. ITE please be our king; govern us and keep us. For there is no man in this land who could or should do this as you can.” And he answered, “I cannot and I must not, not as long as my lord is alive.” And they said that they would rather he were dead. Vortigern said to them, “If he were dead and if you and the others wanted me to be king, I would gladly do so, but as long as he lives I cannot and must not.” They listened to Vortigern’s words and understood them as they saw fit. They took leave of him and went away into their country. And when they had got there, they sent for their friends and told them how they had spoken to Vortigern and the answer he had given them. When they had heard it, they said, “It is best for us to kill the king, and then Vortigern will be king as soon as we have killed him. Ever after he will do just what we will: thus we will find a way to make ourselves lords over him!” They then agreed which among them should kill Maine. They chose twelve, and those twelve went to the place where King Maine was, while the others stayed behind in town to learn whether anyone meant to hurt their cause or harm them, so that they might help their friends. And those twelve came to the place where they found King Maine; they ran upon him with knives and swords and killed him. After they had killed him, they found no one who would talk about it very much at all. And they came to Vortigern and said to him, “Now you will be king, for we have killed King Maine.” And when Vortigern heard that they had killed him, he seemed to be greatly distraught. And he then said to them, “You have done an evil deed in killing your lord. I advise you to flee because of the worthy men of the land, for if they find you they will kill you. I am sorry that you have come here.” And they went away. Afterward it happened that the folk of the kingdom gathered together and talked about whom they would make their king. Vortigern had the hearts of many of the folk in the kingdom, and they agreed all together that he should be king. At this gathering were two worthy men who were in charge of the other two boys, Pendragon and Uther. These two boys were sons of Constant and brothers of King Maine. When they heard and learned that Vortigern would be king, they began to suspect that he had had King Maine killed. The two men who protected the boys took counsel and said, “Since Vortigern has had our lord killed, as soon as he is king he will have these two boys in our charge killed. We dearly loved their father, for he did us [22] many great favors, and thanks to him we still have what we have. We would be wicked to allow those under our protection to come to grief. We are sure that when Vortigern is king he will have them killed, because he knows full well that the kingdom should be theirs.” The two worthy men agreed that they would flee and take the two boys to a faraway land to the east; their forebears had come from there, and they would save them in this way. And they did just as they had planned. Vortigern was chosen and proclaimed king. After his crowning, the twelve who had killed King Maine came to 178 him, and when Vortigern saw them, he did not make any signs of having ever seen them before. They rushed to him and rebuked him, for it was thanks to them that he was king, since they had killed King Maine. When Vortigern heard that they had killed their lord, he ordered them to be taken prisoner, and he said to them, “You have judged yourselves in admitting that you have killed your lord, whom you could not have a right to kill. You would do the same to me if you could, but I'll know how to protect myself against you.” And when they understood what he was saying, they were aghast and said, “Sir, we did it for your good and because we thought you would love us all the more for it.” When Vortigern heard them he said, “I will show you clearly how one must love people like you.” Then he had all twelve of them taken, tied to the tails of twelve horses, and pulled and dragged about for so long that little was left of them. They were of noble stock and had many kinsmen who said to Vortigern, “You shamed us mightily when you killed our kinsmen and friends so unworthily. We will no longer serve you willingly as our overlord.” And when Vortigern heard them threatening him, he grew angry and told them that if they did not hold their tongues, he would do the very same thing to them. When they heard that he was threatening them, their scorn for him grew, and they answered very angrily that they had little fear of his authority: “King Vortigern, threaten us all you will, but we say this to you: as long as we have one friend left on earth you will surely have war. From this moment on we break our faith with you; you are not our lord and you do not hold this land lawfully, for you have it against the will of God and Holy Church. You can be sure that you will die the same death you gave our kinsmen.” They then went away. And when Vortigern heard them threatening him with death, he grew even angrier than he had been before. Thus ill will was born among them, and the killers’ kinsmen gathered together some men-at-arms and invaded the land. Vortigern fought against them a great number of times until he drove them back out of the country. And after they had been driven out, he behaved so wickedly toward his people that they rose up against him. When he saw that, he was very frightened that they would drive him from the land. He then sent his messengers to hunt out the Saxons, and when they heard that he was suing for peace, they were very glad. One of them was named Hengist; he was more fearsome than any of the others. This Hengist had served Vortigern for a very long time, and he served him so well in the war that he led the triumph. When the war was over, Hengist told Vortigern that his own people sorely hated him. I have heard so much said about this that I cannot [23] tell you everything, but I can tell you this much, that Hengist spoke for so long and so persuasively that Vortigern took Hengist’s daughter as his wife. And all those who hear this story should know that she was the first in The Story of Merlin that kingdom to say “Wassail!”4 I must not recount to you everything about Hengist and his deeds and estate, but all Christians grieved when Vortigern took Hengist’s daughter, and it was quite often said that Vortigern ignored a great part of his religious belief because of the woman, who did not believe in Jesus Christ. After all this, Vortigern knew that he was not well loved by his liegemen. He learned as well that Constant’s two sons had been taken away to faraway lands and that they would come back as soon as they could; he was sure that if they did come back, it would be for his downfall. He therefore decided to build a tower so big and so strong that he need not fear anyone. Then he sent for all his master masons, ordered limestone and mortar, and began building the tower. When they had worked up to twenty or so feet above the ground,® it all fell down. And the same thing happened again three or four times.® And when Vortigern saw that his tower’ could not hold up, he became very distraught and said that he would never be happy if he could not find out why his tower kept falling. So he sent throughout all his land for all the wise men who could be found. When they had gathered together, he told them the wonder of his falling tower, which would not stand no matter what he did. And he asked them all their advice about it. When they heard the wonder and saw the tower fallen down in the midst of the place, they were greatly amazed, and said, “It is our opinion that no one but a learned man, a clerk, can find out why this building keeps falling down, for clerks know a great deal about things, thanks to their clerkly learning and training, that the rest of us are ignorant of. So if you want to find out why, you can do so only through them.” And Vortigern said, “It indeed seems to me that you speak the truth.” Then he called together all the learned clerks in his land. And when they had gathered, he showed them the wonder; and when they had seen it, they were greatly amazed, and they said to one another, “This is a very great wonder the king has told us about!” And then the king summoned his wealthiest vassals. He took them aside and said to them, “Will you be able to advise me by yourselves or in consultation with others? I would bid you, make every effort so that I might learn why the tower falls down, for I have been told that I cannot know it unless you tell me.” ‘The translation follows Micha’s text (17, Il. 18-19), a reading Sommer gives as a variant (23, n. 1). Sommer’s manuscript reads, illogically, “that it was she who first held the kingdom.” The story of the bride’s contribution to English culture is amplified in Geoffrey of Monmouth (VI, 12). 5Sommer’s text reads “three or four toises” (23, 1. 13), a totse being a measure of about six feet. Micha’s text, however, speaks of the length of time they had worked: “twenty days or three weeks” (19, Il. 33-34). 6The translation combines Sommer’s text—“and thus it fell back down” (23, 1. 15)——-and Micha’s—“and thus it happened” (19, 1. 35). 7Micha’s text bears the doublet sa tors ne s‘euvre (“his tower and his work”) (19, 1. 35), while the scribe of Sommer’s base apparently garbled the second element: sa tor ne sere (“his tower and ?”) (23, 1. 16). As editor, Sommer draws attention to the apparent error, but does not correct it. The Story of Merlin When they heard that the king was asking them so earnestly, they said, “Sir, we know nothing about it, but it may well be that there are clerks right here who can learn about it through an art called astrology,® and there are clerks here who know it.” And the king said, “You clerks know who you are, so get together and talk about the matter. Find out which ones among you know how to work astrology, and let them come forward boldly. And they will never ask me for anything, if they can tell me what I want to know, that will not be theirs.” Then they drew aside and asked one another if they knew anything about that art. Two of them stepped forward and said that they knew enough about it [24] to find out the answer. “We have here two clerks who know about it.” And the wealthy men said, “Go find your fellow astrologers and come talk to us all together.” They said they would do so gladly, so the two looked about until there were seven of them; and among these seven was not one who did not believe that he was the master of the others. So they went before the king, and the king asked them if they could say why his tower kept falling down. And they answered, “Yes, if it can be known by anyone.” The king told them that if they could tell him, he would give them all they wanted. This is how the king engaged his clerks. And after they entered his service, they worked hard to find out why that tower was falling down and how it could be made to stand. Each and every one put forth his greatest efforts. But the more they worked, the more they wasted their effort, for they found out just one thing, and that had nothing to do with the tower, it seemed to them, so they were terrified. At last the king called them before him and asked them, “Why do you not tell me news about my tower?” They answered, “This is a very great thing you are asking of us, and we still need nine more days.”? The king answered, “We grant you the respite, but make sure that you can tell me at the end of the nine days.” Then the clerks went away to take counsel together, and each one asked the others, “What do you say about this thing the king asks of us?” So they asked one another, but not one of them would tell the others what he had found out. In the end, there was one who knew more than the others, and he said, “You will do well to tell me privately, each without the others, what you have found out. I will not reveal anyone’s secret unless all of you give me leave to do so.” And they said that they were willing to do that. Then he took each one aside privately and asked them in turn what they had found out about the tower. And they all said that they knew nothing about it, nor could they see how it could happen. But they all saw another wonder, for they 801d French astrenomie (Sommer, 23, |. 35). As proved by ensuing events, the clerks do not practice astronomy in the modern sense, but are seers. Cf. 73, |. 26, and 102, 1. 28. 9Sommer’s text twice reads .xj., perhaps a printing error for .ix., Since his summary speaks of a “respite of nine days” (24, ll. 16—- 17). Micha prints the preferred reading (20, Il. 27, 29). 179 saw a boy seven years old who had been born with no man on earth as his father, yet conceived in a woman, who would tell about the tower. Every one of the six!® told him this same thing. And when he had heard everyone’s opinion, he said to them, “Come back all of you.” And they did so. And when they were all together, he said to them, “You have all told me one thing and hidden one thing.” They answered, “Tell us now what we said to you and what we hid from you.” And he said, “You all told me that you know nothing about that tower, but you see a boy seven years old born with no man on earth as his father, yet conceived in a woman, but you told me nothing more. I will tell you this: believe me, there is not one among you who has not seen that he is to die because of that boy. I myself have seen it just as plainly as any of you. But if you will believe me, we will come to grips with this since we know about it so long before our deaths. Do you know what we'll do? We will all agree on one thing and say that the tower cannot stand and never will, unless some of the blood of the boy born fatherless is put into the mortar in the foundation: if anyone could take some of his blood and put it into the mortar, the tower would stand, and it would be good and strong forever. Let everyone say this each in his own way [25] so that the king will not find out what we really saw. This is how we can save ourselves from death by the death of the one by whom we have seen we are to die. Let us also convince the king to order those who will go out looking for him to kill him on the spot as soon as they find him and to bring away his blood.” Thus they agreed on what to say. And when they came before the king, they said that they would not speak their minds all together, but each one separately: then he would know who spoke best. And they pretended that no one knew anything about the others. And so each one told the king what his reckoning had been, and he heard five men, each one by himself. When the King and his men had heard these wonders, they were greatly amazed and said, “How can a man be born without a father?” The king then called all the clerks together before him and said to them, “You all say the same thing, yet each one says itin his own way.” They said to him, “Sir, now tell us what it was.” And he told word for word just what they had said. They all said to him, “If what we have told you is not true, then do with us as you will.” And the king asked them, “Can it be true that a man was born without conception by a father?” They answered, “Sir, we have never heard it said of anyone except this boy. But we can assure you of this: he was born fatherless and he is seven years of age.” And the king said, “I will have you put under a strong guard, then I’ll send people to fetch some of the boy’s blood.” They said all together, “Sir, we are very willing for you to have us guarded, but you should not talk to the boy or even see him; rather, order him to be killed and his blood 10Thus Micha’s text; Sommer repeats .vij. (24, |. 28). 180 to be brought back to you. This way, your tower will stand, if it is to stand, without fail.” The king had all seven put into a very strong house and provided them with everything they needed. He then gathered his messengers and sent them out two by two. There were twelve in all, and the king had them swear on saints’ relics that the one who found the boy first would kill him and bring his blood to him; they also swore not to come back before he had been found. Thus the king sent people out to look for the boy, and his messengers left two by two. And they looked for him in many lands, until two messengers came upon two of their fellows and they agreed to go along together for a while. One day they happened to pass by a big field at the entrance to a town, and in that field a band of children were playing ball. And Merlin, who knew all things, was there. He saw those who were looking for him, so he drew up to one of the wealthiest boys in the town, because he was sure that he would say ugly things about him, raised the stick he was holding, and struck the boy in the leg. The boy burst into tears and began to call Merlin names, accusing him of being born fatherless. And when the messengers heard this, they went all four to where the boy was weeping. They asked him, “Who is the one that struck you?” He said to them, “He is the son of a woman who never knew who sired him, and he has never had a father.” When Merlin heard this, he came to them smiling and said to them, “I am the one you are looking for, the one you have sworn to kill, and you must take my blood to King Vortigern.” [26] When they heard the boy speak they were dumbfounded, and they asked him who had told him that. And he answered, “I know for a fact that you swore to kill me. They asked him, “Will you come with us if we carry you on horseback?” And he answered, “I would be afraid you’d kill me.” He knew that they did not want to, but he said it to worry them all the more. And he said to them, “If you will promise not to harm me, I will go away with you and I will also tell you why the tower for which you want to kill me cannot stand.” When they heard this, they were utterly amazed and asked him who had told him that. And he answered, “I know it for a fact, since you swore to kill me.” And they said to one another, “This boy tells us wonders, and whoever killed him would commit a grievous sin.” Each one of them said, “I would rather break my oath than kill him.” Then Merlin said to them, “You will come take lodging where my mother lives. I could not go with you without her leave or that of a worthy man who lives in my mother’s house.” “We will go where you wish.” Thus Merlin took the messengers who had come to kill him to his mother’s house in a community of nuns where the good priest had sent her to retire. When they came there, Merlin ordered those within to give them a warm welcome. And after they had got down from their horses, Merlin took them before Blaise and said to him, “Look, here are the ones I told you were looking for me to kill ”" me, The Story of Merlin And he said to the messengers, “Please admit to this good man, without lying, the truth in what I am going to say about what you have undertaken. I want you to know that if you lie, Iam sure to know it.” “We will never lie to you,” they said. “Just make sure that you do not lie to us.” And Merlin said to Blaise, “Now listen closely to what we are about to tell you. I say,” said Merlin to the messengers, “that you are King Vortigern’s men. That king wants to build a tower, but when they have gone up twenty feet or so,!! the tower cannot stand, and everything that has been finished crumbles in an hour’s time, and the king gets very angry because of it. “He has summoned clerks, but not one of them could figure it out. They told him they would explain to him why the tower could not stand and how to get it to hold. They cast their lots, but they saw nothing about the tower. But they did find out that I had been born, and it seemed to them that I could hurt them, so they agreed to have me killed. They would tell the king that the tower would stand if some of my blood were in it. And they told him so. When Vortigern heard it, he took it for a great wonder and believed it to be true. They advised him to send out men to look for me, but they should kill me when they found me and bring him my blood to put into the tower, in the mortar for the foundation, and this is how, they said, the tower would stand. And Vortigern chose twelve messengers and made them all swear on holy relics that they would kill me and bring him my blood. So he sent these twelve out, and four of the twelve came here, to the big field where other children and I were playing ball. And knowing that they were looking for me, I struck one of the boys because I knew for certain that he would say the worst things about me he could think of and that he would scold me for being born fatherless. I did it because I wanted these worthy men to find me, and so they have found me. And so I bid you, dear Master [27] Blaise, ask them if I have spoken the truth.” And he asked them whether the wonder he had told was true. They answered that everything had happened just as he told it, “and he did not lie to you in a single word.” The master crossed himself and said that Merlin would be most wise if he lived long enough, “and it would be a very great shame if you killed him.” They answered, “Sir, we would sooner be perjurers all our days—we would sooner the king seized all our possessions—than kill him. And he himself, who knows all other things, knows full well whether we wish to.” And Blaise said, “You speak the truth. And I will ask him this and other things in front of you, and you will be greatly astounded by what he will say.” Then they called him back, for he had left them earlier because he wanted them to speak privately. And when he had come back, Blaise asked him, “Now tell me, Merlin, do these messengers want to kill you?” And Merlin flashed a smile and said, “I know surely, thanks be to God and to them, that they do not wish to at all.” N Here Micha’s text (22, 1. 15) agrees with Sommer’s (26, I. 25): “three or four toises.” See above, n. 5. The Story of Merlin And they said to him, “You have spoken the truth.” Then they asked him, “Will you come with us?” And he answered, “Yes, without fail, if you swear a binding oath to me that you will take me before the king and that you will allow no harm to come to me before I have talked to him, for I am sure that after I spoken to him, I will have no need to fear.” And they promised him. Then Blaise spoke and said, “Now I see clearly that you wish to leave me. Tell me then what you want me to do with this work you have had me begin.” And he answered, “What you ask me, I will tell you aright. For you see that Our Lord, who rightly and justly endowed me with such intelligence and memory that the one who thought he could have me for his own use has lost me—so God has chosen me to work in His own service, for no one but I can do it and no one knows things as I know them. And I must go to that land which they left to come look for me. I will do and say such things that more people will believe me than any man who has ever been on this earth except God. “And you will go away to bring to an end the work you have undertaken; you won’t come with me, but you'll go off by yourself and ask the way to a land called Northumberland. That land is full of great forests, and it is forbidding even to those who belong there, for there are places where no one has yet been. And you will live there. And Ill come to you and tell you the things you will need to make the book you have begun. You must work hard at it, for you will have great rewards from it: during your life you will have a full heart, and at the end, everlasting joy. And the story will forever be told and gladly heard for as long as the world lasts. “Do you know where this grace will come from? It will come from the grace that Our Lord accorded Joseph from the cross. And when you finish laboring for Joseph’s sake and all his descendants and kindred, and have done such good work that you deserve to be their companion, then I will show you where they are, and you will see the glorious vessel and the glorious services that Joseph performed for the body of Jesus Christ which was given to him. “And I want you to know, to make you more [28] certain, that God has given me such intelligence and such memory that I will make the whole kingdom where I am going, the worthy men and noble women, suffer grief along with the one who is to be of that kindred so beloved of God!2—Oh, God! I’ll have so much to do! But I truly want you to know that the great troubles will not come before the fourth king. That king because of whom my great troubles will come about will be named Arthur. “And so you will go to the place I have told you, and I'll come to you often and bring you the things I want you to put into your book. And you should know that your book will be much loved and greatly prized by many people. And when you finish it, you will bring it into the company of those good folk who have the glorious services I have told you about. There will be no noble man or worthy woman in the place where I am going some part of whose life I will 12The epithet is supplied from Micha’s text (23, 1. 39). 181 not have you write down.!3 You should also know that never have the lives of royal personages or the righteous been so gladly listened to as will be those of King Arthur and the people who in that time will live and rule. When you have finished everything and recounted their lives, then you will deserve the joy they have who are in the company of the holy vessel called the Grail. And your book that you have made will be called The Book of the Grail for as long as the world lasts. And people will hear it gladly.” Thus spoke Merlin to his master, and he showed him what he had to do. (He called him Master because he had been his mother’s teacher.) And when the good man heard him say those things, he was very glad and said, “If I can, I will do everything you order me to do.” This is how Merlin instructed Blaise. And he spoke to the messengers who had come for him, and said, “Come with me, for I want you to hear my mother’s and my leavetaking.” Then he took them to the place where his mother was, and he said to her, “Dear mother, I have been summoned from faraway, foreign lands, but I will go only by your leave. I must render to Jesus Christ the service for which He gave me the power, and I cannot accomplish this unless I go to the land where these men want to take me. Your master Blaise also has to leave, so you must let go of both of us.” And his mother said to him, “Dear son, I commend you to God, for I am not so clever that I would dare hold you back. But please, I would truly like Blaise to stay here.” But Merlin said that could not be. Thus did Merlin take leave of his mother, and he left with the messengers. Blaise went off another way, toward Northumberland, where Merlin had ordered him to go. Merlin rode with the messengers until they went through a town that had a market, and after they had left the town, they came upon a peasant who had bought a pair of stout shoes, and he carried with him the leather to mend his shoes with when he wore holes in them, for he meant to go on a pilgrimage. When Merlin drew close to the peasant, he began to laugh, and the men leading him asked him why he had laughed. And he said to them, “Because of the peasant you see here. Now ask him what he means to do with that leather he’s taking with him, and he will say that he will need to mend his shoes. Then follow him, for I tell you truthfully [29] that he will be dead before reaching home.” When they heard this, they took it for a great wonder, and they said, “We will try to see whether or not that is true.” So they went over to the peasant and asked him what he meant to do with that leather, and he said that he wanted to go on a pilgrimage and would need to mend his shoes when he wore holes in them. And when they heard him say just what Merlin had told them he would, they were greatly astounded and said, “This man looks hale and hardy. Two of us will follow him and the other two will take the straight road and wait for us where they'll spend the night, for it would be good to know all about the wonder the boy has told.” '3The final clause is supplied from Micha’s text (23, II. 5152). 182 And two of them followed the peasant and had not gone more than a league when they found the peasant dead right in their path, with his shoes in his arms. And when they saw this, they turned about and caught up with their companions and told them what they had seen. And when the others heard it, they said, “Our clerks behaved like complete fools when they ordered this clever little boy to be killed.” And the first ones said that they would rather suffer great harm to their persons than kill him, they said this among themselves in secret, for they did not think that Merlin would know it. When they came to where Merlin was, he thanked them for what they had said, and they. asked him, “What have we said that you should thank us for it?” He repeated what they had said word for word, and when they heard it they were astonished and said, “We can’t say or do anything that this boy doesn’t know about.” So they rode many days until they came to Vortigern’s kingdom. One day they happened to be going through a town, and people were taking a child to be buried. There were all about the body men and women wailing bitterly. And when Merlin saw the sorrow and the priests and clerks chanting and bearing the body to be buried, Merlin stopped at once and began to laugh. The men who were leading him asked him why he was laughing, and he said, “For a great wonder that I see.” And he told them, “Do you see that good man over there who is mourning so and that priest who is chanting?” And they said, “Yes, of course.” So Merlin said, “The priest ought to be doing the other man’s grieving. I want you to know that the child was his son, yet the man to whom he did not belong at all mourns so much for him. And the one whose son it is, is singing! That’s why this seems to me to be a great wonder.” And the messengers asked him, “How can we find this out?” And he answered them, “Go to the woman over there who is mourning so much and ask her why she is weeping. She will tell you, for her son who is dead. And you will answer her, ‘I know just as well as you that this is not your husband’s son, but the son of that priest who has chanted over him so much today. And the priest himself is aware of it, for he told you himself and reckoned the day when he was conceived.’” When the messengers had understood clearly what Merlin had said, two of them!4 approached the woman and said to her just what Merlin had told them.!5 And when she heard it, she was very much afraid and said to them, “My lords, by God’s mercy, I know that I can’t hide it from you, so I’ll admit the whole truth. It is just as you have said, but for God's sake, do not tell my husband, for he would kill n me. M4supplied from Micha (25, |. 29); Sommer’s text does not specify the number, which is necessary because not all four go to speak to the woman. supplied from Micha (25, 1. 30); Sommer’s text reads & (“him”) (29, 1. 39). The Story of Merlin And when they heard her, they came back to their companions and recounted [30] to them what the woman had told them. Then they said among the four of them that never in the world had there been such a good seer. So they rode until they were a day’s journey from where Vortigern was. Then the messengers asked Merlin to advise them what they could say to their lord, because they had not killed him as soon as they found him as he had ordered them to do. When Merlin heard them talk in that way, he knew that they wanted what was best for him, so he said to them, “You will do just as I advise you and you will never be blamed for it. Go to King Vortigern and tell him that you have found me, and tell him the truth about what you have heard me say. And tell him that I'll show him truly why his tower falls down and why it cannot stand—provided that he do to those who wanted to have me killed just what they wished done to me. And tell hirn that I will explain to him why they want to have me killed. And when you have said all this, do confidently what he orders you to do.” Then the messengers turned away from Merlin and went to the king. And when he saw them, he was very glad and asked them what they had done with his mission. And they answered, “The best we could.” Then they asked him to see them alone, and they told him everything just as it had happened, just how they found Merlin. “If he had wished, we would never have found him, and he comes to you very willingly.” And the king said to them, “What Merlin are you telling me about? Is he the boy who was born fatherless whose blood you were to have brought me?” One of them said, “He is the very Merlin we are telling you about. And you can be sure that he is the wisest and best seer who ever was in the world, but for God. Sir, he told us exactly how you made me swear and gave your orders, and he said outright that the clerks know nothing about why your tower keeps falling, but he will tell you why and show you, if you want, before your very eyes. And he told us other wonders, very great ones, and he has sent us to you to learn whether you will speak to him. If not, we’ll kill him right where he is, for two of our companions are with him guarding him.” And the king answered, “If you will pledge to me that he will show me why my tower keeps falling, then it is not my will to have him killed.” And they said, “We do indeed pledge this.” The king said, “Go fetch him, for I truly wish to speak to him” Then the messengers left, and the king himself rode after them. And when Merlin saw the two messengers, he said to them, “You have vouched for me with your lives.” “You have told the truth,” they said. “We would rather put ourselves in jeopardy than kill you, and we must do one or the other.” Merlin answered, “I will be your guaranty against this peril.” Then they rode until they met the king. And when Merlin saw him, he greeted him and said, “Vortigern, speak with me in private.” And he took him aside and called those who had brought him. And when they were together by themselves, The Story of Merlin Merlin said,!® “Sir, you had me sought out because of your tower that cannot stand, and you ordered me to be killed on the advice of your clerks, who said that the tower would hold up with my blood, but they lied. Yet if they had said that it would stand by my intelligence, they would have told the [31] truth. And if you promise me to do to them what they wanted you to do to me, then I will show you why the tower keeps falling down. And I will show you, if you are willing to do it, how it will stand up.” And Vortigern answered, “If you show me what you say, I will do with the clerks what you wish.” And Merlin said to him, “If one word of what I say is a lie, do not believe me ever again. Let’s go and call the clerks together, and you will hear that they themselves can’t explain.” So the king took Merlin to the place where the tower had been started and kept falling down. And the clerks were sent for and came before Merlin; and when they got there, he had one of the messengers who had brought him ask them, saying, “Sir clerks, what is the reason you say that the tower falls down?” And they answered, “We know nothing about its falling down, but we have told the king how it will stand.” The king said to them, “You have told me wonders. For you advised me to summon a fatherless man, but I don’t know how he will be found.” Merlin began to speak to the clerks and said to them,!” “Sirs, do not take the king for a fool. You had him seek the boy born fatherless not out of concern for him, but because you foresaw that by the boy born fatherless you would die. It was because you were afraid he would kill you that you made the king believe that he should have him killed and put his blood in the mortar in the tower’s foundation, and then the tower would hold up and never give way. So you brooded about how you could have the one killed by whom you would die, according to your forecasts.” And when they heard that the boy was telling this wonder, which they thought no one but they knew, they were terrified and knew that they would have to die. And Merlin said to the king, “From now on you can be sure that these clerks wanted to have me killed not for the sake of your tower, but because they had foreseen that they would die because of me. Please ask them if this was so, for they will never be so bold as to dare lie to you in front of me.” The king asked them whether he was telling the truth. “Sir,” they said, “may God save us from our sins as truly as he has spoken the truth. But we do not know by whom he knows these wonders. We ask you as our rightful overlord, please let us live so long that we may see whether he will tell the truth about the tower and whether it will stand because of him.” Then Merlin spoke and said to them, “You need not fear dying! until you have seen why the tower falls down.” 16Thus Micha (27, |. 4). Sommer’s text adds lor (30, 1. 39): “to them”, however, the remarks are addressed to the king alone. l7supplied from Micha (27, I. 29). Sommer’s text reads lors (“then”) for lor (“to them”) (31, 1. 14). 18supplied from Micha’s text (27, |. 52): Vos n’avez garde de monr. In substituting m for , Sommer’s text provides a meaning inappropriate for the passage (31,1. 31): Vous maues garde de monr (“You have kept me from dying”). 183 And they thanked him profusely. Then Merlin said to Vortigern, “Do you want to know why your tower will not stand and who knocks it down? If you will do what I tell you, I will show you plainly. Do you know what is beneath this tower? There is a great pool of water. And beneath that great pool there are two dragons that can’t see a thing.!9 One of them is red and the other white. They are under two great rocks. Each senses the other’s presence,”° and they are very big. And when they feel the water growing heavier above them and the work going on, they turn over, and the pool makes such a great uproar that whatever is built over it must fall down. So your tower falls because of the dragons. Take a look for yourself, and if you don’t find it just as I have said, then have me burned to death. And if you find it to be so, then let my guarantors”! be absolved and the clerks proved guilty since they know nothing about all this.” And Vortigern answered, “If what you tell me is true, I'll hold you to be the wisest man in the world.” [32] Then the king said to Merlin, “Now show me how I can have the earth taken away.” And Merlin told him, “With horses and carts and men with yokes to carry things a long way.” And the king ordered workmen to be put to the task and called together as many as were needed for the job. The people all around took this to be a great wonder and a great folly. And Merlin recommended that the clerks be well guarded. So the king had the work underway for a long time to take out all that dirt, and the people worked at it until they found the pool. And after they had found it, they uncovered it and sent word to the king that they had found it. And the king came there gladly to behold the wonder, and he took Merlin with him. And when they came there, they found the pool to be very large. The king called two of his advisers and said to them, “Very wise indeed is this man who knew that this pool was under the ground. And he also said that beneath this pool there are two very great rocks and beneath these two rocks are two dragons! From now on, anything he tells me to do I'll do.” Then he called Merlin and said to him, “You have spoken the truth about this thing, for the workmen have found the pool. But I do not yet know whether you told the truth about the two rocks and the two dragons.” And Merlin answered, “You can’t know it before you see it.” The king asked him, “How can we be rid of that water?” And Merlin said, “They will drain it away in good ditches.” Then ditches were ordered dug and the water drained away. And Merlin said to Vortigern, “Those dragons that are beneath the pool, as soon as they smell each other, they will fight until they kill each other. Send for all the 19That is, are asleep (as in Geoffrey of Monmouth)? 20Supplied from Micha (28, |. 7): sentent [sic] bien ii uns Vautre, where Sommer’s text reads sat (for sent? or for sait? ) (31, 1. 37). 21That is, the messengers who have staked their lives on Merlin’s truthfulness. 184 foremost men in the land to see the fight, for the battle between those two will have a very great meaning.” And Vortigern said that he would. Then he sent out through all his land for the great men, both clerics and laymen. And when they had gathered together, Vortigern recounted to them all the wonders that Merlin had told and how the two dragons were to fight. Then they said to one another, “That will be very good to see!” They asked the king if he had said which one would win, and the king answered, “Not yet.” Then the water was drained away, and they could see the two rocks that were at the bottom of the pool. And when Merlin saw them, he said, “Do you see these two great rocks?” And the king answered, “Yes.” “Sir,” he said, “beneath these two rocks are two dragons.” And the king asked, “How will the dragons be got out?” Merlin said to him, “Very easily, for the dragons will not move before they smell each other, and as soon as they smell each other, they will fight until one of them must die.” And the king said to him, “Merlin, will you tell me which one will be defeated?” Merlin answered, “In their fight and in their victory there is very great meaning. And what I can tell you I’ll tell you in private before three worthy men who are your close advisors.” Then Vortigern called three of the liegemen in his kingdom he most trusted, and he told them what Merlin had said to him. And they advised him to ask when they were alone which of the two dragons would be defeated: he should say it before he saw them and before the fight began. And he said to them, “You have spoken well and I agree. After the fight he could make people think whatever he wanted.” [33] Then he called Merlin and asked him which one of the two dragons would win. And Merlin asked him, “Those three22 liegemen of yours, are they in your confidence?” And Vortigern said to him, “Yes, more than anyone else I know of.” “Then can I indeed say in front of them what you ask me?” And the king said, “Yes, indeed.” And Merlin told them, “I want you to know that the white one will kill the red one. And be assured that he will have a great deal of trouble before he kills him. That he will kill him will have very great meaning for him who will know how to recognize it. But I will not tell you any more about it until after the fight.” Then the people were brought together, and they came to the two rocks; they broke them and dragged out the white dragon. And when they saw that it was so large and ugly and fearsome, they became frightened of it and drew back. Then they went to the other one and brought it out. And when the people saw this one they were more terrified than they had been before, for it was larger and 22Sommer’s text has ug. (33, 1. 2). The Story of Merlin uglier than the other one and even more fearsome. So it seemed to the king that this one would defeat the other. Merlin said to Vortigern, “Now my guarantors should be absolved.” And he said that they were indeed. Then they dragged one dragon near the other, and they smelled each other’s backsides. As soon as one smelled the other, they both turned about and grabbed each other with their teeth and feet. Never have you heard of two animals fighting so fiercely. They fought in this way all that day and all that night and the next day until midday. And all the people who were watching them truly believed that the red one would kill the white one. But in the end, fire and flames shot out of the white dragon through its nose and mouth, and he burned the red one up. And when the red one was dead, the white one withdrew, lay down, and lived no more than three days longer. And those who saw that said that no one had ever seen such a wonder. And Merlin said to Vortigern, “Now you can build your tower as high as you wish, and it will never be so high that it will fall down.” Then Vortigern ordered his workmen to go to work, and he built it as high and as strong as he could. And he asked Merlin many times to tell him the meaning of the two dragons and how it could be that the white one killed the red one, since the red one had had the better of the fight for such a long time. And Merlin answered, “These things are all signs of what is to come. If I told you what you ask me to, you would grow angry with me. But you will assure me that you will not harm me.” And Vortigern answered that he would give him all the assurance he could wish. And Merlin said to him, “Go now and send for your council, and have the clerks come before me who have left?3 this tower and who wanted to have me killed.” Vortigern did as Merlin advised. And when the council and the clerks had come, Merlin spoke to the clerks and said to them, “You are very foolish when you think you can work with the occult arts and not be so good or pure or noble as you ought. And because you are foolish and wicked, what you tried to find out eluded you; and because of the other art, the art of first principles, you did not see what you were asked about. You are not ones to see it. But you saw better that I had been born. And the one who showed me to you made it seem that you [34] were to die because of me—and he did it out of sorrow that he had lost me so that you would have me killed. But I have a Lord who will guard me against devils’ tricks, if it pleases Him. And I will show them to be liars, for I will do nothing whereby you might die, if you will swear to me what I order you to.” And when they heard that they could be reprieved from dying, they said, “We will do anything you ask us to do, for we see plainly that you are the wisest man in the world.” And Merlin said to them, “You will swear to me that you will never traffic in this art. And because you have already practiced it, I order you to confess it to a priest, for ?3Supplied from Micha’s text (29, 1. 74): sortirent. Sommer’s text introduces an irrelevant meaning by shifting a letter, sartirent (33, 1. 35): “cut, adjusted.” The Story of Merlin whoever repents of a sin and does not give it up is lost. So put your flesh into such subjection that your souls will not be damned. If you will promise me this, I will let you go.” _ And they thanked him many times over and swore to him that they would do as he ordered. This is how Merlin freed the clerks who had had him sought out. And all those who saw that he had proved himself so well were most thankful to him. And Vortigern came to him with his council and said to him, “You must tell me the meaning of the two dragons, for you have spoken the truth to me about all the other things, and I consider you the wisest man in the world. This is why I beg you to tell me the meaning of the two dragons.” And Merlin answered, “I will tell you. The red dragon stands for you, and the white one represents the sons of Constant.” And when Vortigern understood his meaning, he was ashamed. Merlin took note of this and said to him, “If you wish, I'll stop telling you this thing; please do not hold it against me.” And Vortigern answered, “There is no one here whom I do not trust, and I want you to tell me the meaning plainly, and spare me nothing that has to do with it.” And Merlin said, “I have told you truly that the red dragon means you, and I'll tell you why. You certainly know that Constant’s sons were left alone, after their father’s death; and you must admit that if you behaved as you ought, you should protect them and counsel them and defend them against all men on earth. And you also recognize that it is with their landholdings and their liegemen that you won the allegiance of the people of the kingdom. As soon as you saw that the people of the kingdom loved you, you withdrew from their doings because you understood that they would have troubled times. And when the people of the kingdom came to you to say that Maine should not be king and to ask you to take his place, you answered them like a weakling and said that you could not be king as long as Maine was alive. “So you hid behind your misleading words. And those to whom you spoke them understood that you truly wanted Maine dead, and so they killed him. After they had killed him, two more were left, but they fled the country because they were afraid of you, so you were made king and you still hold their birthright. “When those who had killed King Maine came before you, you had them killed to make it seem that you were sorry about his death; but this was not true sorrow, for you took the kingdom and you still hold on to it. And you have built your tower for your own protection and to safeguard yourself against your foes. But the tower cannot save you because you do not want to save yourself.” Vortigern clearly heard what Merlin told him, and he understood that he had spoken the whole truth. So he said to him, “I acknowledge that you are the wisest man in the world, [35] and I beseech you to counsel me as to what I can do in the face of these things and to tell me how I will dic” And Merlin answered, “If I were not telling you how you would die, I would not be telling you the meaning of the two dragons.” So he begged him to tell him without hiding anything. 185 And Merlin said to him, “I want you to know that the great red dragon stands for your wicked heart, and that its body was so huge means your great power. And the white dragon stands for the birthright of the youths who have fled because they fear your rule. That they fought for such a long time means that you have long held their kingdom. That you saw the white one bur the red one with fire coming out of its body means that the youths will burn you with their fire. And so I do not think that your tower or any other stronghold will keep you from dying.” When Vortigern heard him, he was terrified. He asked Merlin where the youths were. And Merlin said to him, “They are at sea, and they have gathered a great army to invade their kingdom and to bring you to justice. And they say in truth that you had their brother murdered. I will tell you that they will come ashore three months”! from now in the port of Winchester.” Greatly distraught was Vortigern when he heard this news and found out that those people were coming. So he asked Merlin if it could not be otherwise. And he answered, “No, it is not possible for you not to die from the fire of Constant’s children, just as you saw the white dragon burn the red one.” Thus Vortigern spoke to Merlin, who told him the meaning of the two dragons. On the day Merlin told him, he called together all his people to go against the youths who were at sea, and Vortigern led his men-at-arms to Winchester, where the youths were to land. And after they had all gathered, Merlin went off to Northumberland where Blaise was, and he told him that he had indeed done what he had been sent to do. And Blaise put everything into his book, which is how we still know it. 3. Uther Pendragon and the Round Table; the Perilous Seat.’ Here the story says that Merlin stayed for a long time with Blaise, until Constant’s sons sent for him. And Vortigern was at the port with a great host of men, and he waited for the day Merlin had told him about. And that very day the folk in Winchester saw on the sea the sails of the boats that Constant’s sons were leading. As soon as Vortigern saw them, he ordered his men to take their arms and defend his port. They came to the port to defend it, while Constant’s sons came there to go ashore. And when those who were on land saw the banners of King Constant, they were greatly amazed. And when the boat carrying Constant’s sons touched shore, the men on land asked them, “Whose boats are these?” Those on board answered, “They belong to Pendragon and his brother Uther, Constant’s two sons who are coming back to their land, which Vortigern, a false and unfaithful man, took from them a long time ago. He had their brother killed, and they have come to bring him to justice.” 24supplied from Micha (30, |. 66): d’ui en JIT, mots (“three months from today”); Sommer’s text has .7. iors (“three days”). 1Corresponds to Sommer, 35-58. 186 And when the men by the harbor heard [36] that it was the sons of Constant their rightful lord who were leading such a great host, they saw clearly that they had lost the contest and that if they fought them, great harm could come to them, and they told Vortigern so. And when he saw that most of his men were deserting him and that they were already going over to Pendragon’s and Uther’s side, he was afraid; and he told his men who would not desert him to fortify the tower, and they did. The boats came to port, and when they had touched shore, the horses came out, covered with armor, and all the men-at-arms as well; and when they had all left the boats, they went toward the castle. Some of the people, when they saw their rightful lords, came over to them and their menat-arms, and welcomed them as their lords.2 And those who stayed with Vortigern had fled into the castle and defended themselves, for the men outside were storming them. Thus the ones attacked and the others defended themselves, until Pendragon set fire to the castle on one of the great assaults, and as soon as the fire had overtaken them, a great part of the castle was burned up. And Vortigern was burned in that fire. This is how the boys came back to their land, and they let it be known throughout the kingdom that they had retumed. And when the people learned of the arrival of their lords, they were overjoyed and came to them and greeted them as their rightful lords. So the two brothers came back to what was theirs by birthright. Pendragon was made king, and he was a very good and faithful lord to the people. And the Saxons whom Vortigern had brought to the land held on to their castles, which were very strong,® and every day they waged war against Pendragon and the Christians, and they fought for so long that sometimes they lost and sometimes they won. At last Pendragon laid siege to the castle of Hengist,+ and he stayed there for most of the year. At last he took counsel, and on the council were many men, and they deliberated as to how they could take the castle. Five of them had been privy to the meeting where Merlin had explained to Vortigern the meaning of the dragons and had told him about the boys and his death. They called Pendragon and his brother Uther aside and told them the wonder that Merlin had recounted, and said that he was the best seer who ever was, and if he was willing, he would say plainly whether this castle would be taken. When Pendragon heard this, he asked where the good seer could be found. And one of them answered, “We don’t know where. But we do know very well that when someone talks about him, he knows it, and if he wanted to, he would surely come, for I know that he’s in this country.” “Then I will find him,” said Pendragon. ?In the text references to the overlords are in the singular. Later, before one of the brothers is named king, the text reverts to the plural. 3supplied from Micha (31, ll. 58-59). Sommer’s text refers imprecisely only to le chastel, car moult estoit fors (36, 1. 20): “the castle, for it was very strong.” See following note. 4Supplied from Micha (31, |. 62). Sommer’s text continues to refer without specifics to le chastel (36, 1. 23): “the castle.” The Story of Merlin Then he called for his messengers and sent them throughout the whole land to seek Merlin. And Merlin, who had known that the king was summoning him since he spoke to Blaise, went as quickly as he could to the town where the messengers were who had gone out looking for him. And he came like a woodsman into the town, with a great axe at his neck and stout shoes on his feet, dressed in a short tunic torn to shreds; his hair was standing out and his beard was quite long. He looked very much indeed like a wildman. He came so to the house where the messengers were eating, and when they saw him they stared at him in wonder. They said to one another, “This one looks like a very bad man.” And he went forward and said to them, “You are not doing your lord’s work very well. For he ordered you [37] to look for the seer named Merlin.” When they heard it, they said to one another, “What devil has told that to this peasant, and what business is it of his?” And he answered, “If it had been my job to look for him, I would have found him sooner than you have.” Then they stood all around him and asked if he knew who Merlin was and if he had ever seen him. And he answered, “I have seen him and I know where he lives. He is aware that you are looking for him, but you will not find him unless he is willing. And he ordered me to tell you that you are wasting your effort looking for him, and even if you did find him, he would not go with you. Say to the men who told your lord that he was in this country that they spoke the truth. And when you come to your lord, tell him that he will not take the castle that he is besieging until Hengist has died. “You should also know that it was only five men from the army who told your lord to send people to look for Merlin, but when you go back you will find only three of them. And tell your lord and these three that if they came to this land and looked for Merlin in these woods, they would find him. But if the king himself does not come, he will find no one to bring Merlin to him.” They understood very well what he had told them. Merlin turned about, and as he turned they lost him from sight. And they crossed themselves and said that they had spoken to a devil. “What shall we do about what he has told us?” They agreed among themselves that they would go back and tell this wonder to their lord and those who had sent them there. “Then we will find out whether those two have died, and we will tell the king what we have seen and heard.” So they rode back until, after many days, they came to the army where the king was. And when the king saw them he asked them, “Have you found the man you went to look for?” And they answered, “Sir, we will tell you something that has happened to us. Call for your council and those who told you about the seer.” And the king sent for them. When they had come, they drew aside to meet privately. The messengers told the wonder that had happened to them and all the things the peasant had told them, including the two men he said The Story of Merlin would be dead before they came back. And they asked about them and were told that they had indeed died. When the men who had told about Merlin heard this, they were very amazed at the loathsome man they spoke about, and they wondered who he could be. They did not know that Merlin could take on a likeness other than his own, yet it seemed to them that no one could say that but Merlin himself. So they said to the king, “We truly believe that it was Merlin himself who spoke to your messengers. No one else could have told about the two who have died, and no one but Merlin would have dared talk about Hengist’s death.” Then they asked the messengers in what town they had found that man, and they said that they had found him in Northumberland, “and he came to our lodging.” Then they said very plainly that it had been Merlin. “And he said,” the messengers went on, “that the king himself should come for him.” Then the king said that he would leave his brother Uther at the siege, and he would go off to Northumberland and take with him those who he thought knew Merlin. And he did as he said he would. And when they came to Northumberland, he asked news [38] of Merlin, but he found no one who could tell him anything. So he said that he would go look for him deep in the forest. And he rode through the forest looking for Merlin. One of the king’s men? happened to find a great herd of cattle and a very ugly, misshapen man who kept them. The one who found him asked him where he was from, and he said that he was from Northumberland and worked for a gentleman “who told me that the king would come looking for him in the woods today.” And the king’s man said to him, “It is true that the king is looking for him. Could you tell me about him?” He answered, “I would tell the king things I wouldn't say to you.” And he said to him, “Come along. I will take you where the king is.” The herdsman replied, “Then I'd be doing a bad job keeping my livestock! I have no need of him! But if he came to me, I would surely tell him where he’d find the man he’s looking for.” And he said, “T’ll bring him to you.” Then he left him and went looking for the king until he found him, and he told him what he had found. And the king said, “Take me to him now.” And he took the king to the place where he had found the peasant, and he was still there. And he said to the peasant, “Here is the king whom I bring to you. Tell him what you told me just now.” And he said, “I know for a fact that you are looking for Merlin, but you can’t find him until he himself wishes you to. But go off to one of your towns near here, and he will come to you as soon as he knows you are waiting for him.” 5The first part of the sentence is supplied from Micha (33, Il. 5-6, and his note). Sommer’s text (38, Il. 2-3), like that of most manuscripts, including Micha’s base, omits the reference to the other man and presents Pendragon as coming upon the hideous herdsman; this is illogical, as the man who finds the herdsman wants to take him back to the king and eventually brings the king to him. 187 Then the king said, “How will I know that you are telling me the truth?” And he answered, “If you don’t believe me, don’t do anything I tell you, for it is madness to believe bad advice. But you should know this much: I give you better advice than anyone else could.” And the king said, “Then I'll believe you.” So the king rode off to his town nearest the forest. After he had settled in there, it happened one day that a highborn man, well dressed and well shod, came to his lodging. And he said to those he found inside, “Take me before the king.” And they did. When he came before the king, he said to him, “Sir, Merlin sends me to you. And he declares that he was the herdsman who spoke to you in the woods, and the proof is that he told you he would come to you when it was his will. He told you the truth, but you still do not need him, and he has never wanted to see any great man unless that man had something for him to accomplish.” The king said, “Dear friend, I would very gladly see him now.” And he said to him, “Since you have said this, he sends you some very good news by me: Hengist is dead, and Uther your brother has killed him.” When the king heard this, he was greatly amazed, and he said, “Can what you tell me be true?” And he answered, “You are behaving like a fool if you do not believe it before you prove otherwise. Now send there to find out whether or not what I told you is true. And if it is true, believe it yet again.” And the king replied, “You speak well.” Then the king took two messengers and sent them on the two best horses he had, and he ordered them not to stop riding, on the way there or back, until they knew for certain whether Hengist was dead. And they left and went as fast as they could, and after they had ridden a day and a night, they met Uther’s messengers who were coming with the news of Hengist’s death. When the messengers met, they gave their messages, and they all went back to the king. The man who had brought Merlin’s message [39] to the king had left. And the king’s and Uther’s messengers all went before the king and told him in private how Uther had killed Hengist. When the king heard it, he ordered them, if they valued their lives at all, not to speak of this thing, and so it was. And the king was greatly astounded because Merlin had known about Hengist’s death. So the king began waiting for Merlin in his town to find out whether he would come, and he thought in his heart that if he did come, he would ask him how Hengist had been killed, for few people even knew about his death. Thus the king waited for Merlin; then one day the king happened to be leaving the church when a very handsome, well-dressed man came along who certainly looked like a gentleman. And he came straight before the king and said to him, “Sir, whom are you waiting for in this town?” And the king answered, “I was waiting for Merlin to come speak to me.” “Sir,” he said, “you are not so clever that you can recognize him when he is talking to you! Now, call those 188 you have brought who should know who Merlin is and ask them if I could ever be this Merlin.” And when the king heard him, he was amazed. He sent for the ones who ought to recognize Merlin and said to them, “My lords, we are waiting for Merlin, but there is no one here among us who, to my knowledge, knows what he looks like. If you know him, tell me.” “Sir,” they said, “it would be impossible for us not to recognize him, if we saw him.” And the gentleman who was with the king spoke and said, “My lords, how can people who don’t know themselves know another?” And they answered, “We do not see him here, and if we did, we would know him by his looks.” The gentleman said to them, “I’ll show him to you.” Then he called the king into a room all by themselves and said to him, “Sir, I want very much to be friends with you and your brother Uther. And you should know that I am that Merlin whom you have come looking for, but those who think they know me do not know anything about me. I will show you this soon. Go out there and bring me the ones who say they know me well. And as soon as they see me, they will tell you that you have found me and that if I had willed it so, they would never have found me.” When the king heard this he was very glad, and he said to him, “T’ll do whatever you want.” So he went out of the room as quickly as he could and brought those who he thought would recognize Merlin. And when they were there, Merlin took on the likeness in which they had seen him. As soon as they saw him, they said to the king, “Sir, it is indeed true that you have found Merlin.” When the king heard it, he smiled and said, “Be sure you know who he is.” They answered, “We know in truth that it is he.” And Merlin said, “Sir, they are telling the truth. Now tell me what you will.” The king said to him, “I would beseech you to be my faithful friend, if that can be, and to let me be your friend in return, for worthy men have often told me that you are very learned and wise.” And Merlin answered him, “Sir, you will never ask me for anything, advice or anything else, that I will not tell you if I know it.” The king said, “Would you please tell me whether I ever spoke to you after I came to this town [40] looking for you?” And he answered, “Sir, Iam the man whom you found keeping the livestock, and I am he who told you that Hengist was dead.” When the king and those who were with him heard this, they were astonished. And the king said to the others, “You knew Merlin badly when he came before us and we could not recognize him.” And they answered, “Sir, we never saw him do such things, but we believe that he can say and do what we other mortals could not.” Then the king said to Merlin, “How did you know about Hengist’s death?” “Sir, I knew when you came here that Hengist wanted to murder your brother, and I went to your brother and The Story of Merlin told him so, and he believed me, thanks be, and he was on the alert. I also told him about all Hengist’s strength and bravery and what could come from them. And Hengist stole into the midst of your army, in front of your brother’s pavilion, to kill him. Your brother could hardly believe all that I told him, but, thanks be, he did stand watch that night all alone without telling anyone, and he put on his armor without anyone knowing it. At last Hengist came carrying the knife to kill him with. When Hengist went into the tent, your brother began to stalk him; then, when he did not find him there, he went to the tent’s opening. There your brother fell upon him and fought with him. He had him quickly; he was wearing armor and Hengist was not, for he had come only to kill your brother and then to get back out as quickly as possible.” When the king heard this wonder, he asked him, “What shape did you take when you talked to my brother? For I am amazed that he believed you.” “Sir, I took the likeness of an old wretch, and I talked to him alone. I told him plainly that unless he was very much on his guard that night, he would have to die.” And the king asked him, “Did you tell him who you were?” He answered, “He does not yet know who spoke to him, and he will not know until you tell him yourself. And this is why I sent you word that you would not take the castle before Hengist died.” And the king said to him, “Dear friend, will you come away with me? For I have great need of your counsel and your help.” “The sooner I go, the sooner your barons will be upset about it. But if you can see what is worthwhile for you, and if you are wise, you will never, because of them, stop believing me © and it will be for your own good.” And the king said, “You have already done enough for me and told me enough, if what you have showed me is true—that is, that you have saved my brother’s life—so that I should never doubt your word.” Merlin said to him, “Sir, you will go ask your brother who told him what I have said to you, and if he cannot tell you, do not ever disbelieve me on any subject. What is more, I want you to know how to recognize me when I speak to your brother. I will have the character and likeness I had when I told him to beware of Hengist.” The king said to him, “Please let me know when you will speak to my brother.” And Merlin answered, “I will gladly tell you. But as you hold my love dear, be careful not to tell anyone else, for if I ever learned that you have betrayed me, I would never again have faith in you, and you would be hurt far worse than I.” “If I ever lie to you one time, never believe me again, and I will test you in [41] many ways’—this I tell you plainly.” SWord supplied from Micha (35, 1. 37). "The passage follows Micha (35, ll. 53-57). Sommer’s text attributes this clause to Merlin: Et merlins li dist ie vous assaierai (40, il. 41-43): “And Merlin said to him, ‘I’ll test you... .’” Accordingly, the rejoinder is attributed to the king: & li rois respont ore massaies en toutes les manieres que vous uoldres (41, Il. 1-2): “And the king answers, ‘Now test me in all the ways you wish.’” In Sommer’s text The Story of Merlin Merlin answered, “I am glad for you to test me in as many ways as you like. And I want you to know that I will speak to you and your brother on the eleventh day after you come to him.” Then Merlin took leave of King Pendragon and went off to Blaise, and he told him these things. And Blaise put them all in writing, and this is how we still know them. Pendragon rode until, after many days, he found his brother Uther. When each saw the other, they were overjoyed. And Pendragon took his brother to one side and told him about the death of Hengist just as Merlin had recounted it to him, and he asked him if it had been so. And Uther answered, “Sir, God help me, you have said something that I never thought anyone could know but God and an old man who told me in secret, and I did not think that any other man could know it. So I bid you, tell me who told you this, for Iam amazed that you could know it.” Pendragon said to him, “You can acknowledge fully that I truly know. But I beg you, tell me if you know who the old man is who saved you from death, for it seems to me that if it hadn’t been for him, Hengist would have killed you.” And Uther answered, “Sir, by the faith I owe you as my brother and my lord, I do not know who he was, but he seemed to me to be a very worthy and wise man. And because he seemed so, I believed him. He told me something that was not to be believed, for Hengist behaved foolishly when he tried to kill me in the midst of our army and in my own tent.” Pendragon asked him, “Would you ever know this man if you saw him again?” And he answered, “Yes, sir, I think so.” Pendragon said to him, “I assure you—and you can be certain of this—that he will speak to you eleven days from now. But for the love of me, do all you can to be with me all that day until the day is over, so that I can see all those who speak to you, that is, so I can see whether I can recognize him.” So the two brothers swore their oath one to the other. And Merlin, who knew all these things, brought this about so that they might be friends, and so that he might have their companionship. And he told Blaise how the two brothers had spoken about him and how the king wanted to test him. Blaise asked him, “What do you mean to do about this?” And Merlin said to him, “They are young and fickle, so I could hardly draw them into friendship with me® except by telling them at least a part of what they crave to know. And to give them joy and smiling faces, I know about a lady whom Uther loves. I'll go to him and bring on behalf of the lady a letter that you will write for me, so that he may believe me in what I tell him. We will talk about these things on the eleventh day, when they’ll see me and not know who I am. And when the following day comes, I will the last sentence in Merlin’s reply is correctly attributed to him. Later Merlin tells Blaise that the king wishes to test him (41, ll. 29—~ $0), contrary to what Sommer’s text affirms here. 8supplied from Micha: m’amor (“love for me”) (37, 1. 8), where Sommer’s text reads amor (“love, faith”) generally (41, 1. 32). 189 become their true friend, and they will be all the more grateful to me.” Merlin did as he said he would. And he came on the eleventh day to the city where the brothers were. He took on the likeness of one of the serving boys in the lady’s train, and so he came to the place where he found the two brothers. And he said to Uther, “Sir, my lady greets you and sends you this [42] letter.” And Uther, to whom the letter gave great joy, took it. He truly thought that the lady had sent it to him, so he had it read to him. The letter said that he should believe what the boy had to say. And Merlin told him what he knew he would be most glad to hear. And so, on that day until the evening, he was before the king, and Uther was overjoyed. And when evening drew near, the king was amazed at Merlin, who had promised him that he would come that day to speak with Uther. When evening had finally fallen, the two brothers talked together and said that Merlin had lied to them. But Merlin withdrew a little and took on the likeness in which he had spoken to Uther, and he came before Uther and his brother. And when the king saw him, he asked Uther whether he was the gentleman who had saved him from death, and Uther recognized him and showed him how glad he was to see him, and he spoke to him about many things. And he said, “Sir, you have saved me from death and from much else, but I am very astonished that you should say what I did after you had left me. And my brother told me that you would come today to speak to me. He asked me, if you spoke to me, to let him know. And I am amazed that my brother should have known what you told me.” Merlin answered, “He could not know it if someone hadn’t told him.” The king had gone out of the pavilion, and Merlin told Uther, “Now go look for your brother and bring him here, and ask him what he said in my presence.” And Uther went out of the tent and ordered those who were outside to take care that no one went in. As soon as he was outside, Merlin took on the likeness of the serving boy who had brought the letter. When they came back, they found the boy, and when they saw him they were greatly taken aback. Uther said to the king, “Sir, I see wonders, for just now I left the gentleman here I had told you about, and now I find here only this serving boy. Now, stay here and I'll ask my men-at-arms out there whether they saw the gentleman leave and the boy come in.” So Uther spoke to his men outside the pavilion. And the king began to laugh out loud. Uther asked those outside if they had seen anyone go in or out “after I went to fetch my brother.” And they said, “After you left, no one went in but the king and you.” Then Uther came back and said to the king, “Sir, I do not know what can have happened.” And then he asked the serving boy, “And you, when did you come in here?” He answered, “I was already here when you spoke to the gentleman.” And Uther raised his hand and crossed himself and said, “God help me, I am utterly bewitched; nothing like this has ever happened to anyone but me.” 190 The king took great delight in this, and he was sure in his heart that it was Merlin who had done these things. Then he said, “Dear brother, I wouldn’t have thought that you could lie!” He answered, “Sir, I am so amazed I don’t know what to say.” And the king asked him, “Who is this boy?” And Uther said, “This is the boy who brought me the letter today 9 right in your presence!” The king asked, “Did you recognize him?” And he said, “Yes, very well.” And the king said to him, “Does it seem to you that this could be the gentleman who told you to come fetch me?” He said, “Sir, this could not be he!” And the king said to him, “Well, let’s go along outside, and if he wants us to find him, we’ll soon find him.” Then they went outside and stayed there a little while. Then the king said to [43] a knight, “Go inside to see who is there.” And he went in and found the gentleman sitting on a bed; then he came back to the king and told him. When Uther heard it, he was struck with wonder, and he said, “Thank God! now I see what I did not believe anyone could know. Here is the very gentleman who warned me that Hengist would kill me!” When the king heard this, he was greatly delighted, and he welcomed the gentleman. Then he asked him, “Sir, do you want me to tell my brother who you are?” Merlin answered, “Yes, indeed.” Then the king, who knew much about the things Merlin did, said, “Dear brother, where is the serving boy who brought you the letter?” And Uther answered, “Sir, he was here just now. What do you want him for?” The king and Merlin began to laugh and to share delight in what was happening. Merlin took the king aside and told him what he had said to Uther about his sweetheart, and he told him to repeat it in front of him. Then the king, laughing all the while, called his brother and said to him, “Dear brother, you have lost the boy who brought you a letter from your sweetheart.” “And how do you know,” said Uther, “what letter he brought me and from whom?” And the king answered, “T’ll tell you if you want to hear what I know.” He replied, “I do,” for he thought that no one on earth would know it. And the king told him everything word for word that Merlin had said to him. When Uther heard it he was greatly amazed and said, “How could I believe that you knew so much about it unless the boy told your” And the king said to him, “In God’s name, this gentleman told me! And you can be sure that he was the serving boy who let you know that Hengist was about to kill you. This is Merlin, whom I went to look for in Northumberland, and this man has such power that he knows everything done and past, and of all the things that are to come he knows a great deal.” 9Sommer’s text has iui (42, 1. 38) for hui (“today”). The Story of Merlin And Uther answered, “Sir, if it is your pleasure, this man could be very useful to us.” Then both brothers begged him to stay with them for the love of God and because they would believe whatever he wanted them to. And Merlin answered, “You must both know that I know everything I want to know. And you, sir,” he said to the king, “are you still not sure whether or not what I have told you about the things you asked me is true?” And the king said, “I have never caught you in a lie.” “And you, Uther, did I not tell you the truth about Hengist and about your love for a lady?” Uther answered, “You have told me so much that I will never disbelieve you. And because I know you are so worthy and clever, I would like you always to be with my brother.” “I will very gladly stay,” he said. “But I want you to know, just the two of you, about my ways. I must, by the force of my nature, be away from people at times. But you can be sure that everywhere I am, I will be mindful of you more than anyone else and of what you do. And just as soon as I know that you are in any kind of trouble, I will come to help you and give you counsel. If you want to keep me as a friend, you must not be upset whenever I go away, and whenever I come, show everyone how glad you are to have me back, so that the worthy people who love you will love me all the more. The evildoers and those who hate you will hate me, but if you show me a cheerful face, they will not dare do otherwise. And you can be sure [44] that I will not change my shape for long except in private with you. I'll always come to your lodging in my right likeness, and those who have seen me before will run to tell you that I have come. As scon as you hear this, show how happy you are, and they will tell you what a good seer I am! In all trust, ask whatever your mind bids you ask, and I will counsel you in everything.” So Merlin stayed with Pendragon and his brother Uther, and he became fast friends with them. He asked their permission to take back!® the likeness in which the people knew him. And when he came before those who had seen him with Vortigern, they were very happy and ran to tell the king that Merlin had come. And when the king heard it, he went out to greet him, welcomed him joyfully, and took him to his lodging. As soon as he came inside, the king’s advisers took him aside and said to him, “Sir, there is Merlin, who we know for a fact is the best seer there is. Ask him to tell you how we will take this castle and how the war between you and the Saxons will end. You know that if he wants to, he will surely tell you.” And the king said that he would very gladly ask him. Then they let the matter drop because the king wanted to honor Merlin beforehand. When the third day came, the king’s council was gathered together, and the king said to Merlin, “Dear friend, I have heard it said that you are very wise and a very good seer, so I beg you, so that I may be!! always in your good graces, please tell me how I can take 10Verb supplied from Micha: revenir en (“to come back into”) (39, I. 68); Sommer’s text has revevir en (“to see again in”) (44,1. 8). Msommer’s text has sour estre for pour estre (“in order to be, that I may be”) (44, 1. 20). The Story of Merlin this castle and, as for the Saxons who have invaded my land, whether I can ever drive them out.” And Merlin answered, “Now you can test me to see how clever I am! I want you to know that ever since the Saxons lost Hengist, all they want is to give up your land and flee. Find this out for yourself tomorrow: you will send messengers to them seeking a truce, and you will call on them!? to leave you the land that belonged to your father; you will give them passage out, and you will give them boats in which they can leave.” The king answered, “You have spoken well, and I will do what you say.” Then the king sent them Ulfin, one of his counselors, and other knights with them. He entrusted his message to them, and they left for the castle. When those within the castle saw them, they came out to meet them and asked what they wanted. Ulfin said to them, “The king seeks a truce with you for three months.” “We will talk about it among ourselves,” said the Saxons. Then they drew to one side and took counsel together: “We are in a bad way because of Hengist’s death, and we don’t have the food to hold out here for as long as the king is giving us. But we’ll tell him that if he lifts the siege and leaves us the castle, we will hold it as a fief from him, and we will give him each year ten!> knights, ten maidens, ten falcons, a hundred greyhounds, a hundred warhorses, and a hundred palfreys.” They all agreed to everything. So they came back to the messengers and told them, and the messengers went back to the king and told him. And [45] the king asked Merlin what he would do about it. Merlin answered that the king should not become entangled in such a truce, for great harm would yet come to the country because of it, “but tell them straightway, without waiting any longer, that they must withdraw from the castle. And they will do it very willingly, for they have nothing to eat. And tell them that they will never come to terms with you if they do not come out, but you will hand boats over to them so that they can leave. And if they are not willing to do this, then every one of them you take prisoner will die a dreadful death. And I pledge my life that if you let them go with their lives, they will be overjoyed as never before, for they think they are doomed to die.” The king did just as Merlin had set it out. He sent his messengers to them in the morning to deliver his terms. And when the Saxons heard that they could leave safe and sound, they were happier than they had ever been since they had lost Hengist. So the Saxons withdrew from the castle. The king had them taken to the harbor, and he gave them boats. Thus King Pendragon sent them out of his land on Merlin’s advice. Merlin stayed on as head of the 12supplied from Micha’s text, which reads et lor faites querre que (“and you will entreat them to”) (40, |. 23-24); Sommer’s text has lors vous requerront (“then they will call on you”) (44, lL. 26). In the latter tradition, the text became garbled as, apparently, it was truncated. 13supplied from Micha (40, |. 42); Sommer’s text reads .ij. (44, 1. 38). 191 king’s council. He was there a long time, until one day he spoke to the king about a matter of great import. One of the king’s barons grew very troubled about Merlin, and he went to the king and said to him, “Sir, it is a wonder how you can trust this man so much, for all the wisdom in what he tells you and all the intelligence he has come from the devil. If you like, I will test him,!4 and you will see very clearly that he knows nothing on his own.” And the king said to him, “I advise you to leave this alone, for I would not like at all for him to get upset.” He said, “Sir, I would never touch him, nor would I ever say anything to him that could bother him.” And the king granted him what he asked. When he had the king’s leave, he was very happy. He was, in the eyes of the world, a very clever man, deceitful and full of wickedness, and a wealthy man, powerful and well born. One day he came to Merlin. He seemed to be delighted to see him and looked very cheerful. He called Merlin before the king for private counsel and took him aside with a gathering of only four men, and he said to the king, “Sir, here is one of the wisest men in the world and one of the most trustworthy, for I have heard that he told Vortigern about his death and said that he would die from your fire, and so he did. Sir, I therefore entreat you and all who are here, for God’s sake, since you see clearly that I am ill, please to ask him to tell me what my death will be, if he knows. I am sure that if he is willing, he will indeed tell me.” They all begged Merlin, and he answered them; and, speaking to the man who was testing him, for he knew well the jealousy and ill will he bore him, he said, “You have asked me to tell about your death, and I will tell you. You can know for a fact that on the day you die, you will fall from a horse and break your neck. This is how you will leave this life on that day.” And when he heard this, he said to the king, “Sir, you well know what this man has said, God keep me!” He then called the king aside and said to him, “Sir, now remember well what Merlin has told me, and I'll test him in yet another way.” And he went off to his own lands, dressed himself in different clothing as fast as he could, came back to the town where the king was, and made out to be ill. He secretly sent word to the king to come see him and bring Merlin with him in such a way that he would know [46] nothing. And the king said that he would go very gladly and that Merlin would not find out anything from him. Then the king came to Merlin and said to him, “Let us go, just the two of us, to see a sick man in the town, and we will take along with us whomever you will.” And Merlin answered, “My lord, a king must not go anywhere alone or so privately that he does not have twenty men with him.” Then the king called those whom he wanted, and he went to see the sick man. And when they came there, he had got his wife ready to fall at the king’s feet, and she did so. And she said to him, “Sir, for God’s sake, have your seer Msupplied from Micha (41, 1. 7). Sommer’s text has iel laisseroie (“I would let him”) (45, 1. 19) for iel assaterote or essaierote (“I would test”). 192 say about my husband here, whom I care for in his sickness, whether he will some day get well.” And the king had a very pitiful look on his face, and he looked at Merlin and said to him, “Could you know anything about what this woman asks concerning her husband’s death and whether or not he will get well?” And Merlin said, “I truly want you to know that the sick man lying here cannot die in this bed from this illness.” And the sick man tried hard, so it seemed, to speak and said, “Sir, for God's sake, what will be my death when I leave this bed?” “The day when you die,” said Merlin, “you will be found hanging, and you will be hanging in the place where you die.” Then Merlin turned about and made a look as though he were upset, and so he left the king in the house. He did this because he wanted those inside to speak to the king. When Merlin had gone, the baron said to the king, “Sir, if you know anything, you must know that he is mad, and there is nothing in what he has told me, for he has set out for me two kinds of death that cannot go together. I'll test him yet a third time before you. I'll go off tomorrow to an abbey, and I'll play the sick man. I'll send the abbot to find you, and he'll tell you that I am one of his monks, I am in a dreadful state, and he is very much afraid that I will die. He will beseech you, for the sake of God and for your own good, to come there with your seer,!> and I swear to you that I will test him harder than today.” And the king promised that he would go there and bring Merlin with him. So the king left that man and went off with Merlin. And the baron went straight to the abbey and did everything he had told the king he would do. He sent the abbot for the king, and the king went there and took Merlin. Before the king had heard Mass,!© the abbot came to him with a good twenty-five monks and entreated the king to come see one of his brother monks who was very ill and to bring his seer so that they might know if the efforts they were devoting to him would be worthwhile. The king asked Merlin if he would go with him, and he said that he would gladly do so, but he first wanted to talk to Uther his brother in his presence. . And Merlin called both of them privately to an altar, and he said to them, “The better I know you, the madder I think you are. Do you believe that I do not know how this madman who is testing me will die? Yes, I truly do know. 15The last phrase is elaborated on the basis of Micha’s text (42, 1. 11): que vos i amenez vostre devin (“that you bring your seer there”); the clause in Sommer’s text is truncated (46, |. 25): que vous t soies (“that you be there”). 16Other manuscripts, as in Micha’s text (42, Il. 17-20), add that they rode to the abbey, arriving there early in the morning before Mass was sung; after the king had heard Mass, the abbot came, etc. Apparently, a rewriter in the tradition of Sommer’s manuscripts (assuming that his text does not reflect the original) responded to a certain logic in the context developing from the fact that in the original plan, which the text says was followed, the abbot was to tell the king about the ill monk from the very beginning; moreover, subsequent details might seem redundant if the king were already at the abbey so close to the presumably dying man. In this light, the details constitute a kind of amplified repetition of the previous summary statements. The Story of Merlin And I will tell him today another death than the other two he has asked me for twice.” The king answered, “Can it be true that a man can die as you have said?” “If he does not die that way,” said Merlin, “then never believe me in anything I say to you. I truly know what his death will be and yours, too. When you have seen his death, you will ask me about your own. And I say to Uther right now that I will see him king [47] before I am separated from his company.” Then they went to the sick man, and the abbot said to the king, “Sir, for God's sake, have your seer tell me whether this worthy man can get well.” And Merlin looked as if he were upset and said, “He certainly can get up, for he isn’t sick at all. He is testing me for nothing, for he will indeed have to die in both the ways I have told him, and I will tell him the third way even stranger than the other two. He should know for a fact that on the day he dies, he will break his neck, hang, and drown.!7 Whoever is alive then will see his death and will see these things happen, and you can surely test me to see whether I arn telling the truth! He can stop pretending from now on, for I know all his ill will, and I know what his foolish heart thinks.” The baron got up and said, standing, “Sir, now you can plainly recognize his madness, for he does not know what he’s saying. How can he possibly say that on the day I die I will break my neck and I will drown and I will hang, and that all that will happen on the day I die? I know very well that this could not happen to me or anyone else. Now look at how wise you are to believe such a man, to make him lord over you and head of your council!” And the king answered, “I will never forsake him for this and certainly not before I know how you have died.” Then the baron grew angry when he heard that the king would not oust him from the council until after his death. This is how things stayed for a while, and everyone in the land learned what Merlin had said about this man’s death, and they were all eager to know how Merlin could be telling the truth about it. One day a long time afterward, the man who was to die as Merlin had foretold was riding with a great crowd of people, and he came to a stream. Over the stream was a wooden bridge, and his palfrey stumbled on the bridge and fell to its knees. The baron who had been on the horse was thrown forward and fell on his neck and broke it, and his body twisted and fell into the water in such a way that it was caught by his mantle on one of the old uprights that had been on the bridge: his backside was up in the air, and he kept hanging with his head and shoulders in the water. He had three gentlemen with him who saw that he had fallen in this way, and the cry rose up so that all the people heard it!8 and came as fast as they could across the bridge or by boat in the water. When they had all come there, the The order of the last two is supplied from Micha (43, Il. 47— 48); they are reversed in Sommer’s text (47, !. 7). 18supplied from Micha, 43, n. 14 (omitted in Micha’s text), Sommer’s text, along with other manuscripts, reads le uirent (47, |. 30): “saw it.” The Story of Merlin three gentlemen said to those who pulled him from the water, “Look carefully to see if his neck is broken.” They looked and said, “It is broken beyond any doubt.” And when they all heard it, they were amazed, and they said, “Merlin indeed spoke the truth when he said that this man would break his neck, hang, and drown. Anyone who does not believe Merlin in everything he says is mad, for it seems to us that all his words are true.” Then they did with his body what was fitting. And Merlin, who knew all these things, went straight to Uther, whom he greatly loved, and told him about that man’s death, just the way he had died. He asked him to tell the king, and he did. When the king heard it, he was quite amazed and said to him, “Who told you this?” And he said, “Merlin.” The king told him to ask him when!? this had happened. And when Uther came to Merlin, he asked him when it had happened, and he said, “It happened yesterday. And [48] those who will tell the king about it will come six days from now. I am going away, for I do not want to be here when they come. They would make? many speeches to me and ask me things I would not want to answer. From now on, I will not speak within the hearing of the people except so obscurely that they will not understand what I have said before they see it happen.” This is what Merlin said to Uther, and Uther came straight to the king and told him. The king believed that Merlin was upset, and he was very sorry about it, and he said, “Where has he gone?” And Uther said, “IT don’t know. But he said that he did not want to be here when the news came.” So the king was left alone. And Merlin went off to Northumberland, to Blaise, to tell all these things to provide material for making his book. And the king waited until the sixth day, when those bringing the news about the baron came. And when they were there, they told the king the wonder they had seen happen to that man. Then the king and all those who had heard Merlin’s words said that there had never lived such a wise man as he. Then they said that they would write down everything they ever heard him say would come about. This is how they all ordained it, and thus was begun The Story of the Prophecies of Merlin from what he said about the kings?! of England and all the other things he spoke about afterwards. This is why that book does not say who Merlin is or who he was,2? for they put?* down in writing only the things he said to them. And this is how the king was for a long time. In that time Merlin was like a lord over Pendragon and his brother Uther. And when Merlin found out that they 19S upplied from Micha (43, |. 31). Sommer’s text reads comment (“how”) (47, 1. 41). 20supplied from Micha (43, Il. 35-36): me metroient (“would put”). Sommer’s text has me croient (“believe me”) (48, I. 2). 2l Supplied from Micha (44, l. 12); Sommer’s text reads del rot in the singular (48, |. 16). 22The reference to Merlin as a character is supplied from Micha (44, I]. 14). 23supplied from Micha (44, |. 15). Sommer’s text has the verb in the conditional (48, 1. 17). 13 had said they would write down his every utterance, he told Blaise. And Blaise asked him if they would make another book like the one he was to make. And Merlin answered, “No. They will write down only what they can come to know after it has happened.” Merlin came back to the court. And when he was there, he told them the news as though they knew nothing about it. And then Merlin began to speak those murky words from which was made The Book of Prophecies, the ones that cannot be understood until after they have come about. And after that, Merlin came to Pendragon and Uther, and he told them with great feeling that he loved them very much and wanted what was good for them and for their honor. And when they heard it, they were awestruck, and they told him to tell them in trust as much as he was willing to say and to hide nothing from them that had to do with them. And Merlin said, “I will never hide from you anything that I am bound to tell you. And I'll tell you a great wonder. Do you recall the Saxons whom you threw out of the land after Hengist’s death?” And they answered that they did indeed. And he said that the ones who left were telling in Saxony the news of Hengist’s death. He was of very noble stock, and his kinsmen were saying that they would never find happiness until they avenged Hengist’s death. And they thought they could overpower this land and the whole country. When the brothers heard this, they were astonished. They asked, “Have they then such a great army that they can bear up against ours?” And he answered, “For every man you have ready to fight they will have two. And if you do not act cleverly, they will destroy you and win your kingdom from you.” And they said, “We will do everything you tell us to do, and with your help we'll never fail to do anything you order.” And he [49] said to them, “You must know that the enemy horde will come against you on the eleventh day of June. No one in your kingdom will know about it unless you send them word, and I forbid either of you two to utter a word about it. But do as I tell you. Send for all your liegemen and all your knights, rich and poor, and show them the best time you can, for it is a wise thing to be mindful of a man’s well-being, so keep them nearby you. Then call them all together and bid them do their utmost to be with you the last week of June at the gates of Salisbury. And there gather all your forces on the riverbank so that you can defend yourselves.” “What?” said the king. “Shall we then let them come ashore?” And Merlin said, “Yes, take my word for it. And you will let them get a long way in from the water, and they will not yet know that you have gathered your forces. After they have gone in quite a way, you will send some of your men to their boats to make it seem that you want to stop them from getting back. When they see that, they will be disheartened. Then one of you two must go there with your army, and you will move so near them that you will force them to camp 194 away from the water.*4 When they have set up their encampment, they will suffer from a lack of water, and the boldest among them will be distraught. You will hold them there two days, then on the third you will fight them. And if you do just this, then I tell you truly that the people of your kingdom will have the victory.” Then the two brothers said to him, “For God’s sake, Merlin, please tell us if we will die in that battle.” And Merlin answered, “Everything that has a beginning must come to an end, and no one may run away from death, but all accept it as they have to. All people alive must learn that they will die, and you two surely know that you will die and that no amount of wealth can save you.” And Pendragon said to him, “You told me one time that you knew about my death just as you knew that of the man who was testing you. As for his, I was sure that you were telling the truth about it. This is why I beseech you, please tell me about my death.” And Merlin answered, “I want both of you to have the very most holy things and the most powerful relics you own brought out, and I want both of you to swear by the saints that you will do everything I tell you for your welfare and for your honor. And when you have done this, I can tell you in greater trust the things I know that you will need to know.” And they did everything that Merlin set out. And when they had sworn their oath, they said to him, “Merlin, we have done what you ordered. Now please tell us why you made us do it.” And Merlin answered the king: “You asked me about your own death and what will come of this battle. I’ll tell you enough aboutit so that you won’t need to ask any more. “Do you two know what you have sworn? I'll tell you: you have sworn that in this battle you will be worthy men and faithful to yourselves and to God, and you may be sure that no man can be upright and faithful to himself if he is not so first to God. I will show you how to be faithful and worthy men. Confess to a priest; you must do so now more readily than at any other time, because you know that you have to go into battle against your foes. If you are as I have told you to be, they will be beaten, for they do not believe in the Trinity or in the trials that Jesus Christ suffered on earth, and you will be defending your birthright, which is yours by law and by religion. All who [50] die so upholding their rights will be reconciled to the law of Jesus Christ by the authority of Holy Church, and they need hardly fear death. I want you both to know that since holy Christianity was brought to this island there has never been, nor will there be again in our time, such a great battle as this one. “Each of you has sworn that he will work for the other’s welfare and honor. I want you to know something that I will tell you openly:*° one of you two must leave this world. And the one who will come back alive will make, on the spot where the battle will take place, the handsomest and richest 24Supplied from Micha (44, Il. 76-77), where the location of the Saxon encampment at a distance from a water source is stated more clearly—ou plain sanz niviere (“in the plain without a stream”)—than in Sommer’s text (49, 1. 15): ensus de la rive (“above,” even “adjoining the bank”). 25Thus Micha (45, 1. 28), whereas in Sommer’s text (50, |. 6) the verb is negated. The Story of Merlin burial ground he can with my help, and I swear to you to work so hard that what I build there will be seen as long as Christendom lasts. “I have told you that one of you must die. Now strive to be worthy men who can in heart and in body carry through with what I have said. May each of you be clothed in greatest honor when he goes before his Lord. One of you two will come back. I will not tell you which one will die, because I want both of you to be strong-hearted and upstanding, as you both need to be. Now both of you, remember to show a happy, cheerful face, and treat each other in good faith for the love of Jesus Christ.” This is how Merlin ended his speech. They understood thoroughly what he told them and what in good faith he advised them to do, and they did so with resolve. They called for their liegemen and their barons in every land. When they had come together, Uther and Pendragon gave them of their great wealth, and they gladdened the barons’ hearts. And they entreated each one to bid*® those under him to take arms and horses and to send word throughout the land that the last week of June all should gather at the head of Salisbury Plain on the banks of the Thames in order to defend the kingdom. All who heard the news said they would be there most willingly. Time went by and the day of the summons came. The two brothers had personally taken care to do everything that Merlin told them. And so they came to hold their Whitsuntide court on the riverside, and the whole people gathered there. Much wealth was given out there, and there were many cheerful faces. And they waited there until they heard that the boats had landed. When Uther found out that they had landed right on the eleventh day of June, he knew for a fact that Merlin had told him the truth. So he sent word to his bishops and to other leaders of Holy Church that every man in the host was to confess and that each was to forgive the other his anger and ill will; and if there was a piece of chattel over which any were in disagreement, it would be given back to the rightful owner. The orders were given throughout the army. And the Saxons had left their boats and gone ashore, and they camped for a week. The next day they rode out. King Pendragon knew very well what they were about. He had his spies in their army and knew that they would ride out, so he went to Merlin and told him, and he said it was true. He then asked him what he had in mind for him to do. And Merlin answered, “You will send your brother to them tomorrow with a great many men-at-arms. And when he sees that they have got far away from the river and the sea, and have come to the middle of the plain, then he must keep his troops so near them that he forces them to halt and make camp. And when [51] the Saxons have encamped, then your brother and his men should draw back. Next morning, when they want to go on, he should hem them in so tightly that they cannot ride forth. Then there will be none among them so bold that he wouldn’t wish to be back where he came from. Your brother should 26The subordinate que il comendassent (“that they bid”) is lacking in Sommer’s text (50, 1. 21) and is supplied from Micha (45,1. 50). The Story of Merlin keep them there for two days. And on the third day, with your own army, as soon as it is daylight, you will see a red dragon moving in the air, and it will run from the sky to the earth. When you see the embodiment of your own name, you can safely begin to fight, for the victory will belong to your men.” At that meeting there were only Pendragon and Uther, and when they heard it they were struck with wonder, and they were very glad. Then Merlin said, “I will go away now. Trust what I have told you, and be worthy men and good knights.” So they went their ways. Uther got his equipment and his men-at-arms ready to march between the river and the Saxon army. Merlin took Uther aside and told him, “Strive to prove your worth, for you need not fear death in this battle.” When Uther heard this, his heart was filled with gladness. Merlin went away to Northumberland, to Blaise, to work this story out and make it just right. And the two brothers did just as Merlin had set it out. Uther came between the boats and the Saxon army and drove them into the plain far from the water. And he and his men ran against them so forcefully that they made them pitch camp, like it or not, right in the middle of the plain far from any water. Uther held them there for two days, and they could not ride out. And on the third day King Pendragon came with his army. When they saw those in the encampment lined up in battalions to fight Uther, the king ordered his battalions to form. This was done quickly, for each man knew beside whom he was to fight, and Pendragon’s army drew near to the encampment. When the Saxons saw both armies, they were stricken with fear, for they saw plainly that they could not get back to their boats without a fight. Then the wondrous thing appeared up in the sky—a red dragon that breathed fire and smoke from its nose and mouth, so it seemed to those in the army. The Saxons were disheartened and overcome with dread. Pendragon and Uther said to their men, “Let us attack them!” (And they did so, because the Saxons were utterly undone.) “For we have seen all the signs Merlin told us about.” Then Pendragon’s men2’ ran against them as fast as their horses could go. And when Uther saw that his brother’s men had engaged in battle, he fell upon the Saxons with his men. Thus began the Battle of Salisbury. I cannot tell you everything, who fought well there and who poorly, but I can tell you this much: King Pendragon was killed there and many other barons. And the story says that Uther won the battle and that many of his liegemen rich and poor died there. But of the Saxons who were there, we find none that got out alive; they died right there or were drowned at sea. Thus ended the Battle of Salisbury. After Pendragon died, Uther was left lord of the kingdom. He had all the bodies of the Christians brought together on one plot of ground, and there all the men took their friends’ bodies and laid them near the others by 27Thus Micha (46, Il. 58-60); Sommer’s text does not specify whose men attack first (51, Il. 30-31). 195 troops. Uther had his brother’s body taken there along with the others. And he had written on his headstone who each one was. [52] Uther had his brother buried higher up than all the others, but he said that he would not have his name written above him, for anyone would be mad to see his grave and not recognize that it belonged to the lord of all the others who lay there. And when he had done this, he went to London and called together®® all his chief vassals and all the prelates of Holy Church who were under him, and he had himself crowned and anointed king; and he wore the crown and ruled as king after his brother. And after he had been anointed and given the crown, Merlin came to him two weeks later. And the king was very glad to see him. And Merlin said to him, “I want you to tell your people about the signs I told you would come to this land and the pledge you and your brother made to me and the oath that each of you swore to the other.” So Uther told his people everything, how the brothers had tried to do everything Merlin had told them about, except the dragon, which he knew no more about than any of the others. Then Merlin explained the meaning of the dragon and said that the dragon had come to signal the death of Pendragon and Uther’s survival, and he told what ill fortune had befallen the king because of his brother’s death and the meaning ascribed to the battle. And because of the dragon’s wondrous appearance, the new king bore for evermore the name Uther Pendragon, and thereafter that was the name he wanted all to call him. And thus everyone knew that the things Merlin had shown the two brothers how to do, and the things he counseled them to do, were good. So Merlin stayed for a long time: he was King Uther Pendragon’s chief adviser, and the king confided in him. At last, a long time later, Merlin called Uther Pendragon and said to him, “Why don’t you do more for your brother Pendragon, who lies on the Plain of Salisbury?” And he answered, “What do you want me to do with him? I will do whatever you advise me to do.” And Merlin said, “You swore to do as I wish, and I promise you that we will build something that will be seen as long as this world lasts. Do as you have promised, and I will keep my word.” And Uther Pendragon answered, “Tell me what I can do and I will very gladly do it.” And he said to him, “Now learn how to do something that no one has ever known before, and it will be spoken of ever hereafter.” Uther Pendragon answered, “I will do so very gladly.” “Now send someone for great stones that are in Ireland, and send along two boats in which to bring them, and they will not be able to bring so many back that I cannot set them all up. And I will go to show them which ones I want so they can bring them back.” And the king said that he would very gladly send them there, and he sent a great many boats. And when they got there, Merlin showed them some great stones, long and *8The verb, supplied from Micha (46, I. 84), lacks in Sommer’s text (52, I. 4). 196 wide. And he said to them, “Here are the stones we came to find.” When they saw them, they thought it was all madness, and said that all together they could hardly turn one of them over, “and we will never put such stones on our boats at sea.” And Merlin said, “If you don’t wish to do this, then you have come for nothing.” They turned about and went back to the king and told him the wonder Merlin had ordered them to perform, which they knew no man on earth could do. And the king said to them, “Now wait until he comes.” [53] When Merlin came, the king told him the story his men had brought back to him. And Merlin answered, “Since they have all let me down, I will do what I have promised all by myself.” Then by the power of magic he had the stones brought from Ireland which are still in the burial ground at Salisbury.2? And when they had come, the king went to see them and took many of his people to see the wonder of the stones. When they saw them, they said that all of them together could not move one of them, and they wondered at how he got them there, for no one had seen it or heard about it. And Merlin said that someone should set them upright, for they would be more beautiful standing straight up than lying down. And the king answered that no man could do that but God, “unless you did it.” And Merlin said to him, “Now you go away and I will set them up, and I will have fulfilled my pledge to Pendragon; otherwise, I would have begun something for his sake that can never be brought to an end.” So Merlin stood the stones up. They are still in the burial ground at Salisbury and will be there as long as the world lasts. And so this work was over, and Merlin came back to King Uther Pendragon; he served him a great deal and loved him. A long time had gone by since he had come to understand in whom he had put his love, and he knew that he would believe him in everything he said. One day it happened that Merlin came to the king and said to him privately, “I must talk to you about the highest secrets I know. For I see that all this land is yours; you are firmly in command of it as lord, and no one could rule it better. It is because I love you that I want to tell you something. Don’t you remember that Hengist would have killed you if it hadn’t been for me? Thus it seems to me that you ought well to believe me and love me.” Uther Pendragon answered, “There is nothing that you would say that I would not believe and do all in my power to bring about.” “Sir, if you do this, it will all be for your own good, for I will teach you something that will hardly distress you, and you could never do anything whereby you might so easily have the love of God.” And the king answered, “As surely as you say it, if it can be done by any man, I will do it.” Then Merlin said, “What I will tell you will be a very strange thing to you, and I bid you, keep it hidden and do 2°The reference, clearly, is to Stonehenge. The Story of Merlin not say it to your courtiers or your knights, for I mean for all the worth and honor and thanks to be yours.” And the king said that he would never talk about it except through him alone. He then said to the king, “Sir, you must take it as truth that I know everything that is past, gone by, and spoken, and I want you to know that this skill came to me from a devil. Sir, Our Lord, who is powerful over all things, has given me the intelligence and the knowledge to recognize and to know things that are to come. And thanks to that sovereign power, the devils lost me, for I will never, God willing, be subject to their will. Sir, now do you know where my power to do the things I do comes from? “T will tell you what I know Our Lord wants you to do. And when you know it, be sure to honor Him according to His will. Sir, you must believe that Our Lord came to earth to save the world and that He sat down at the Last Supper and said to His disciples, ‘There is one of you who will betray me.’ Sir, everything was true just as He said, and the one who did Him wrong left His fellowship, just as He said he would. “Sir, after this it happened that Our Lord [54] suffered death for our sake. And a knight®° asked to take Him down from the cross, and He was given to him in place of his wages. Sir, this hired soldier loved Our Lord very much, for he wanted Him and agreed to have Him given to him. Sir, His disciples bore many hardships and many fearsome things afterwards. And it happened a long time after Our Lord was raised from the dead that the knight was in a wilderness along with some of his kin and a great many others who had gone along after him. Sir, a very great famine overcame them, and they complained to the knight, who was their leader. And he prayed to Our Lord to give them a sign telling them why He wanted them to suffer this trial. “Our Lord ordered him to make a table in the name of the table that was at the Last Supper and to put a cup he had on that table?! after he had covered it with a white cloth, and he was to cover the vessel fully as well. Sir, Jesus Christ gave that cup to him, and with this cup He divided the fellowship of the good from the wicked. And, sir, anyone who could sit at that table could fulfill his heart’s desires in every way. “Sir, at that table there was always an empty seat that stood for the place where Judas sat at the Last Supper when he understood what Our Lord was saying on his account and he left the fellowship of Jesus Christ. And his seat was left empty until Our Lord put another man there to take his place to bring the count to twelve. And the empty seat at the new table stands for that place. Thus these two tables are very much alike, and Our Lord perfects men’s hearts at the second table. And they call the cup, from which they have that grace, the Grail. 30That is, Joseph of Arimathea. 3!The text beginning “in the name .. .” supplied from Micha (48, ll. 57-58), a scribe in the source of Sommer’s text (54, 1. 10) having telescoped it (see Micha 184, n. to Il. 57-58). The Story of Merlin “If you will believe me, you will set up the third table** in the name of the Trinity, and by these three tables will the Trinity be signified in its three Persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. I promise you that if you do this, great good will come to you from it and great honor to your soul and your body, and in your time will happen things that will utterly amaze you. If you will do this, I will help you, and I promise you that if you do, it will be one of the most talked about things ever. For Our Lord has indeed granted grace to those who will know how to speak well of it. And I tell you also that this cup and the people who keep it have drawn westward, by the will of Jesus Christ, to these parts. And even those who do not know where the cup is have come here, and Our Lord, who brings good things to pass, led them. If you believe me, you will do what I advise you to do about these things. If you do this, and if you will believe me, you will be very glad indeed.” Thus spoke Merlin to Uther Pendragon, and the king was very glad about it. And he answered, “I do not want Our Lord to lose, because of me, any part of the thing that must be done according to His will. Indeed, I want you to know that I love Him. I put it all onto you, and I will do anything you order me to do, if I can.” So King Uther Pendragon put the whole burden onto Merlin, who was very glad to bear it. And Merlin said, “Sir, now look to the place where you would like most to do what you must.” And the king answered, “I want it to be done where you would most like it done, where you know it can best be done according to the will of Jesus Christ.” Merlin replied, “We will do it at Carduel in Wales, so have your people gather there to meet you on Whitsunday, and you will be ready to give out great gifts and to be of good cheer. And I will go before you and have the table built, and you will give me silver and [55] men who will do what I order them to do. And when you get there and your people are gathered, I will pick out the ones who are to stay there.” As Merlin set it out the king ordered it done, and he sent word throughout his kingdom that he would hold his court at Whitsuntide at Carduel in Wales, and all knights and all ladies were to be there to meet him. This is what the king made known everywhere. Merlin went off and had the table built and everything done there that needed to be done. And so it was until the week before Whitsunday, when the king came to Carduel. And when he had got there, he asked Merlin how he had fared, and he answered, “Very well.” So the people gathered that Whitsuntide at Carduel, a great many knights and ladies and other folk. Then the king said to Merlin, “Which ones will you choose to have sit at that table?” And he said, “Tomorrow you will see happen what you never thought you would see. For I will seat there the worthiest men in your kingdom, and never, once they have sat there, will they want to leave this place to go back to their lands and domains. Then you will see for yourself who the worthiest are.” 321 is not explicit until much later that the third table is the Round Table. 197 And the king answered, “That I will very gladly do.” And the next day Merlin did just as he had said. It was Whitsunday, and Merlin chose fifty knights, and he bade them, and had others do likewise, to sit at that table and eat the food that was there, and they did so very willingly. And then Merlin, who was full of powerful craft, went among them and called to the king, when they had sat down, and showed him the empty seat. Many others saw it, but they did not know what it meant or why it was empty, except for the king and Merlin. When he had done this, Merlin told the king to go take his seat. And the king said that he would not sit until he had served all who were at the table, and when he had done this he went to sit down. So they were for a whole week, and during the season of that feast the king gave away much wealth and many lovely jewels to ladies and unmarried gentlewomen. And when it came time for leave-taking, the king went to his worthy companions and asked them how they were. And they answered him, “We have no wish ever to leave here, and we want always to be at this table at the hour of terce, so we will have our wives and children come to this town. And so we will live here at our lord’s pleasure, for this is what our hearts tell us to do.” The king asked, “Do you all feel this way?” And they all said, “Yes indeed! And yet we wonder at how this can be. For many of us have no bonds with any among us; others have not seen one other before, and few of us were friends before. And now we all love one other as much as a son should love his father, or more, and it does not seem to us that we will ever be parted unless it is by death.” When the king heard them speak in this way, he took it for a very great wonder, as did all those who heard it. And the king was most glad and ordered everyone in the town to love, believe, and honor them just as they would his own self. And so Uther Pendragon founded that table in his own time. Then he came to Merlin and said to him, after [56] the crowds had gone, “You told me the truth indeed, and nowI really believe that Our Lord wills this table to be founded, but I wonder at the empty seat. I would like you please to tell me, if you know, who is the one that will sit there.” And Merlin answered, “I can tell you only that the place will not be taken in your time, and the one who will sit there has not yet been conceived. The one who will take that seat must fulfill the adventures of the Grail. This will not be in your time, but in the time of the king who will rule after you. And I bid you, hold all your gatherings and all your high courts in this town, and IJ ask you please to stay here and hold your court here three times every year.” And the king told him that he would gladly do this, and Merlin said to the king, “Sir, I will go away, and you will not see me again for a very long time.” The king asked him where he was going. “Then you will not be in this town for all the feast days I will keep here?” And he answered, “T will not. I do not want them to believe what they will see happening, for I want no one to say that Ihave brought about what will happen.” So Merlin left Uther Pendragon and came into Northumberland to Blaise, and he told him these things, 198 the founding of that table and many other things which you will hear in his book. And so Merlin stayed more than two years, when he did not go to court. And those who did not love him, or only put on a show of loving him, came one day to the king, who was at Carduel to hold his Christmas court. And they asked him about the empty seat. Why could a worthy man not sit there and so fill up the table? And he answered, “Merlin told me a great wonder about the empty seat: no man could take it in my time, and he who is to sit there has not yet been born.” And they smiled scornfully, for they were falsehearted, and said to the king, “Sir, you don’t believe that any man could ever be better than we are! Or even that there is any in your land as good as those who sit there already!” The king said, “I do not know. But he told me as much.” And they said, “Now you are worth nothing if you do not try it.” “I will not try it now,” said the king, “for I would fear doing a great wrong, and Merlin would be angry.” They answered, “We are not telling you to try it now. But you say that Merlin knows what people do. If he does, then he knows well enough that we are talking about him and what he does. And if he knows it, he will come here, if he is alive, and he will not allow that place to be filled because of the great lie he has told you about it. And if he doesn’t come between now and Whitsunday, please let us try it, and we will do so very willingly, and there are many worthy men among your kinsmen who will be very happy to undergo the test, if you want, and you will see whether they can stand it there!” And the king answered them, “If I did not think it would disturb Merlin, there is nothing I would do more gladly.” “If Merlin is alive,” they said, “and if he knows about it, he will come without fail before anyone can try it. But please, when it’s Whitsunday, if he doesn’t come, let us test it.” And the king granted them what they asked for, and they were very glad and thought they had done very well indeed. ‘ So it was until Whitsunday. And the king let it be known throughout all the land that everyone should meet him at Carduel, for he would hold his Whitsuntide court there. And Merlin, who knew all these things, told Blaise about the wicked [57] thoughts of those who had undertaken this business, and he said he would not go there, since he knew that they would try the seat. He had rather they do it for their evil reasons than for good, and if he went there, they would say that he had come to upset the court. And the ones who had brought this plan to a head would in no way understand what they needed** to about it. This is why Merlin said that he would not go there, so he bore up and waited until the eleventh day after Whitsunday. 33supplied from Micha. Sommer’s text has quil ni mistrent ,j. (“that they did not put one there”) (57, 1. 5) for tant com lor est mestier (“as much as they need”) (Micha 50, 1. 49). The Story of Merlin The king went off to Carduel and took a great crowd with him. And the ones who came to try the seat spread the word everywhere that Merlin was dead and that peasants had killed him in a wood where they said they had found him behaving like a wildman. And they told the story so often and had it repeated so much that the king himself believed it, because Merlin had taken so long to come and seemed not to care about the test for the seat. And when the evening before Whitsunday came, the man who wanted to try the place came forward. He was a highborn and very wealthy man, and he said to the king, “Sir, we must try the seat.” And the king answered, “Who is the one to do it?” “No one but I will sit there,” he said. Then he came to the table where the fifty worthy men were sitting, and he said to them, “I come to sit with you to share your fellowship.” And these men did not answer a single word, but bore themselves in a kindly way and watched what he wanted to do. And the king was there with a great crowd of people gathered about. The man went forward to the place, moved in between two of the gentlemen, and sat down. He had just the time to put his thighs onto the seat when he melted away just like a ball of lead, and was lost from sight right before everyone, so that they did not know what had become of him. And when they saw that he had thus perished, everyone else wanted to sit in the place. But the king ordered the worthy gentlemen to stand up, so that after they had got up from the table no one would know which was the place, and they all rose straightway. The sorrow in the court was great, and the court was utterly distraught by this wonder. The king was more aghast than anyone else, and he thought he had been made a fool of. He said for all to hear that34 Merlin had plainly told him before that no one should take that seat, and that that man did not want to believe him; the king himself had forbidden it, but the man would not give up just for that—so did the king explain himself. And when, two weeks later, Merlin came to court, and after the king had been told that he was there, the king was most happy and went out to greet him. As soon as Merlin saw the king, he said that he had behaved most unwisely about the place, for he had allowed someone to sit there. And the king said to him, “He tricked me.” “So has it happened to many who mean to trick others and trick themselves instead,” said Merlin. “You know this because he spread the word that peasants had killed me.” The king said, “It is true that he said so.” And Merlin said to him, “You ought now to have learned your lesson not to try the seat anymore, and I warn you that if you do, you could be badly hurt. For the place and the table have great meaning; they are very high and most worthy, and they will bring great good to those who are in this kingdom.” The king asked him please to tell him what had happened to the man who sat at the place, “for I am awestruck.” : $4supplied from Micha (50, |. 92), not in Sommer’s text (57, 1. 27). The Story of Merlin And Merlin answered, “It is not your place to ask, and it would be worthless to you even if you knew. Think instead about those who still sit at the table and how to keep up [58] in the most honorable way you can what you have started. Come hold all your high feasts and joyful celebrations in this town in honor of this table. For you know without doubt, thanks to the test you have seen, how worthy it is, for you cannot honor it too much. So I will leave you. Be careful to do just as I have told you.” The king said that he would very willingly do so. 4. Uther’s Love for Ygraine; Arthur’s Conception and Birth.’ So the king and Merlin parted company. And when the king knew that Merlin was gone, he ordered handsome buildings and houses to be built in the town, for he would henceforth hold his courts and his other gatherings there. And he sent word throughout all his land that all in his kingdom should know that he would be in Carduel on all feast days, such as Christmas, Whitsunday, and All Saints, and they should come there without being summoned again. So for a long time the king by custom held all his courts in Carduel. At length the king happened, one certain time, to wish to call his barons together, and, for the honor and love of him, he wanted them to bring their wives and noble vassals and knights. He had them summoned and sent his letters everywhere, and they did everything the king had asked. So there were a great many married and unwed ladies, and many knights. I cannot begin to tell you who all the people at that court were. But I must tell you about those my source story speaks of one after the other. And I want you to know in truth that the duke of Tintagel was there and Ygraine his wife. And when he saw Ygraine,? the king loved her deeply, but he did not show it, except that he more willingly looked at her than any of the other women. And she herself took note of it and knew in her heart that the king did indeed love her. When she fully understood this, she was slow in coming before him, and avoided it if she could, for she was very beautiful and utterly faithful to her husband. And the king, for love of her, but so that no one? would take notice, sent jewels to all the ladies at the feast; he sent Ygraine some she was sure to like. She knew that he had sent them to all the ladies, and she did not want hers, but she dared not refuse them; instead she took them, and she knew in her heart that the king had given jewels to the other ladies only because of her, but she made no sign of this. Thus King Uther Pendragon held his court, and every man was there with his wife, but he did it all for love of Ygraine, who had so overwhelmed him that he did not know what to do. The holiday court ended, but before the 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 58-80. supplied from Micha (52, 1. 14), not in Sommer’s text (58, 1. 21). Supplied from Micha (52, |. 22); the verb is not negated in Sommer’s text (58, 1. 25). 199 people left, the king entreated all his barons to be with him again on Whitsunday as they had been at that time, and he asked them to bring their wives as they had just done. And they all swore they would. That was the end of it. And when the duke of Tintagel left court, the king rode along with him and did him great honors. The king then said to Ygraine, the duke’s wife, that she was taking his heart away with her, but she did not show that she had understood him. So the duke went off and took leave of the king, as did his wife. The king stayed in Carduel and gladdened the worthy men of the table who were left behind, and he brought cheer to the table, but his heart belonged wholly to Ygraine, and he pined for her until Whitsuntide. Then the barons [59] gathered again and their wives too, and the king was very glad when he knew that Ygraine had come. At that feast he gave many gifts to the knights and ladies, and the king had the duke and Ygraine sit with him to eat. The king gave so many gifts and looked at her in such a way that Ygraine knew in truth that he loved her, and she was sorely distressed; as all could see, she was deeply worried, but she dared not talk about it. So the king was very cheerful at the feast, and he took delight in his barons. But when the holiday was over, all wanted to go back to their lands and took their leave. And the king begged them to come back to court and bring their wives when he sent for them, and they said they would. So the people in the court scattered, and all year the king bore the misery of his love for Ygraine. At the end of the year he could hide it no longer, and he told two of his closest friends about his distress and the agony he felt because of Ygraine. And they said, “What do you want us to do about it?” And the king asked them, “How could I be with her more often?” They told him that if he went to the land where she was, he would be blamed because people would take note of it. So he asked, “What advice will you give me?” And they said to him, “The best advice we know is for you to call together a great court at Carduel. Send word to all who will come there that they must not leave for two full weeks, and everyone must come ready to stay for the two weeks. Tell all your barons to bring their wives. So you will have a long time to spend with Ygraine, and you can take delight in your love.” When the king heard this, it seemed to him that they were giving him good advice, so he did as they had told him. He sent word to his barons to be at Carduel on Whitsunday, to bring their wives, and to come all ready to stay two weeks. And they came there and brought their wives, just as the king had ordered. On that Whitsunday the king was of a mind to wear his crown, so he did, and he had many handsome gifts bestowed on his barons and wherever else he thought it worthwhile. On the day the king gave the feast he spoke to one of his advisers, named Ulfin, whom he very much trusted, and he asked him what to do, for love of Ygraine was killing him and he could neither sleep nor rest. He was at his wits’ end, for he thought he would die, and he would be utterly unable to live without some kind of help. 200 And he answered him “Sir, you are very silly if you think you will die of craving a woman. I am a poor man beside you, but if I loved her as you do, I would never believe I would die. I’ve never heard tell of a woman, if she was entreated and sought after enough, and if a man gladly did everything he could to give jewels to all the men and women about her, to love and honor them by doing, and telling each one of them, what they want and what pleases them—I’ve never heard tell of a woman who, in face of that, could forbid the man to talk to her! And you who are a king are terrified! This is happening to you because you are fainthearted.” The king answered, “Ulfin, you speak very well, and you certainly know what has to be done in these matters. And I beg you, help me in all the ways you can. Please take from my room everything you will and give it to all the men and [60] women about her. Strive to do whatever pleases her, and speak to Ygraine in ways you know will be useful to me. “Now let it be,” said Ulfin, “and I will do whatI can.” This is how the king spoke to Ulfin, and Ulfin answered, “Sir, love has no regard for reason when reason works against love’s will. As for yourself, be careful to win the duke’s good will and to be with him as much as you can. I will do my best to find a way to speak to Ygraine.” The king told him that he would surely know how to do that, and so they set to work. The king regaled the duke and was his companion for a full week, and he said to him and did whatever might please him, and he endowed him and his companions with many a lovely jewel. And Ulfin spoke to Ygraine: he told her things he believed would please her the most, and many times he brought her beautiful jewels. But Ygraine turned them down and refused to take any. At length it happened one day that Ygraine was talking privately with Ulfin and said to him, “Ulfin, why do you want to give me these jewels and these lovely gifts?” And Ulfin answered, “For your great beauty and for the beautiful way you look. And I cannot give you anything, since all the wealth in the kingdom of Logres* is yours and every worthy gentleman is at the mercy of your will and pleasure.” ‘ And Ygraine said to him, “How?” Ulfin said to her, “Because you have the heart of the one to whom everyone else swears fealty. This heart belongs to you and obeys you. This is why all the other hearts are under your sway.” Ygraine asked him, “What heart are you telling me about?” “The king’s.” And she raised her hand and crossed herself and said, “God! what a traitor the king is to make a show of loving my husband and me, yet he means to shame him! Ulfin,” she went on, “take care not to let it happen that you should ever say such words to me! For I want you to know that I 4The traditional name of the kingdom, but in the Merlin Logres is a city from which the kingdom takes its name, as is clear in Sommer’s text (79, ll. 6-9). Eventually (Sommer, 96) the city is identified with London. The Story of Merlin would tell my husband, and if he knew it, you would have to die! I will hide® it from him just this one time.” And Ulfin answered, “It would be an honor for me to die for my lord. Never has a lady ever forbidden such a thing as you have when you forbid the king to love you, the king who loves you more than all things that can live and die. But perhaps you are jesting with us! Please, lady, for God’s sake, take pity on the king your lord and on yourself! For if this is something in which you cannot be merciful, then great harm could yet come from it. Neither the duke your husband nor you could stand up against his will.” Ygraine answered, weeping, “God willing, I’ll protect myself: I'll never be anywhere he can see me.” So Ulfin and Ygraine parted. And Ulfin came straight to the king and told him everything Ygraine had said. And the king said, “That is how a worthy lady should answer, so I will not stop beseeching her, for a good lady was never won oyer so quickly.” On the eleventh day after Whitsunday, the king was sitting at table, and the duke of Tintagel was sitting very close by. The king had in front of him a very handsome golden goblet. Ulfin knelt before the king and said to him, “Send this goblet to Ygraine, and tell the duke to bid her take it and drink from it for love of you. Have one of his knights take it to her full of good wine.” The king said that he would very gladly do so, and he said to the duke what [61] Ulfin had advised. The duke thought there was no harm in it, so he answered, “Sir, many thanks! She will very gladly take it.” And the duke called a knight of his with whom he was very friendly and said to him, “Bretel, take this goblet to your lady on behalf of the king and tell her I bid her drink from it for love of the king.” Bretel took the goblet and came to the table where Ygraine was sitting, and he knelt before her and said, “Lady, the king sends you this goblet, and my lord asks you to take it and drink from if for love of the king.” When she heard this, she was deeply shamed and she blushed, but she dared not refuse her husband the duke’s order. She took the goblet and drank from it, then she told Bretel to take it back to the king. But Bretel said, “My lady, my lord orders you to keep it, and the king himself asked him to do this.” When she heard this she understood clearly that she would have to accept it, and Bretel went back and thanked the king for it on behalf of Ygraine, who had not said a word about it. The king was very happy that she had kept the goblet. And Ulfin went to the table where Ygraine was sitting to see what look she had, and by the look of her he thought she was most upset and brooding in thought. After the tables had been taken down, she called him and said to him, “Ulfin, it was most unfaithful of your lord to send me a goblet. But you may be certain that he will win nothing by it, for before daylight tomorrow I will bring shame down on him. I will tell my husband about the treachery the king and you are trying to bring about.” 5Supplied from Micha (54, 1. 27): celerai (“I will hide”). In Sommer’s text (60, 1. 25) the future has become a preterite with the loss of the interior syllable: chelai (“I hid”). The Story of Merlin Ulfin answered, “You are not so mad you do not know that, once a woman tells her husband such a story, he will never believe her again! This is why you will keep it to yourself.” And she answered, “A curse on any woman who does.” Ulfin left Ygraine straightway. And the king, who had eaten and washed his hands, was very cheerful. He took the duke by the hand and said to him, “Let’s go see the ladies.” And the duke said he would very gladly. They went into the room where Ygraine had eaten along with all the other ladies. As soon as Ygraine saw the king, she was certain that he had come there only for her. The king talked and enjoyed himself for a while with the ladies, and Ygraine stayed there until nightfall. And when night had come, she went off to her lodging, and the duke went after her and found her weeping bitterly. When he saw her tears he was greatly amazed. He took her in his arms, because he loved her very much, and asked her what the matter was. She told him she wanted to die, and the duke asked her why. And she said to him, “Husband, I will not hide the reason from you, for I love you more than anything.” “Sir,” she went on, “the king says he loves me. And all these courts you see him holding with these other ladies whom he orders to come here—he says he does this only for love of me and to have a reason for you to bring me here. I have known this since the last court; that day I refused his gifts, and I took nothing from him until today. Now you made me take his goblet, and you ordered me through Bretel to drink from it for love of him! This is why I would like to be dead, for I cannot hold out against him or his friend Ulfin. Now I am sure, since telling you this, that he cannot for long keep himself from doing something harmful. So I beg you as my husband, please take me back [62] to Tintagel, for I don’t want to stay in this town any more!” When the duke heard this, he was deeply angered, for he loved his wife very much, more than anyone could. Then he sent through the town for his knights, and when they had gathered, they saw him and recognized how angry he was. He said to them, “Get ready to ride out in secret, and let no one know a thing about it. I am leaving, and don’t ask me why? before I tell you.” And they said, “Just as you order.” And the duke said to them, “Leave behind all your gear except for your armor, and your horses will follow you out in the morning, for I don’t want the king or anyone else to know that I am leaving.” The duke’s knights did just as he ordered. The duke, his wife, and their household got on their horses and went back toward his country. In the morning, when they found out that the duke had left, there was much ado about it among those who were still with the king. And when the king found out that the duke had gone off, he was sorely distressed and upset that he had taken Ygraine away with him. He called the barons of his council ©The sentence to here, apparently telescoped in Sommer’s text (62, 1. 5), is supplied from Micha (56, I. 29). 201 together and showed them the shameful thing the duke had done to him, and they said that they were amazed that he had done it, and he had done a very foolish thing. And the king asked them to advise him as to how the duke could be made to make amends. They did not know why the duke had left, so they said, “Sir, you will have your payment in any way you please.” The king told them how he had honored the duke more than any of his other barons, and they said that was true, and they were amazed that he should have done him such a great outrage. And the king said to them, “I will order him, if you say so, to come make amends for the wrong he has done me. And as he went back home, so let him come back here to be brought to justice.” And the whole council agreed to this. Two worthy men went on behalf of the king to take this message, and they rode until, after many days, they came to Tintagel, where they found the duke. And they gave their message just as they had been ordered to. And when the duke heard that he had to go back to court with his wife Ygraine, he told the messengers that he would not. “For the king and his people,” he said, “have done such a wrong to me that I can no longer trust him, nor should I go to his court under his protection, nor will I ever speak otherwise about it. As God is my witness, he did everything in his power to make me lose faith in him.” And the messengers left the duke when they could not find any other arguments. After they had gone, the duke sent for the worthy gentlemen of his private council and told them why he had left Carduel, and he recounted to them the king’s treachery and the dishonor he sought to bring him when he wanted to shame his wife. When they heard about these matters, they were amazed, and they said that, God willing, it would never be allowed to happen, and misfortune should come to anyone who would try to do such a thing to his liegeman. Then the duke said, “I beseech all of you, for God’s sake and for your honor, and because it is your duty, to help me defend my land if he attacks me.” And they said that they would, even if it meant they would lose their heads. So the duke took counsel with his liegemen. And the messengers went back to Carduel, where they found the king, and they told him and his council what they had found out. Then they all said together that they were astounded by the duke’s madness, for they held him to be a very shrewd man. And the king [63] asked them, as his liegemen and friends, to help him avenge the shameful thing the duke had done to him. They answered that they could not refuse him that, but they begged him all of one voice, so that he might keep the law, to defy him forty days beforehand. The king did this, and he asked them to come back together at the end of the forty days. They said that they would very gladly do so. And the king straightway sent his messengers to challenge the duke of Tintagel, and when the duke heard that he was being defied for forty days, he answered that he would defend himself if he could. He sent word to his liegemen telling them about the breech of faith the king 202 had declared. He entreated them to help him, for he had very great need of it. And they told him that they would very willingly help him. Then the duke took stock, and he said that he had only two castles that might be defended against the king, and he would not lose these two, he said, as long as he lived. So he made a plan to leave his wife in Tintagel along with ten knights, for he knew that the castle did not have to fear an attack from any man, and those ten knights and the townsfolk would keep the gate well guarded. And they did as he had ordered. And he went off to the other castle that would be harder to take, and he said that he could not defend the rest of his land against the king. This is how the duke behaved. And the messengers who had delivered the breech of faith came back to the king and told him that the duke was preparing to defend himself against any who would attack him. When the king heard his messengers, he was very happy. And he sent word throughout his whole kingdom calling his barons together, and he had them gather on the border of the duke’s land in a meadowland beside a great river. And when his army and all his barons had gathered, the king told them about the shame, the scorn, and the outrage against the court that the duke had inflicted, and the barons said that it was indeed right that he should make amends. So the king invaded the duke’s country, and he took his castles and his towns and laid waste his lands. Then he was told that the duke was in one of his castles and his wife was in the other. The king spoke to his council and asked them which of the two castles he should storm, and his council advised him to attack the duke where he was, for if he could take the duke, he would have the whole countryside and all his lands. And the king agreed, and they rode there. The king called Ulfin and said to him, “Ulfin, what shall I do, now that I cannot see Ygraine?” And he answered, “What a man cannot have he must do without. But you must make every effort to take the duke, for if you had taken him prisoner, all would have come to a good end; but if you had gone first to the place where Ygraine is, your doings would have come out into the open all too soon.” So the king besieged the duke in his castle, and he launched a heavy attack. The duke held out for a long time, and the king could never take the castle. The king was sorry and distraught, and he was most upset because of his love for Ygraine. At length he was in his pavilion one day and began to weep very bitterly. When his men-at-arms saw him weeping, they took themselves far off and left him alone. And Ulfin, who had been outside, went into the tent when he learned of the king’s state and found him in tears. So he asked him [64] why he was weeping, and the king answered, “You should know why, for you are well aware that I am dying for love of Ygraine. And I see plainly that I will have to die because of it. I have lost the will to drink, to eat, to sleep, to rest—this is how I know I will die, for I can see no other way out of this. And so I am sorry for myself.” The Story of Merlin When Ulfin heard this, he answered, “You are very fainthearted to think that you will die for love of a woman. But I will give you some good advice. Send word to Merlin to come to you, and he cannot fail to give you counsel, and you will do to the utmost whatever his heart wills and not be stubborn about it.” And the king answered, “I would do anything that anyone told me to do. But I know already that Merlin is aware of my distress, and I am afraid that I made him angry when the seat at the table was tested, for it has been a very long time since he has come anywhere I was, or perhaps he is bothered because I love the wife of my liegeman. But I certainly can’t do anything more, for I cannot stop my heart from loving her. And I am well aware that he forbade me to send for her.” Ulfin answered, “I am certain of one thing: that if he is hale and hardy, if he still loves you as he has, and if he knows the distress you are in, he will not be slow in letting you hear from him.” This is how Ulfin comforted the king, and he told him to look cheerful and be glad; if he sent for his men and spent some time with them, he would forget much of his distress. And the king answered that he would very willingly do so, but he could never forget his pain or his love. So the king was consoled for a while, and he renewed the assault on the castle, but could not take it. One day Ulfin happened to be riding in the midst of the army when he met a man he did not know. And this man said to him, “My lord Ulfin, I would like very much to speak with you away from here.” And Ulfin answered, “And I with you.” Then they went off outside the encampment, the man on foot and Ulfin on horseback. The man was old, and Ulfin got down to talk to him and asked him who he was. And he answered, “I am an old man, as you can see for yourself. Once, when I was young, I was thought to be wise, but now people say about many things I say that I am driveling. But I will tell you just between us that I was in Tintagel not long ago, and I came to know a worthy man who told me that your King Uther Pendragon loved the duke’s wife, and he is laying waste the duke’s lands because he took her away from the court at Carduel. If the king and you want to give me a little reward, I know of a man who could bring you to talk to Ygraine and advise the king about his love life.” When Ulfin heard the worthy man speak in this way, he wondered about where he had got what he had said, and he asked him kindly to point out the one who might advise the king about his love life. And the old man answered, “I will hear first about the reward the king would like to give me.” Ulfin said to him, “Where will I find you again after I have spoken to the king?” The old man answered, “Tomorrow you will find either me or my messenger on the way between here and the army.” And he commended him to God and went away, saying that he would talk to him the next day without fail and tell him something that would gladden him. Ulfin left and came straight to the king [65] as fast as he could, and he told him all about how he had spoken The Story of Merlin with that man. When the king heard what he had to say, he asked Ulfin when he had seen the man. And he answered, “I saw him just now, and he told me that I would talk to him again tomorrow, and I had to be able to tell him what reward you wished to give him.” The king said, “You will take me when you go to speak to him.” And Ulfin said he would very gladly do so. “And if you speak to him without me,” said the king, “offer him everything of mine he wants and more.” So they dropped the matter until the next day. That evening the king was happier than he had been in a long time. And the next day, after Mass when Ulfin was ready, he rode with the king through the encampment to the place where Ulfin thought he would find the old man. After they had gone forward a little, they saw a cripple who also seemed to be blind. And when the king passed in front of him, he said, “May God fill your heart with the thing you most long for. Give me something I can thank you for.” The king looked at him and said to Ulfin smiling, “Ulfin, will you do what I order as a service to me, for love of me, and to do what I will?” Ulfin answered, “I want nothing more than to do your will.” And he asked him, “Did you hear what this cripple said and what he asked me for? He has reminded me of the thing in the world that I love most and crave most. Go sit beside him and tell him that I have given you to him and that there is nothing I own that I love more.” Ulfin did not answer him, but went to sit down beside the cripple and gave himself to him. And when the cripple saw Ulfin, he asked him, “What have you come looking for?” And he said, “The king sends me to you so that I may be of service to you.” When he heard this, he smiled and said, “The king has taken note and recognized me better than you have. I would like you to know that the old man you spoke to yesterday has sent me to you here. But I will not tell you what he told me. Instead, go to the king and tell him that I see clearly that he would do great harm if he had his way, and I advise him that the sooner he understands this the better off he’ll be.” Ulfin said to him, “Could I dare ask you about yourself” And he answered, “Ask the king and he will tell you.” And Ulfin got on his horse and rode after the king. When the king saw him, he turned aside, called Ulfin and said to him, “How can you have come here after me? I just gave you to the cripple.” “Sir, he wants you to know that you are more observant than I am, and he wants you to tell me about him, for he would not, but said that you would.” When the king heard this, he turned about and rode back very fast until they came to the spot where they had found the cripple. Then the king said to Ulfin, “Do you know who talked to you yesterday in the likeness of an old man? It is the same man whom you saw crippled today.” And Ulfin said, “How could a man disfigure himself so? And who is he?” 203 The king answered, “You can be sure that it is Merlin playing tricks on us, and when he wants to, he will let us know who he is.” With that, they let the matter drop and rode down through the encampment. And Merlin came straight to the king’s tent in his true likeness, so that people would know him for who he was, and [66] he asked where the king was. A messenger came in to the king and told him that Merlin was asking for him. When the king heard this, he was happier than anyone, and he came straightway to Ulfin. He said to him, “Now you will see what I was telling you, for Merlin has come. And I was sure that they were looking for him in vain!” Ulfin answered, “Now we’ll see whether you can honor him and do what he wants, for no man alive could better help you in your love for Ygraine.” And the king replied, “You speak the truth, and I will do everything he orders.” So they rode to the king’s tent, where they found Merlin. And when the king saw him, he was filled with joy and said that Merlin was welcome indeed. He took him in his arms, embraced him tenderly, and said, “Why should I tell you of my suffering, when you know just as well as I how I am? I have never been so eager for any man to come! And I beseech you, in God’s name, for myself and on behalf of what you know my heart craves!” And Merlin answered, “I will never listen to anything you have to say without Ulfin.” Then the king had Ulfin summoned. He took him aside so that they could talk alone, and said, “Here is the old man you saw yesterday and the cripple.” Ulfin looked very hard at Merlin and said to him, “Could what the king told me be true?” And Merlin said, “Yes indeed! And as soon as I saw that he sent you to me, I was sure that he had understood everything.” Ulfin said to the king, “Sir, now you should talk to Merlin about your troubles, and not shed tears when you are alone.” And the king answered, “I do not know what to say or what to ask him, for he knows my whole heart and my feelings, and I could not lie to him without his finding it out. But I beg him for God’s sake please to help me so that I can have Ygraine’s love. And I will do anything that he sets out for me to do.” Merlin answered, “If you dared give me what I asked of you, I would arrange it so that you could have her love and lie in her room naked beside her in her bed.” When Ulfin heard this, he smiled and said, “V’ll now see what a man’s heart is worth!” And the king answered, “Anything you ask me for that can be found, you will have it.” “I will be sure of it,” said Merlin. And the king said, “Let everything be as you propose.” “Will you swear by the saints, and will you make Ulfin swear, that what I ask you for the morning after you have lain with her all night and done with her all you will—that you'll give me what I ask you for and not take it back?” And the king said to him, “Yes, very willingly.” Merlin asked Ulfin if he would swear likewise. 204 And he said, “I am sorry that I have not already sworn sO. When Merlin heard what they said, he smiled and said, “When the oath is taken, I will tell you how this can happen.” Then the king had relics brought in and the holiest things he had, and he swore to him just what he had laid out. And he agreed to give Merlin in good faith, and with no deceit, what he would ask him for. After the king, Ulfin swore that, with the help of God and all the saints, the king would hand over to him what he had said and sworn in good faith that he would. Thus were the oaths made, and Merlin accepted them. Then the king said to Merlin, “Now I beg you to tell me about my business, for I am the man in the world who most needs to have it over and done with, and I have the strongest will to satisfy my yearning.” [67] Then Merlin told the king, “You will have to go there very boldly, for she is a most honorable lady and very faithful to God and her husband. But soon you will see what power I have to deceive her. I will bestow on you the likeness of the duke, and it will be so good that all people there will take you for their lord. The duke has two knights who are closer to him, and to Ygraine as well, than anyone could be. One is called Bretel and the other Jordan. I will make Ulfin look like Jordan, and I will take Bretel’s shape. I will have the gates opened for you, and thanks to these shapes, I will get you inside there to go to bed, along with Ulfin and myself. But you will have to leave there very early in the morning when Ulfin and I go out, for we will hear very strange news there. Get your army ready to leave your barons in charge,’ and give orders forbidding anyone to go toward the castle before we get back. And be careful to tell no one where you are going but the two of us who are here.” The king and Ulfin answered that they would do everything he ordered. Merlin made things ready for what he had to do. And he said to them, “I will give you your new likenesses on the way.” And the king hurried to do as fast as he could what Merlin had ordered. When he had done, he came straight to Merlin and said to him, “I have done what I had to do. Now tend to your business.” Merlin said to him, “The only thing left to do is to leave.” They got on their horses and rode until they came to Tintagel. Then Merlin said to the king, “Now wait here a little, and Ulfin and I will go over there.” He and Ulfin went to one side, separated, and went straight back to the king. Merlin brought a herb, and the king took it and rubbed himself with it, and after he put it on himself, he looked unmistakably just like the duke. And Merlin said then, “Do you recall ever having seen Jordan?” The king answered, “I know him very well.” 7Supplied from Micha (64, 1. 18): a laissier a voz barons (“to leave to your barons”). Sommer’s text reads (67,1. 11) a loisir, & vos barons (“at leisure, and your barons”). The Story of Merlin And Merlin showed him Ulfin in the likeness of Jordan. When Ulfin saw the king, he said, “Good Lord God! how can any man be changed to look like another?” And the king asked him, “What do you think about me?” Ulfin answered, “I recognize you as no one but the duke.” And the king told him that he looked just like Jordan. After they had spoken thus for a while, Merlin came, and it seemed to them that he was Bretel. So they talked together and waited until night came. Just after darkness began to fall, they came straight to the gate of Tintagel. Merlin, who looked just like Bretel, knocked at the gate, and the gatekeeper and those who guarded the gate came out to him. And he said, “Open the gate. See, this is the duke coming!” They opened the gate and saw clearly, so it seemed to them, Bretel, the duke, and Jordan, and they let them in. And Bretel forbade them to tell anyone that the duke had come. Several of them ran to tell the duchess that the duke had come. And they rode until they came to the great hall, and they got down from their horses. Merlin told the king privately that he should behave like the duke, cheerfully. Then all three went up to the room where Ygraine was already lying in bed. [68] As fast as they could, they had their lord’s boots taken off, and they put him to bed with Ygraine. This is how the good king called Arthur was conceived. The lady took great delight in the king, for she thought that he was surely her husband the duke, whom she loved very much, and they lay together until daylight the next morning. Then news came to the town that the duke was dead and his castle taken. When the two companions, who had got up, heard the news, they went straight to their lord where he lay and said to him, “Sir, get up and go to your castle, for news has come to your people that you are dead.” And he jumped up and said, “It is no wonder they think so, for I left the castle and no one knew it.” Then he took leave of Ygraine and kissed her in plain sight of all who were there when he left. And the three of them went out of the castle as quickly as they could, and no one recognized them. When they were outside, they were very happy. And Merlin came up to the king and said, “Sir, I have done allI promised you. Now be sure to keep the oath you swore to me.” The king answered, “You have made me far happier and served me far better than any man ever did another, and I will certainly hold to our bargain.” And Merlin said to him, “I am laying claim to my reward, and I want you to give it to me. You should know that you have fathered a male child in Ygraine: this is what you have given me, and you must not have him. Any power you have over him you have yielded to me. Have the hour and night you sired him written down, and you will know whether I am telling the truth.” “And I swear to you,” said the king, “that I will do everything you have told me, and I surely owe it to you.” The Story of Merlin So they rode as far as a river, and Merlin had them wash in that river. After washing, they lost the shapes they had taken on, and they looked as they had at first. Then the king rode as fast as he could and came straight to his army. As soon as he had got there, his liegemen and his men-atarms gathered around him and told him how the duke had been killed. They said that the day after he had gone, the army grew very still and quiet. “And the duke noticed that you weren't in the encampment. So he had his men put on their armor and had his foot soldiers come out through one gate and his knights through another. They ran against us and did us great harm before our men could get their arms. The cry was raised and the din grew louder. Our people armed themselves, ran against them, and pushed them back to their gate. There they turned about and fought very hard until the duke’s horse was killed beneath him and he was struck down. There the duke was killed among your foot soldiers, for they did not recognize who he was. And we broke through after the others inside the gate: they defended themselves very poorly after losing the duke.” And the king answered and told them that he was very sorry about the duke’s death. This is how the duke was killed and his castle taken, and the king spoke to his liegemen and told them that he was very sorry about the duke’s ill luck, and he asked their advice as to how he could make up for such a loss so that his vassals would not blame him. For he did not hate the duke so much that he wanted him dead, and he was quite distraught about the mishap that had befallen him, “so I will make up for it as best I can.” Then Ulfin, [69] who was very close to the king, spoke and said, “Since this thing is over and done with, amends must be made in the fairest way we can.” Then Ulfin took a great many barons aside,® and he said to them, “How do you advise the king to take news of this death to the lady and to the duke’s friends? He begs you to give him counsel, and you must advise him as best you can, because he is your overlord.” And they answered, “We will very gladly advise him. And we bid you, tell us the thing it would be most worthwhile to ask for, so that the king will not refuse us, for we know that you are his dear friend.” And Ulfin answered, “Since I am a friend of the king, if I knowingly counseled something behind his back that I would not want said to him in front of everyone, then you would take me for a traitor, and I would be. Now if it were up to me to give counsel about the lady's friends and? peace, I would advise something that you would not dare think about.” They answered all together, “We believe everything you say and we yield to you, for we are well aware that you are a wise man and a trustworthy adviser. So we entreat you, help us to make up our minds about this matter.” 8supplied from Micha (67, Il. 9-10); in Sommer’s text the barons come and take Ulfin aside (69, Il. 2-3). °The conjunction is not in Sommer’s text (69, I. 11), where the punctuation suggests that a scribe may not have understood the exemplar. 205 Ulfin answered, “I will tell you what I think, and if you know anything better, say so. I would advise the king to send word everywhere that the lady’s friends are to come to Tintagel. The king should be there, and he should call the lady and her friends to come before him. After they have gathered, the king should make so much ado about the duke’s death that people would think that any there who refuse to make peace are mad, and they would say that the king is an upstanding and faithful man of honor and that we his counselors are, too. This is how anyone who wants to make peace should do so.” . And the worthy barons said, “We will hold to your counsel, and there will be no other.” So they came to the king and gave him the counsel they had decided upon, but they did not say to him that Ulfin had given it to them. After they had proposed it all to the king, he answered, “I willingly agree to this, and I want it to be just as you have said.” So the king sent word by letters to all the duke’s kinsmen that they should come to Carduel under a truce, for he wished to make amends for everything they held against him. And Merlin came straight to the king and said to him, “Do you know who has given that counsel?” And the king answered, “No, just that all my worthy barons advised me to do this.” Merlin said, “They did not dare make such a recommendation by themselves, but Ulfin, who is very shrewd and faithful, thought out in his heart the best and most honorable peace there could be. I do not believe anyone knows this but me,” he went on, “and I have now told you.” And the king asked Merlin please to tell him just how Ulfin worked it out, and Merlin told him all Ulfin’s train of thought. When the king heard this, he was very gladdened in his heart and very happy. And the king said to Merlin, “What would you have me do about this?” “I could not give you,” said Merlin, “better or more faithful advice. This way, you will have everything your heart yearns for. I want to go away, but first I want to talk to you with Ulfin there. After Iam gone, you can surely ask Ulfin how he came up with this peace.” And the king said he would do so. Then Ulfin was called before them, and when he had come before them, Merlin spoke and [70] said to the king, “Sir, you have sworn to me that you will give me, insofar as you can, the heir you have begotten, and you have written the hour and the date he was conceived. You know for a fact that you fathered him thanks to me. So the sin would fall on me if I did not help him, for his mother may yet be shamed because of him: she has no way to hide from the world. So I want Ulfin to write out the documents, and he should put there 10 the time, the hour and the night, when he was conceived. You will not see me before the hour and day he is born. And I entreat you, as my overlord, to believe Ulfin in what he tells you, for he loves you, and he will 10gommer’s text has quil ote (70, 1. 6): “let him hear” (?), while Micha reads que il ait (68, 1. 34): “let there be.” 206 never say anything to you or advise you in anything that is not for your welfare and for your honor. “I will not speak to you or to him again for six months, and I will talk first to Ulfin. What I tell you to do through him, please believe in it and do it, if you want to be my friend and his and if you mean to safeguard from now on what is lawfully yours.” So Ulfin recorded the child’s conception. And Merlin took the king aside by himself and said to him, “Sir, you will take Ygraine as your wife,!? and you will be careful not to let her know that you have lain with her or that she is with child by you. It is with respect to this that you will most have her at your mercy, for if you ask her about her pregnancy and try to find out by whom she is with child, she will be unable to name the father, and she will feel ashamed toward you. This is how you can best help me have the fruit she is bearing.” So Merlin left the king and Ulfin and came straight to his master Blaise; he told him these things and had him write them down, and it is through the writing that we still know them. And the king and his barons went off toward Tintagel. And when he had come there, he sent for his liegemen and his council and asked them what to do about the things that had happened. They answered, “We advise you to make peace with the duchess and the duke’s friends, and you will have great honor in it.” The king ordered them to go straight to Tintagel to speak to the duchess and show her that she could not defend herself against him, and tell her that if she and her liegemen throughout her land wanted peace and her advisers counseled it, he would gladly work it out just as she wished. So the barons went to Tintagel, and the king stayed behind and took Ulfin aside privately and asked him what he advised about the peace. He led him to understand that he was well aware who had urged it. “Then you surely know, sir,” he said, “whether or not you like it.” The king answered, “I like it very much indeed, and I would like even better for it to be brought about just as you thought it through in your heart.” ' And Ulfin said to him, “All you need do is grant it, and I will bring it about.” And the king bade him to do so. So their talk ended. And messengers came to Tintagel and found the duchess there and the duke’s friends, and they showed how the duke had died because of the wrong he did. They said that the king was very sorry about it, and he would gladly make peace and come to terms with the lady and all the duke’s friends. The duke’s wise barons clearly saw that they could not hold out against the king, so they advised the lady and her friends to make peace with the king. And the lady and her friends said that she would take counsel about it, and they withdrew to a room together. [71] When they gathered in private, the lady’s and the duke’s friends said, “Lady, those gentlemen are telling the supplied from Micha (68, 1. 42); the verbs are reversed in Sommer’s text (70, Il. 11-12). 12The clause is supplied from Micha (68, |. 46). The Story of Merlin truth: we cannot hold out against the king. Listen to them and find out what kind of peace the king wishes to make with you and your liegemen. They can offer peace in such a way that it cannot be refused: one must choose the lesser of two evils—we advise you to do this.” And the lady answered and said, “I never shunned my husband’s counsel, nor will I ever forgo anything you advise me, for I do not know anyone whom I should believe better than you.” Then they came straight out, and one of the worthiest and wisest of the gentlemen spoke and relayed the lady's words to the king’s messengers. “My lady has taken counsel,” he said, “and wishes to know what amends the king will make to her for her dead husband.” The messengers answered, “Dear sir, we do not know the king’s will, but he clearly said that he will take counsel with his barons and will make everything up to her as they dare judge fit.” And they replied, “Then he will make amends fairly, if that is the case, and we need not ask any more of him. You are all such worthy gentlemen that you will grant her just redress, if it is God’s will, and you will urge him to do what is good and what is honorable for him.” So they set a day at the end of two weeks when the lady and her friends would come before the king to hear what he wanted to say. If he had nothing to say that suited the lady and her friends, then they would have safe conduct to go back to Tintagel. So the day was set, and the messengers went straight back to the king and told him what they had found and the counsel the lady had taken. And the king said that she and all her people who came with her would be very well taken care of, and that he would gladly hear them out if they sought from him what was right. So the king bided his time for two weeks, and he and Ulfin spoke together of many things. And when the appointed day came, the king sent an escort for the lady. After she had come into his encampment, the king called all his liegemen and counselors together, and he sent word to the lady and her counselors asking them what they meant to request with respect to the peace. And the lady’s counselors said, “Sir, the lady has not come here to ask for anything, but to find out what she will be offered in amends for her husband’s death.” And the messengers went straight to the king and told him. When the king heard this, he held them to be very shrewd, and he took his council to one side and asked them what they would advise in this case. They answered him, “Sir, no one can know better than you what kind of peace you want to make with them or what you mean to offer.” “I have already told you my thoughts and feelings on the matter.” said the king. “You are all my liegemen and we are friends, so I put myself wholly in your hands. Anything you advise me I will do.” And they answered, “No one could ask more of you. But sir, this is a very weighty case, and we would not dare undertake it unless we were sure that you would not hold a grudge against anyone.” And Ulfin spoke up: “It seems that you take the king for a madman, and you don’t believe anything he tells you.” The Story of Merlin The barons answered, “Ulfin, you are right. But we beg you to join us in our deliberations, and the king to allow it. You will report our finding to the king, and you yourself will do your best to show us what to do, for you know how by your worth and by right.” [72] When the king heard what they asked Ulfin, he looked happy, and he said to him, “Ulfin, I have raised you up and made you a wealthy man, and I know that you are clever. Go counsel them, on my orders, the best you know how.” And Ulfin answered, “I will do so since you send me there, but I want you to know that no king or any ruler can be loved too much by his liegemen, nor can he lower himself too much to them to win their hearts.” This is what Ulfin told the king when he went to the council of the barons, and they withdrew by themselves. They asked Ulfin what he would have them do in this matter. And Ulfin answered, “You hear that the king is leaving it all up to us. Let us go to the lady and her friends and ask them if they will defer to us as well.” And they answered that he had spoken well, like a learned man. So they went to speak to the lady and her council, and when they came before her, they told her that in everything the king had put himself into their hands, that he would keep the peace and do what they told him, “and we have come to you to ask you and your council if you will also yield to us.” They answered, “We should take counsel on this.” So they deliberated and said that the king could not make a better offer than to leave everything up to his barons. Thus the lady and her counselors and all the dead man’s kin agreed to yield to them, and everyone on both sides took heart. Then the king’s barons withdrew to deliberate by themselves, and they asked one another what they advised. After they had spoken among themselves and everyone had given his views, they all asked Ulfin what he would have the king do. And Ulfin answered, “T will tell you what I think, and what I say here I would say anywhere else. You are well aware that the duke was killed by the king and his army. Whatever wrong he may have done the king, he did nothing against him for which he deserved to die. Isn’t what I’m telling you true? And you should know that the duke’s wife has been left with child, while the king has utterly laid waste her lands. You may also be sure that she is the best lady in the world, the fairest and the most honorable. And you should know that the duke’s kinsmen have lost a great deal through his death, so it is right and just that the king should give back to them a large measure of their losses, according to what they are, so that he may win their love. “On the other hand, you know that the king has no wife. So I say in my judgment that the king cannot make up for her loss unless he weds her, and it is my view that he should do so to make amends and win your friendship and for the sake of all those in this kingdom who will have restitution. And when he has granted all this, he should as soon wed the duke’s elder daughter to King Lot of Orkney, 207 who is right here, and do for the lady’s other friends what he must so that each and every one will take him as their lord and lawful king. “Now you have heard my advice,” said Ulfin, “and you may say something else if you cannot agree to it.” And they answered all together, “You have spoken the boldest counsel that any man could think of. And if you dare report it just as you have said it here, and if we see that the king agrees, then we will very willingly agree to it.” And Ulfin said, “You don’t say very much at all, but if you agree to it plainly and openly, then I will report our words to the king. Here is King Lot of Orkney, about whom I have said a great deal. Let him say what he thinks.” “Never, whatever you may have said about me,” answered the king, “would I want to put off making peace.” When the others heard that, they all agreed as one to Ulfin’s counsel. [73] Then they all went straight to the tent where the king was staying. And the lady was called along with the gentlemen of her council, and when they had all gathered, they all sat down. Ulfin stood and reported the terms of the peace just as they had talked them out. And when he had said everything, he asked the barons, “Do you not advise what I have just said and agree to it?” And they all answered that they did. Ulfin turned toward the king and said to him, “Sir, what do you say? Do you agree to these gentlemen’s terms?” And the king answered, “Yes, Ulfin, if the lady and her friends agree to them and if, for my sake, King Lot will take the duke’s daughter as his wife.” King Lot said, “Sir, you will never ask me to do anything for the sake of your love and peace that I would not do very gladly.” Then, within earshot of everyone, Ulfin spoke to the man who had reported these words to the lady and asked him if he recommended this peace. And he answered like the able, learned man he was. He looked at his lady and her council, who were so sad and wretched that the water from their hearts had welled up in their eyes, and behind him they were weeping from sorrow and said through their tears that never had a lord made such an honorable peace with his liegeman. So he asked the lady and the duke’s kinsmen if they recommended the terms. The lady did not speak, but her kinsmen spoke and said all together, “Everyone should agree to them, and we do indeed. For we know that the king is such a worthy and faithful man that we put ourselves into his hands.” Thus it was sworn to on both sides, and the king took Ygraine, and King Lot of Orkney wed her daughter. The wedding of the king and Ygraine was on the thirtieth day after he had lain with her in her room. And of the lady’s elder daughter and King Lot were born Sir Gawain, Agravain, Guerrehet, Gaheriet, and Mordred.!3 And King Neutres of Garlot took the other daughter, a bastard!* named Morgan. On the advice of his 130On these sons, see below, Sommer, 96. Msupplied from Micha (72, ll. 6-7). Sommer’s text introduces a third daughter as Neutres’s wife and does not mention that Morgan was a bastard (73, 1. 23). Later, the text explicitly mentions five daughters (96, Il. 27-30), none of whom is singled out as a bastard. 208 kinsmen, Neutres put her in a nunnery to learn to read and write, and she learned so much so well that she mastered the arts, She became wonderfully skilled in an art called astrology,}® and she worked hard all the time and knew a great deal about the healing arts. For her mastery of knowledge, !® people called her Morgan the Fay. The king behaved justly toward all the other children, and he loved all the duke’s kinfolk. So the king took Ygraine, and at length it showed that she was with child. The king lay one night beside her and put his hand on her belly. He asked her by whom she was pregnant, for she could not be carrying his child: since he had married her, he had not lain with her without having it written down; and she could not be pregnant by the duke, for she had not seen him since a long time before his death. And as the king kept heaping guilt on her, she grew frightened and ashamed, so she said, weeping, “Sir, I cannot deny what you already know. For God’s sake, please take pity on me, for I will tell you things that are amazing but true, if you promise me that you will not leave me.” The king said, “Speak confidently, for I will not leave you for anything you might say.” When she heard this she was greatly cheered, and she said to him, “Sir, I will tell you amazing things.” So she told him how a man had lain with her in her husband’s shape, and he had brought two men with him who looked like the two men her husband most loved in all the world. “Thus he came into my room in front of all [74] my liegemen, and he lay with me, but I thought certainly that he was my husband. That man fathered this child with whom I am pregnant, and I know for a fact that he was conceived on the very night my husband was killed. And when the news came to me the next morning, that man was still lying in my bed. He gave me to understand that he was my husband and that his men didn’t know what had become of him, and he left right away.” When she had given her account, the king answered and said, “Dear friend, take care to hide this from every man and woman you can, for you would be shamed if anyone knew it. And I want you to know that this child you are carrying is neither yours nor mine by rights. Neither you nor I will have him, nor will we keep him near us. Rather I beg you to hand him over to the one I'll recommend you give him to, so that we will never hear of him again.” And she answered, “Sir, you may do what you will with me and all that is mine. I am at your beck and call.” The next morning the king came to Ulfin and reported to him all his and the queen’s words. When Ulfin had heard them, he said, “Now you can see clearly how honorable and faithful my lady is, for she did not dare lie to you even about such an upsetting matter. You have carried out very well what Merlin gave you to do, and he could not have it any other way.” 150On astrology/ astronomy, see ch. 2, n. 8. 16supplied from Micha (72, |. 12). Instead of clergie (“book learning”), Sommer’s text repeats fusique/fisique (“medicine,” “medical arts,” “natural science”) but goes on to mention as well her great intelligence (sens) (73, 1. 27). The Story of Merlin So the king waited until the sixth month, when Merlin had promised him to come. And he did come, and he spoke to Ulfin in private and asked him to tell him about many things, and Ulfin told him the truth as he knew it. Then he came to the king, and the king told him how he had spoken with Ygraine, how Ulfin had negotiated the peace, and how he had accepted it. And Merlin answered, “Ulfin has to a degree atoned for his sins in abetting your love-making. But I have not atoned for my sin in helping to deceive the lady about the child fathered in her womb and she does not know by whom.” The king answered, “You are so learned and so worthy that you will know how to atone for this.” And Merlin replied, “You will have to help me.” The king said that he would help him in any way he could. “And the child,” said the king, “T will see that you have him.” And Merlin said, “In the nearby country there is one of the worthiest men in your kingdom, the best endowed with all good traits. He has a wife who has just given birth to a son, and she is very worthy and faithful. This good man is not at all wealthy, so I want you to send for him and tell him that you will give him of your own wealth if he and his wife swear on saints’ relics that a child who will be brought to them will be nursed with the woman’s very milk, that they raise him as their own and give their son over to another woman to be nursed.” The king answered, “I will do just as you have said.” Then Merlin took leave and went off to Blaise. And the king had the worthy gentleman sent for, and when he had come, the king welcomed him with great gladness. He was quite amazed that the king was so happy to see him. And the king said, “Dear friend, I must reveal to you a wonder that has happened to me. You are my liegeman, and I would ask, by the faith you owe me, that you help me in what I am about to tell you and do your best to keep it hidden.” And he answered, “Sir, you could order me to do nothing I wouldn’t do [75] if I could. And if I cannot do it, I will keep it a secret.” And the king said to him, “A wondrous thing happened to me. While I was asleep, a gentleman came to me and told me that you were the worthiest man in my kingdom, the most upright and faithful to me. He told me that you have a newborn son by your wife. He also told me to ask you to take your son from your wife and give him to another woman to be nursed, and to ask your wife, for love of me, to suckle and raise a child who will be brought to her.” The good man answered, “Sir, this is a very weighty thing, for you are asking me to cut my child off and disown him, and to have him nurse on milk that is not his. Sir, I will get my wife to agree if I can, so I beg you, tell me when this child will be brought.” And the king answered that, God help him, he did not know. And the gentleman said to him, “Sir, I would do anything in the world you ordered me to do, if I could.” The Story of Merlin Then the king gave him such a handsome gift that he was dumbfounded. And he left the king and came straight to his wife and told her what the king had said. And when she heard it, it seemed a very strange thing to her. “How could I stop nursing my son,” she said, “to nurse another?” And the good man answered, “There is nothing we should not do for our lord. He has done so much for us and given us so much, and he promises to do so much, that we should do as he wills, and I want you to swear to me that you will.” And she replied, “I am yours and so is the child, so do with us as you will. And I grant what you want, for I ought in no way to be against you.” Then the gentleman was very gladdened that his wife would do whatever he wanted. He told her to find a woman who could nurse her child so that they might be ready when the other one was brought to her. This is how the worthy man spoke to his wife. And it happened that the queen was ready to give birth. The day before she gave birth, Merlin stole back to court and spoke to Ulfin. He told him that he was proud of the king because he had spoken wisely to Antor “just as I asked him to. Now tell him to go tell the queen that she will have a child tomorrow after midnight and that she must hand him over, or have someone else give him, to the first man they find on the way out of the hall.” And Ulfin said, “Then you will not speak to the king?” Merlin said, “T will not speak to him at this time.” Then Ulfin came to the king and told him what Merlin had bidden. And when the king heard him, he was very happy, and he rejoiced with great gladness. He said to Ulfin, “Will he not then speak to me?” And Ulfin answered, “No, but do as he orders.” The king then came to the queen and said to her, “Lady, I will tell you something. Believe me and do as I ask you.” And he went on, “Lady, tomorrow night, after midnight, you will give birth to the child that is inside you. And I beg, I beseech, I order you to have one of the women closest to you give him, just as soon as he is born, to the first man she will find on the way out of the hall. And let none of your maids tell anyone that you have had a child, for it would bring great shame to me and to you if anyone knew that you had borne a child so soon, and many people would say that he was not mine, nor does it seem to me that he could be.” [76] When the lady heard her husband, she said to him, “Sir, what I told you a while ago is true, for I don’t know who fathered him. I will do with him whatever you order, since I am very much ashamed of the mishap that has befallen me. But I am utterly astounded that you know the time of the birth.” And the king answered, “I beg you, please do what I have said.” “Sir, I will indeed, God willing.” Thus the king’s and queen’s meeting ended. And she waited as long as it pleased God until the next evening, after the hour of vespers, she was stricken with the birth pains. And she was in labor until the hour the king had told 209 her. She gave birth right at that hour, after midnight and before daybreak. As soon as the child had been born, she called one of her women, whom she most trusted, and said to her, “Dear friend, take this little boy and carry him to the door to the hall, and if you find a man who asks for him, hand him over to him. And you will look carefully to see who this man is.” She did just as the queen had ordered. She wrapped the child in the richest and best clothes she had and carried him to the door to the hall. When she had opened it, she saw a man who seemed very old and weak. So she asked, “What are you waiting for?” He answered, “The thing you are bringing me.” And she asked, “What kind of man are you? To whom shall I tell my lady I have given her little boy?” He replied, “That is none of your business. Just do what you have been ordered to do.” And she held the child out to him, and he took it. What became of him after he took the child she never knew. She came straight back to her lady and told her that she had handed the child over to an old man “but nevertheless, I do not know who he is.” And the queen began to weep because she was filled with great sorrow. The man to whom she had given up her child went off as fast as he could to Antor, and he found him just as he was leaving to go hear Mass. He had taken on the likeness of an old man, so he called Antor and said to him, “Antor, I want to talk to you.” And Antor looked at him, and he seemed to be a wonderfully worthy gentleman, so he said to him, “Sir, I would very gladly speak with you.” “I bring you a little boy, and I bid you have him nursed in as loving a way as if he were your own. You can be sure that if you do this, many good things will happen to you and your children, such that if anyone told you now what they were, you would not believe it.” “Is this the child the king asked me to have my wife nurse,” asked Antor, “the one I disowned my own son for?” And he answered, “In truth, it is he. And the king and all worthy gentlemen and noble ladies should entreat you to take him, just as I do myself. You can be sure that my entreaty is not worth less than a wealthy man’s.” Then Antor took the child and saw that he was most handsome, and he asked him if he had been baptized. He answered that he had not been and begged him to have him baptized at once in that church. And Antor said that he would. Then he took him and asked the man who had handed him over to him, “What do you want his name to be?” And he answered, “If you want to have him baptized as I would have it, his name will be Arthur. Now I am going away, for I have nothing more to do here. You can be sure that great good will come to you because of this, and after you and your wife have had this child for just a little while, you will not know whether you love him or your own son better.” And Antor asked him, “Who shall I tell the king gave him to me?” He answered, “You won’t know any more about me now.” [77] 210 Then each went his own way. And Antor had the child baptized. Then he took him to his wife and said to her, “Lady, this is the child I have asked you to care for.” “He is very welcome indeed,” she said. She asked him whether he had been baptized, and he said he had and that his name was Arthur. Then the lady took him and nursed him, and she put her own little boy in the care of another woman. King Uther Pendragon held the land for a long time afterwards. At length he happened to fall gravely ill with a crippling of his hands and feet, and then upheavals broke out in many places throughout the land, and the rebels!” were so bothersome to him that he appealed to his barons. His barons advised him to strike back against them if he could. But the king then entreated them, for God's sake and for love of him, to go together without him, as worthy liegemen should do for their lord, and they said that they would very willingly do so. So they went and found the king’s foes, but they saw that they had already drawn much of the land over to their side. The king’s men moved as a body against them, but they were an army without a leader, so they were overwhelmed and the king lost many of his liegemen. When the news that his men had been routed was brought to the king, he was most distraught. Those who had got away from the battle came straight to him, but the numbers of those who won had grown many times. And the Saxons who had been left in the land in a wretched state all drew together and greatly strengthened their ranks. And Merlin, who knew all these things, went straight to Uther Pendragon, who was dreadfully weakened by his illness, and his time had almost run out. When the king found out that Merlin had come, he was very glad, and thought in his heart that he would yet have solace. And Merlin came straight to him, and the king turned a cheerful face to him. Merlin said to him, “Sir, you are very frightened.” And the king answered, “That is right, for you well know that my own liegemen, without my taking notice of them, have destroyed my kingdom and killed my people and routed them in battle.” And Merlin replied, “Now you can see that no one is worth anything without a good overlord.” “For God’s sake, Merlin,” said the king, “advise me as to what to do!” “I will tell you something meant for you alone that I want you to believe. Have your army called together. And when they are all gathered, have yourself put on a horsedrawn litter and go out to fight your foes. I can assure you that you will defeat them. And after you have won the battle, you will understand what it means to say that a land without an overlord is worth less than a land that has one. When you have done that, in the name of God and for your soul’s sake, share your wealth, for I want you to know that you will not have long to live. “You must understand this: people who have great wealth and die with it whole cannot then share it to save their souls, for it is no longer theirs, but belongs to those Mmplicit in Micha’s text (77, ll. 4~5). In Sommer, the Saxons are responsible for the initial threats (77, 1. 8). The Story of Merlin left behind after them, who are hardly at all charitable toward those who have depended on them.!§ It would be better [78] for a wealthy man to have had nothing than not to share his gifts, as it is fitting, in this earthly life. The wealth and favors that people have in this world are a hindrance to the soul only if they do not share them as they should. And since you know beforehand that you are to die, you must share them well and in such a way that you will not lose the bliss of the other world. For happiness in this world is worthless, and I will tell you why in a single word: in this world there is no happiness that does not come to an end, but the joys you earn in the other world cannot end or grow wearisome or turn bad. And whatever people have in this mortal world, God allows them to have it in order to try them for the next world. “Now, it is therefore fitting that, if a man wishes to be sensible with the things God has lent him, he should strive for everlasting life. And you, who have had so many of the good things in this world, what have you done for Our Lord, who has graciously lent them to you? I have loved you a great deal, and I still do, but you should know that no one can or should love you better than you yourself, and no one can hate you more than you yourself.!9 I tell you truly that, after you have won this battle, you cannot live for very long.*° And I want you to know that all the works a man does in his lifetime cannot be better for him than a good end. If you had done all the good things in the world and came to a bad end, you would be at risk of losing everything, and if you had done many evil things and came to a good end, you would have forgiveness. I want you to know that you cannot take anything away from this world but honor and works of charity. And because I know that there can be no honor without good works and no charity without honor, I have explained to you where you are and what you must do. “You know that Ygraine your wife is dead and you carinot have another, so your land will be left without an heir because you must strive to do the right thing. I will go away, for I have nothing more to do here, but please tell Ulfin to believe me when he must.” And the king said to Merlin, “You said dreadful things to me when you told me that I would defeat my enemies and what I must do to repay Our Lord.” Merlin answered, “Only to a good end. I am going away, but I implore you to keep in mind what I have said would happen to you after your battle.” The king then asked for news of the little boy he had taken away, and Merlin said to him, “You needn't ask 18Thus Sommer’s text (77, 1. 37-38). In Micha, and the majority of manuscripts he consulted, it is a question of a single survivor, who is explicitly identified with Satan (78, Il. 18-19): ainz est a celui qui nul bien n’en laisse faire: et tu saiches que ce est li deables (“rather it belongs to the one who allows no good to be done with it—you may know for a fact that this is the devil”). 19supplied from Micha (78, Il. 38-40). Sommer’s text substitutes mais bien saces que nus ne se puet miex hounir que li homs but misme (78, ll. 13-14): “but you should know that no one can bring shame to a man better than he himself.” 20Supplied from Micha (79, Il. 40-42); the sentence is not in Sommer’s text. The Story of Merlin anything about that, but I will tell you that the child is handsome and big and well fed.” The king asked Merlin, “Will I ever see you again?” And Merlin said, “Yes, one more time.” So Merlin left the king. And the king had his men-atarms summoned and said that he would go against the enemy. When his army had gathered, he had himself put on a litter, and he moved out with his troops. And the others moved against them forthwith and fought with the king’s army, and the king’s men routed them thanks to the king’s encouragement. So the victory was the king’s, and his land was then left in peace. And the king recalled what Merlin had told him, so he went back to Logres. When he had got there, he called for his hoards and his treasures and then sent for his worthy gentlemen and noble ladies and the poorest people in his kingdom, and he gave them of his wealth and did acts of charity. And what was left over he distributed according to the counsel and will [79] of the ministers of Holy Church and his confessors. Thus did the king share what belonged to him, and there was none of his wealth that he could think of that he did not give away on God’s behalf because of the advice Merlin had given him. And he humbled himself so meekly before God and His ministers that all of his people were moved to tears. So he was for some time, when at length his illness grew more painful. And his people gathered in Logres, because they were distraught over his death, for they saw plainly that he would have to die; and he was so ill and weakened that he could not talk and had not spoken for three days. Then to the town came Merlin, who knew all these things. And when the gentlemen of the land saw him, they said, “Merlin, now the king has died whom you loved so much.” And Merlin answered, “You are not saying it right. No one dies who has come to such a good end as he has. In fact, he is not even dead yet.” They said that he would never speak, but Merlin said he would indeed, if it was God’s will. “Come with me now and I will soon have him talking to you.” They said that it would be the greatest wonder in the world, so they went with Merlin to the room where the king lay, and they had all the windows opened. The king looked at Merlin, and when he had caught sight of him, he turned toward him as best he could and gave a look of recognition. And Merlin said to the barons who were there and to the prelates of Holy Church, “Anyone who wishes to hear the last words the king will speak, let him draw near.” They all asked him, “How do you think you'll get him to speak?” And he answered, “You will see.” Merlin then turned around to the head of the king’s bed and whispered quietly in his ear, “You have come to a very beautiful end, if your conscience is as your looks say it is. And I tell you that your son will be head of your kingdom after you through the power of Jesus Christ, and he will perfect the Round Table you have founded.” 211 When the king heard this, he pulled toward him and said, “For God's sake, bid him pray*! to Jesus Christ for me.” Then Merlin said to those who were there, “Now you have heard what you did not believe could be. And you may be sure that these are the last words the king will ever say.” Then Merlin went away along with all the others, who had been amazed that the king had spoken, and not even one of them could hear what the king had said except Merlin. The bishops and archbishops held for him the most beautiful service they knew how. And the next day, after the king had been buried, all the barons gathered and took counsel as to how the kingdom would be ruled, but they could never come to terms. Then they said by common agreement that they would seek Merlin’s advice, for he was a trustworthy counselor, and they had never heard it said that he had misguided them. So they sent for him. And when he had come before them, they said to him, “Merlin, we know very well that you are very learned, and you always loved the king. The land is left without an heir, and a land without an overlord is almost worthless. Therefore, we beg you for God’s sake to help us choose a king who may rule the kingdom for the good of Holy Church and the welfare of the people.” Merlin said, “I am not one who should give advice in this matter or choose a man to rule. But if you are willing to agree [80] with my view, I will tell you; and if I do not speak well, then do not agree with what I say.” They said, “God grant that we bring about what is good and profitable for the people.” And Merlin said, “I have greatly loved this kingdom and all who are in it. If I said that you should choose a certain one I know about who is capable, I would be taken at my word and he would straightway be king. But a most wondrous thing has happened to you, if you would only recognize it: the king died two weeks after St. Martin’s day,?* and it is not long before Christmas. If you believe me, I will give you then good and faithful counsel, following the will of God and following reason.” They answered all of a voice, “We will do what you wish.” - And he said to them, “You are aware that the holy day is coming when He who is Lord of all things was born. And I stand as your pledge, if you pray to Him and have the people one and all do the same,° since they need a rightful lord and ruler, that God, in His mercy and His great and noble goodness, on that feast day that is called Christmas, when He condescended to be born, will choose for us as 2lsupplied from Micha (79, |. 51). Sommer’s text has prieche (79, 1. 25): “preach.” 22The feast of St. Martin of Tours is observed November 11. Micha’s text, in agreement with the manuscripts he consulted, has au cinquieme jor (“on the fifth day” [80, 1. 28]) and not des la quinzaine saint martin (“on the fifteenth [day] of St. Martin,” Le., a fortnight afterward [Sommer, 80, I. 6]). 23supplied from Micha (80, Il. 35-36). Sommer’s text, which appears to be somewhat confused, reads se vous le faites otroier al pueple communaument quil attendront iusques dont que diex vous conseillera se chascuns prie (80, Il. 10-12): “if you allow the people one and all to wait until then, when God will give you counsel, if each one prays.” 212 king and lord;24 just as truly as He did condescend to be born that day and is King of Kings and Lord of the whole world, he will be a man by whom the people will be ruled according to His will. And he will be chosen in such a way that they will themselves see and recognize that he is king by God’s choice and no one else’s. And you should know that if you do as I have said, you will see a sign that he is the choice of Jesus Christ.” Then they all said one to another, “This is the best counsel anyone could have given us.” So they agreed to it. Then they asked the bishops to have orders sent out to the common folk and throughout all of Holy Church that everyone will make prayers to God and swear to keep the commandments of Holy Church and all that God manifests therein. This is how they agreed to Merlin’s counsel. And Merlin took leave of them, and they entreated him to come back to them, if he would, so that they might know whether what he had told them was true. But Merlin said, “You will not see me until after the king has been chosen.” So Merlin left them and went straight to Blaise. He told him these things which were yet to come. And it is because he told it to Blaise that we still know it. Then the barons and the prelates of Holy Church sent word out that all the gentry in the kingdom should come to Logres at Christmas. And Antor had raised the child named Arthur until he reached the age of sixteen, and he was handsome and big, and he had had no other milk than that of Antor’s wife, while her own son had been nursed by a peasant girl. And Antor did not know which he loved better, Arthur or his own son. He had never called Arthur anything but his son, and Arthur truly thought that he was. Antor had had his own son, Kay, knighted on All Saints’ Day, and he took him to Logres® with him, and Arthur, too. 5. The Youth of King Arthur; the Sword in the Stone.’ On Christmas Eve, all the clergy in the kingdom and all the barons of worth were gathered in Logres, for they had very well sent out the orders and done all else Merlin had told them to do. After they had all come, they lived very humbly and [81] very uprightly, and they waited there for the midnight Mass, and they prayed Our Lord to give them an overlord who was worthy to uphold the religion of Christendom. But there were many men who said that they were mad to believe that Our Lord meant to choose their king. As they were talking, they heard the bells ringing for the first Mass of the day, so they went to the service. And 24S upplied from Micha (80,1. 41). Sommer’s text, losing sight of the fact that God is the subject of the verb, reads que vous puissies auoir (80, 1. 16): “that you will have.” 25supplied from Micha (81, 1. 22). Here (80, 1. 38) and elsewhere in this vicinity, Sommer’s text replaces Logres with London. 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 80-101. The Story of Merlin when they had all come together, a holy man from the countryside got ready to sing the Mass. But before he began the service, he spoke to the people and said to them, “You are gathered here for three things that are for your welfare, and I'll tell you what they are: to save your souls, first and foremost, to bring honor to your lives;2 and to see the wonders and amazing displays of His might that Our Lord will bring about among you this day, if it is His will to give you a king and leader to safeguard and keep Holy Church and to uphold all folk. We are gathered here to choose a king, but we don’t know which man would be best for our well-being, and we cannot know this by ourselves, so let us pray the King of Kings to show us His will as truly as He was born this day, and this each one of us will pray as best we know how.” They did just as the good man had bidden them, and he went on to sing the Mass. And after he had sung as far as the offertory, certain people went to the open space outside the church. Dawn had broken, and they saw a huge stone in front of the church, and they could not tell what kind of rock it was. In the middle of the stone was an iron anvil at least half a foot high, and a sword was sticking through the middle of the anvil down into the rock. When those who had left the church saw it, they were amazed, so they ran to the archbishop and told him. When he had heard it, he took some holy water, went to the stone, and sprinkled it with the water. Then he leaned down and saw on the stone writing that was all of gold, and he read it. The writing said that the one who pulled this sword out would be king of the land by the choice of Jesus Christ. And when he had read the writing, he told the people. Then the stone was entrusted to ten worthy knights to be guarded, and everyone said that God had given them a great sign. And they went back inside the church to hear Mass, and they thanked Our Lord. When the good man had come before the altar, he turned toward the people and said to them, “My dear lords, now you can see that there is something good among us, since by your prayers and entreaties Our Lord has given you a sign. And I beseech you, by all wonders that Our Lord has wrought on earth, that no one go against God’s choice for any high rank or wealth that God may have endowed him with. For Our Lord who has given us a sign will show us the way to do the rest.” Then the worthy archbishop sang his Mass. And when he had sung all of it, they went to the stone, and each one asked the other who should try it first. Then they all agreed that no one would try it unless the ministers of Holy Church allowed it. With these words, there was a very great uproar, [82] because the highest-born and wealthiest men who had the strength to do so said that they would try it first. Many a word was then spoken that must not be remembered or set down. And the archbishop spoke so loudly that they all could hear him, and said, “My lords, you are not so wise or so worthy as I thought. I wantyou to know this: that Our Lord, 2supplied from Micha (82, Il. 17-18). The second is missing in Sommer’s text (81, 1. 9). The Story of Merlin who? knows and sees all these things, has! chosen one man, but we do not know who he is. I can tell you for the truth that wealth and high rank and nobility will have nothing to do with it, but only the will of Jesus Christ. And I have such trust in Him that, if? the one who is to draw the sword out were not yet born, it would never be drawn out until he was born and he himself drew it out.” The worthy nobles and the learned men were all of one mind that he spoke the truth, and they swore to abide by the agreement they had made with the bishop. And when he heard this, he was very glad, and he wept with feeling. And he said to them, “I mean for you all to know that I will do my utmost to work according to the will of Jesus Christ for the welfare of Christendom, so that I will have no blame, God willing.” He then showed the people the great wonder that Our Lord had wrought for them as a sign that there would be a true election of a king, “for when Our Lord established law and order on the earth, He set them in the sword. The rule that was over the laity must come from a layman and must be by the sword, and the sword® was, at the beginning of the three orders, entrusted to knighthood’ to safeguard Holy Church and uphold true law and order. And by this sword Our Lord has ordained for us this election. “You can all be sure that He has kept in His sight the one He wills to rule. High-ranking men should not boast that the sword will be drawn out by wealth or pride, but the poor should not be upset if the highborn try it before they do, for it is fitting that the wealthy should go first. There is no one here who would not, if he knew how, choose the worthiest one among us to make him king.” They said all of one voice that they would agree to whatever he advised. The archbishop went on to sing a solemn Mass. After it was sung he chose two hundred and fifty of the worthiest gentlemen he knew of, and he had them try pulling the sword out, but it was all for nothing. When they had tried it, he then ordered the others to put themselves to the test. Then they all tried it one after the other, but there was no one who could ever move that sword. They then entrusted ten worthy knights to guard it, and they were told to let anyone undertake the test who wanted to and to watch carefully to see the one who would draw the sword out. The sword held fast for a week, when all the barons went to High Mass on the Feast of the Circumcision.§ And the archbishop said to them, “My lords, I told you so: you would all in time come to try pulling the sword out. Now you can truly understand that no man will ever draw it out but the one whom Our Lord wills to be king.” 3supplied from Micha (84, 1. 8), not in Sommer’s text (82, 1.5). 4Supplied from Micha (84, 1. 9), not in Sommer’s text (82, 1. 6). 5Supplied from Micha (84, |. 13), not in Sommer’s text (82, 1. 8). ®The text beginning “from a layman” supplied from Micha (84, Il. 34-35); not in Sommer (82, 1. 17). 7Supplied from Micha (84, 1]. 35): au chevalier (“to the knight”); not in Sommer’s text (82, I. 18). 8The iour des estraignes (82, |. 25), that is, New Year’s Day. PAG} And they all said that they would not leave the town before knowing on whom Our Lord wanted to bestow His grace. When Mass had been sung, all the barons went to their lodgings to eat. After eating, the knights went jousting, as they usually did, outside the town, and many people went out to see [83] the games. When the knights had fought for a long time, they gave their shields to their serving men and began to joust again. And they fought among themselves so hard that a free-for-all broke out, and everyone from the town, armed and unarmed, ran there. Antor’s son Kay, who had been knighted earlier, on All Saints’ Day, called his brother Arthur and said to him, “Go get me my sword at our lodging.” Arthur was always willing to be helpful, so he answered, “Very gladly!” He then spurred his horse and rode to their lodging. He looked for his brother’s sword or another one, but he could not find any, because the lady of the house had hidden them all in her room and gone off to see the fighting with the other ladies. When Arthur saw that he could not find a sword, he turned back and went by the church where the stone was. The thought came to him that he had never tried the test, and if he could pull the sword out he would take it to his brother. So he came straight back, and, still on horseback, he took the sword by the hilt, drew it out, and covered it with the bottom of his tunic. But the men who were to guard the sword had run to the melee. Kay ran up to meet his brother and asked him for his sword. He answered that he could not find it, but that he had brought him another, so he gave him the sword from the anvil. Kay asked him where he had found it, and he told him that it was the sword from the stone. Kay took it and hid it under his tunic, and went looking for his father. When he found him, he said to him, “Sir, I will be king. Here is the sword from the stone.” When his father saw it, he was thunderstruck, and he asked him how he had got it. Kay answered that he had taken it out of the stone. When Antor heard this, he did not believe him, but said to him that he knew very well that he was lying about it. Then they both went to the church, and the lad followed after them. Antor said to his son, “Dear son, don’t lie to me. Tell me how you came to have this sword. If you lie to me, I'll know it and I will not love you for it.” And he answered, for he was very much ashamed, “T won’t lie to you. My brother Arthur brought it to me when I told him to bring me mine, but I do not know how he got it.” When Antor heard this, he said to him, “Give it to me, for you have no right to it.” And Kay gave it to him. Antor looked around and saw Arthur. He called to him and said, “Come here, dear son. Take this sword and put it back where you took it.” He took it and put it into the anvil, and it held there just as fast as before. Antor ordered his son Kay to take it, and he leaned down, but could not get it out. Then Antor went into the church and called both of them inside. ea He took Arthur in his arms and said to him, “Sir, if I could see to it that you were king, what advantage would there be for me?” And Arthur answered, “Sir, I cannot have that or any other worthwhile thing and not have you as my lord, for you are my father.” Antor answered him, “I am your father for having raised you, but in truth I do not know who sired you or who your mother was.” When Arthur heard the man he believed to be his father disown him as his son, he was grief-stricken and began to weep. And he said, “Dear Lord God, how shall I ever have anything when I am fatherless?” Antor said to him, “Sir, you are not fatherless, for you must have been sired by a father. Now, dear [84] sir, if Our Lord means you to have His grace, and if I help you become king, what advantage will there be for me?” And Arthur said, “Sir, whatever you please.” Then Antor told him about the favor he had done for him and how he had raised him. He had his own son taken away from his mother and given to another woman to be nursed, while Arthur had his wife’s milk. “Thus you should return the favor to me and my son, for never was a child reared more lovingly than I have reared you. So I entreat you, if God bestows this grace on you, and if I can help you out, please reward my son.” And Arthur said, “I beg you not to disown me as your son, for I would not know where else to go. And if God grants me this honor, I will give you anything you ask.” Antor said, “I will not ask you for any of your land. I ask only that my son Kay be your seneschal for as long as he lives and that he never lose his stewardship for anything he might do to any man or woman of your land or to you yourself. If he is wicked and foolish, you will have to bear with him, for his ways of thinking and behaving must have come to him from the peasant girl who nursed him. So that you might be reared properly, he lost his birthright. This is why you must humor him more than others. So I beg you, please give him what I ask.” Arthur said, “I very willingly grant you this.” Then they took him to the altar, and he swore that he would faithfully keep his word. And when he had so.sworn, they came back out in front of the church. By then the melee had come to an end, and the barons came back to the church to hear vespers. Antor then called his friends and told them that Arthur had drawn the sword out, and they told the archbishop. “Sir, this is one of my sons,” said Antor. “He is not a knight, but he begs me to let him try the test of this sword. Please call the barons together.” And he did. Then they all gathered at the stone. And when they had come together, Antor ordered Arthur to take the sword and give it to the archbishop, and he did. And when the archbishop saw this, he took him in his arms and began to sing the Te Deum very loudly. Then they took him into the church. The barons who had seen it were most upset and distraught, and they said it could not be that an upstart boy was their king. But the archbishop grew angry and said, “Our Lord knows better than we what everyone is!” The Story of Merlin Antor and his kinsmen stood by Arthur, and the common folk did too, but the barons were against him. Then the archbishop made a bold speech. “If everyone in this world,” he said, “wished to stand against this election and God alone wanted it to be, it would be.? And I will show you what faith I have in God.” Then the archbishop said to Arthur, “Dear son, go put the sword back into the stone.” And he took it in plain sight of all, and after he had put it back, the archbishop spoke and said, “Never has a more perfect election been carried out or witnessed. Now go, my wealthy lords, and see if you can pull it out again.” And they went and tried the test [85] one after the other, but they could not draw it out. And the archbishop said, “Anyone who wants to go against the will of God is a madman. Now you understand the will of the Lord God!” And they answered, “Sir, we do not go against His will, but it is very strange to us that a mere boy should be lord Over us.” The archbishop said to them, “The One who chose him knows him better than we do and better than we know ourselves.” The barons begged the archbishop to leave the sword in the stone until Candlemas, when many others might try it who had not yet done so, and the archbishop allowed it. So the sword stayed there until Candlemas. Then the people were all gathered, and all who wanted underwent the test. When they had all tried it, the archbishop said, “It would be right for you to do the will of Jesus Christ. Go, dear son Arthur. If Our Lord wills you to be king and guardian of this people, show us.” And he went forward and pulled out the sword and gave it to the archbishop. When they saw it, the common folk wept for joy, and they all asked, “Is there anyone who means to go against this election?” And the barons answered, “Sir, we beg you, please leave the sword until Easter. If between now and then no one but he draws it out, we will submit to him as you have ordered. And if you mean to do otherwise, then each of us will do the best he can.” The archbishop said to them, “Will you all submit to him wholeheartedly if I let it go until Easter and postpone crowning him?” And they all said together that they would and that he could always do with the kingdom what he wanted. And the archbishop said, “Arthur, brother, put the sword back, for, God willing, you will not go without the favor God has promised you.” He went forward and put the sword back. And when it was back in its place, it held just as fast as it ever had. And the archbishop, who had taken the young man under his own Care, said to him, “You can be sure that you will be king and lord over this people. Put your heart and mind always to being a worthy man. And from now on, keep your eye on people and choose some with whom you want to share your private thoughts and words. Give out your °The main clause is supplied from Micha (87, |. 49), not in Sommer’s text (84, 1. 35). The Story of Merlin honors and choose those who will be of your household, Just as though you were already king, for you will surely be king, with God’s help.”!° And Arthur answered, “Sir, I entrust myself and everything God gives me to the care and counsel of Holy Church. Please, you be the one to choose and watch over such people as will be best for me in doing God’s will for the welfare of Christendom, and please call my father into your confidence.” Then the archbishop called Antor and told him about the seemly words that Arthur had spoken. They chose all such!! counsellors as he wanted, and they made Kay steward of the land, as the archbishop advised. So things were until Easter. When Eastertide came, everyone came together in Logres on Easter Eve. And the archbishop called them all into his great hall for a meeting. When they had gathered, he told them what he saw the will [86] of Jesus Christ to be, and it was that the lad should have the kingdom; and he told them about the good qualities he had seen in him since he had known him. “We must not be against the will of God,” he said. And the barons answered, “It is very distressing to us that such a young man, and one of such low birth, will be our overlord.” And the archbishop said to them, “You are not good Christians if you mean to go against the will of Jesus Christ.” They answered, “Sir, we do not mean to go against the will of Our Lord. But please do in part what we want. You have seen this lad to be upstanding and learned in many things. We have not got to know him, and we know nothing about him or his ways. There is someone among us who would recognize whether or not he will be worthy.” The archbishop replied, “Do you then mean for us to postpone proclaiming his election and crowning him?” They said, “Sir, in truth we would like to postpone the election until tomorrow. And if he is not such that he should not be elected king, we ask you to put off his coronation until Whitsuntide. And we beg you to do it.” And the archbishop answered, “I would not lose your allegiance for such a thing.” So they left this meeting. And the next morning, after Mass, they came back to the election of the lad, and he drew the sword out again just as he had done other times. And they took him and raised him up and recognized him as their overlord. Then they all begged him to put the sword back and afterwards to speak to them, and he said he would do this very willingly, and there was nothing they could ask him to do that, unless it was to his dishonor, he would refuse them. Then he put the sword back, and the barons took him into the church for a meeting. And they said, “Sir, we know well, and we see it, that Our Lord wills you to be lord over us, and since that is His will, itis ours also. So we now hold, and will hold, you to be our overlord, and from you we wish to hold our fiefs and what is ours by birthright and the honors that are ours. So 10Wording after “household” supplied from Micha (88, Il. 3637), not in Sommer’s text (85, |. 29). supplied from Micha (88, |. 45); Sommer’s text specifies two (85, 1. 35). 21D we bid you as our lord, please put off your coronation until Whitsuntide, and you will not be any the less lord over us and this kingdom. And we mean you to answer according to your will and without counsel from anyone.” And Arthur said to them, “From what you say, I am to accept your homage and bestow honors on you, and you will hold everything from me. I cannot do this, nor should I. For I cannot bestow honors on you or anyone else, nor can I rule, before I come into my own honor. You tell me that I am to be lord of the kingdom, but that cannot be before I am anointed and given the crown and the honors of the empire. But the delay you request [87] before the coronation I will grant very gladly, for I do not mean to have anointment or honors but by God’s will and yours.” Then the barons said among themselves, “If this one lives long enough, he will be very wise and reasonable, and he has answered us very well.” Then they said to him, “Sir, it would be good for you to be anointed and crowned on Whitsunday.” And he said that he was very willing to do what they wanted. Thus was the delay until Whitsunday agreed upon, and in the meantime they would all submit to the archbishop. Then they had everything of worth brought out, all kingly things and things that a man might lust after or love, to test whether his heart was greedy or grasping. And he asked those who were close to him the value of each thing, and he followed their counsel. When he had accepted everything of worth they had, he gave it all out just as the book tells it. He gave horses to the good knights, and to those who were light-hearted, cheerful, and in love, he gave jewels and coins and silver. As for worthy gentlefolk and the learned, he asked people from their countries what they liked best, and he gave it to them. Thus he shared the gifts bestowed on him by those who wanted to test what kind of man he was. And when they saw that he had borne himself so well, there were none who did not esteem him in their hearts. They all whispered behind their hands that he was surely of high birth, for they found no greed in him: as soon as anything of worth came his way, he put it to good use, and all his gifts were fair according to what each one deserved. This is how they tested Arthur, and in no way could they find any bad traits in him. So they waited until Whitsuntide. Then all the barons gathered at Logres, and all who wanted tried the sword-test, but no one could draw it out. And the archbishop had made the crown ready for the coronation. On Whitsun Eve, following everyone's wholehearted counsel and all the barons’ agreement, the archbishop made Arthur a knight. And Arthur kept watch in the church all that night until day broke the next morming. When the barons had come to the main church, the archbishop spoke to them and said, “My lords, here is a worthy knight whom Our Lord has chosen for us in the election you have witnessed again and again since Christmas. Here are the kingly raiment and the crown. Now, in this royal meeting with you, I want to know whether there is any of you who means to oppose the election. If so, let him speak.” 216 Then they all answered aloud, “We agree to it, and we wish him to be crowned, in the name of God! In case there are any among us toward whom he has any ill will because they have been against his election and coronation until now, may he forgive them all together at one time!” They all knelt down and cried for his mercy. And Arthur wept with deep feeling and knelt down to them and said to them in his loudest voice, “I earnestly and faithfully forgive you all, and I pray the Lord who has willed to bestow this honor on me that He may forgive you.” They then rose in a body and took Arthur in their arms and led him to the place where the kingly raiment was, and they attired him with it. And when he was dressed, the archbishop was ready to sing Mass. And [88] he said to him, “Arthur, go get the sword— the justice with which you will defend Holy Church and Christendom in every way as best you can.” Then the procession went to the stone. And when they had come there, the archbishop said, “Arthur, if you are willing to swear and promise all the saints that you will safeguard the rights of Holy Church, keep lawful order and peace in the land, give help to the defenseless as best you can, and uphold all rights, feudal obligations, and lawful rule, then step forward and take the sword with which Our Lord has shown that you are His elect.” When Arthur heard this, he wept for joy, and many others wept for him. And he said, “As truly as God is Lord of all things, may He give me the strength and the might to do what is right and to uphold all the things that you have told me and I have heard.” He went down on his knees and took the sword in both his hands. He raised it out from the anvil as easily as if the sword had not been held fast by anything. He bore the sword upright in his hands, and they took him to the altar and set him down there. And when he was seated, they anointed him and crowned him and did everything that must be done to a king. And when he was crowned and the Mass sung, they all left the church; and when they looked, they did not see the stone, nor did they find out what had become of it. This is how Arthur was made king, and he held the land and the kingdom of Logres in peace for a long time.!* At length he sent word one day throughout his land that he would hold a high court. To that court came King Lot of Orkney, who held the land of Loonois and part of the land of Orkney. He came with five hundred knights of great worthiness. From another direction came King Urien of the land of Gorre. He was a young knight of great worth, and he came with five hundred others. Afterwards came King Neutres of Garlot, who had married Arthur’s sister, with seven hundred knights. After that came King Caradoc Shortarm, who was one of the knights of the Round Table. He brought six hundred knights. After that came King Aguisant, very well fitted out, who was king of Scotland. He 12The Merlin proper attributed to Robert de Boron ends at this point, where the so-called Merlin Continuation (the remainder of Sommer’s vol. 2) begins as a link to the Prose Lancelot. Micha’s text continues with a “bridge” linking the prose Merlin to the Didot-Perceval (91, ll. 59-69), an anonymous prose Perceval romance that is not part of the Vulgate Cycle. The Story of Merlin was a young knight and skillful at arms, and he brought five hundred knights. And when they had all come together, King Arthur gave them a fitting welcome and showed that he was very glad to see them. Because they were men of high estate, he bestowed on them beautiful gifts and costly jewels that he had stored up for them beforehand. When the barons saw the rich gifts and costly jewels that King Arthur was giving them, they looked on him with very great scorn. Some who were there said that they were mad to have made such a lowborn man king and lord over them and so wealthy a land as the kingdom of Logres, and they said that they would not tolerate him at all. They refused the gifts that the king meant them to have, so that he would understand that they did not take him for a king and they wanted him to leave the land forthwith and make sure that they never saw him again. If he did not leave the country, they promised him death if they could get their hands on him. When King Arthur heard these threats, he withdrew from the main [89] stronghold of Carlion, where they were, for he was very much afraid of their treason. And the other kings stayed in the town of Carlion for two weeks, but no one did any wrong to anyone else. Then it happened that Merlin came into the town and showed himself to all the people, for he meant them all to recognize him. When the barons heard that Merlin had come, they sent word to him to come before them, and he came there all happy and smiling. And when they saw him coming, they all rose to meet him and were very glad to see him. They took him to a great hall that sat beside the River Thames, and when the barons were gathered there, they spoke to Merlin and asked him what he thought of the new king whom the archbishop had crowned without their leave or the assent of the common folk of the land. “To be sure, dear lords,” said Merlin, “he did well, and it was the right thing, for you should know in truth that he is higher-born than any of us. He is not the son of Antor or the brother of Kay, whom he has made steward over everything but food.” “What?” said the barons. “Merlin, what you are telling us now troubles us more than we were before.” “I tell you,” said Merlin, “that you should send for King Arthur. You will call him to come before you by right of truce. You will also summon Ulfin, who was counsellor to King Uther Pendragon, and Antor, who raised King Arthur. Then you will hear the truth about what happened from beginning to end. You can be sure that I would not lie to you about anything.” And the barons said that they would gladly send for King Arthur and that they would grant him safe conduct, “since you have asked us to. But who will go get him for us?” They sent Bretel on Merlin’s advice, and they entrusted him with the message. And Merlin told him to tell the king that he should bring along with him the archbishop of Brice and the archbishop of Logres. Bretel answered that he would very gladly tell him. Right away Bretel left and came straight to the king and told him everything just as it had been entrusted to him. And the king said that he would go very willingly. Then Bretel left and came straight to Ulfin’s lodging and told him that the barons and Merlin were summoning him. The Story of Merlin When Ulfin heard that Merlin had come, he was very happy and filled with joy, for he knew then that the truth about the king would be disclosed and spread far and wide. So he went to the great hall. He and Merlin were very glad to see each other, and they talked just between themselves about many things. Very soon King Arthur came with the archbishop of Brice and Antor, and King Arthur had put on a good, short hauberk over his tunic before he left the keep in the main stronghold. When they had come before the barons, they found a great many other people who had come to hear what Merlin would say publicly. When the barons saw King Arthur coming, they got up to meet him because he was the anointed king and for love of the archbishop of Brice, a holy man who led a good life. Then everyone sat down but the archbishop, who continued to stand and spoke to them thus: “My dear lords, I want to convince you for God’s sake to take pity on Christendom, lest it fall into decline because of you and be put to shame, for that would be a great loss! Every one of you is just a man, and the wealthy man will die soon enough just like the poorest of this town, if it is God's will.” “Sir,” said the [90] barons, “wait awhile until we have spoken to Merlin. Then you can take up your speech again. For Merlin has told us something that has bewildered us more than we were when we came here.” And the archbishop said that he would yield to them, so he sat down. And Merlin rose to his feet and said to them, “My dear lords, I had started to tell you whose son King Arthur was. You may know for a fact that he was the son of King Uther Pendragon, who fathered him with Queen Ygraine on the very night her husband was killed on the bridge when he stormed King Uther Pendragon’s army. The next morning, when King Uther Pendragon went back to his army, I asked him for the child he had sired with the duchess in return for the favors and services I had done him. And he agreed to have him handed over to me as soon as he was born. He had me write this down in a letter bearing his seal. Ulfin still has it, and he himself was witness to the contract, as he can testify. “And when it happened afterwards that the king married Ygraine, she grew very big with the child the king had sired in her before they were wed. When the king found out that she was with child, he told her that it was not his or the duke’s, for it couldn’t be. The lady was taken aback, and she admitted that the child had been conceived on the night the duke was killed. When the king heard that she had disclosed the truth to him, he loved her more for it than he had before, because he saw her great faithfulness. “And he said to her, ‘Lady, the child is therefore not mine, so it would not be right for him to inherit this land or be king after I die. This is why I ask you, as you hold me dear, that as soon as he is born, please have him handed over to the first man who will be found on the steps to the great hall.’ And the lady swore to him that she would very gladly do this, since he wanted it to be so, and she would have it done just as he had set it out, for she did not wish in any way to be at odds with him. “T tell you the truth. The child was given over to me on the very night he was born. And as soon as I had him, I Za7 went straight to this worthy man named Antor. I entrusted the child to him and told him to have him nursed by his own wife, who had a little boy of her own barely half a year old, and he did it. And he made his own son Kay go to another woman for nursing. So Kay, Arthur's brother, was torn from his mother’s breast,!* for Arthur nursed at the breast of Antor’s wife. For King Uther Pendragon, before the child was brought to him, had implored Antor to do as I had ordered, and so he did, and I thank him for it. And he had the child baptized and named him Arthur. “This is why I tell you, my dear lords, Our Lord does not forget the sinner, provided he wishes to serve Him with a good heart. Our Lord means to give back to the son what is rightfully his by the seed that issued from his father, ! for he sent the stone and the sword, as you saw, to show in the trial before all the people that he was and is the lawful heir. You may know in truth that everything is just as I have told you, and you may ask Antor, who reared Arthur, and Ulfin too, if you don’t believe me.” Then they asked Antor if he had spoken the truth, and he said, God help him, that he had not lied in one word. And Ulfin sprang forward and said, “Look, here is the sealed letter that Uther Pendragon had [91] Merlin draw up about the agreement.” The barons took the document and read it, and they found it to be word for word just as Merlin had told it. And when the common people in the land heard this, they began to weep all around, and they cursed those who sought to harm Arthur. When the common folk saw that the clergy were taking Arthur’s side, they said that they would, too. But the barons said that it was nothing but a cover. They also said that, God willing, they would never have as their overlord a man who was not lawfully conceived; never would there be a bastard whom, God willing, they would allow to hold a land or so high a kingdom as the kingdom of Logres. And the archbishop answered them and said that Arthur would be king, and he would hold the kingdom and all the land of Logres, regardless of who was upset, for Our Lord willed it. For, since he had become involved in the election, he would not fail to help Arthur keep the land. When the archbishop and the common people saw the barons’ faithlessness, they stood together of one accord with King Arthur. And the barons walked out in anger and said, for any who cared to listen, that they did not hold Arthur to be their lord and that thenceforth their faith with him and those who upheld him was broken. They went off to their lodgings, put on their own armor, and armed their liegemen. And King Arthur went straight to the keep and had as many of his men as he could find arm themselves. When they had all got together, there were a good seven thousand, clerics and commoners, but very few knights indeed. Such knights as were there were poor men to whom Arthur had given horses and money, and all told there were about three hundred and fifty who said they would fight to the death to help Arthur. When King Arthur 13The participle is missing in Sommer’s text (90, 1. 32). l4sommer’s text has que de lui isst (90, ll. 37-38): “that issued from him.” 218 and his men-at-arms had been fitted out on their horses, they rode into the bailey, the walled yard around the keep, and they were all ready to fight for their lives. And the barons, all in their armor, had mounted their horses on the other side, and they had gathered about their banners. There were a good four thousand knights, not counting squires, serving men, and crossbowmen, who were there in great numbers. And when they had come together, they talked about whether they should storm the castle where King Arthur was, and there were some who thought so, but others said that they should lay siege to the bailey and starve to death those who were inside. “No one,” they said, “will dare come out of the keep.” While they were so deliberating, Merlin came up to them and said to them, “My dear lords, what are you trying to do? You should know that if you mean to ruin the king, you will lose more than you win. Our Lord, who is allpowerful, will take such vengeance that you will all be brought to shame, for you are wrong to go against the election Our Lord made as you have witnessed it.” “How well the wizard has just spoken!” said the barons, and they began to mock him. And when Merlin saw that they were laughing at him, he told them that they had behaved wickedly. He went straight to the king and told him not to be frightened of anything and not to be worried about any of the barons, for he would help him yet that very day in such a way that even the bravest one of all his enemies would wish to be back in his own country stripped naked. [92] Then King Arthur took Merlin by the hand, and they went off to one side, along with the archbishop, Antor, Ulfin, Kay, and Bretel, to a private meeting. And the king said for all of them to hear, “My very dear friend Merlin, I have heard it said that you were very close to my father as long as he lived, so I would beseech you, for God’s sake, please advise me what to do about this matter, for you certainly know what I need to do, and you see clearly that the people of this country are doing me wrong. I would like very much for you to be my friend just as you were my father’s, if you will. You can be sure that I would strive to my utmost not to do anything that would displease you. You helped me when I was young, so you should help me now to hold on to my land. It is with God’s help, and yours and the archbishop’s and Antor’s who reared me, that I have come to where I am now, so please take pity on me and the folk who will be ruined if God is not mindful of them!” “Now, don’t be afraid, dear sir,” said Merlin, “for you needn’t worry about them. But as soon as you are rid of the barons who come to attack you, you must do as I advise. “It is true that the knights of the Round Table, which was founded in the time of your father Uther Pendragon, have gone away to stay in another land because of the faithlessness they saw springing up in this country. And they went to the kingdom of King Leodagan of Carmelide. His wife is dead, he is an old man, and his only child is a daughter to whom the kingdom will go after her father. King Leodagan is fighting a very great war with King Rion, who is king of the Land of Grasslands and Giants, where no one dares dwell because so many strange things happen there day and night. The Story of Merlin “This King Rion is very powerful, wealthy in land and people, and he is skilled at arms and a ruthless man as well. He has defeated twenty-five crowned kings, and, out of spite, he had their beards torn off with their skin and made into a coat which he has a knight always hold before him every day he holds court, and he says that he will not stop until he has defeated thirty kings. This king is waging war against King Leodagan, and he is wreaking havoc in his land. “Now, Leodagan’s land borders on your kingdom, and you can be certain that if he loses his land you will lose yours soon after. And he would have lost his land some time ago had it not been for the companions of the Round Table, who have kept up the war for him, for he is very old. This is why I advise you to go serve King Leodagan for a while, and he will give you for a wife his daughter, who stands to inherit the kingdom. She is very beautiful and young, and she is one of the cleverest women in the world. “Don’t be afraid, for your land will not be in danger. The barons who are now waging war against you will have so much trouble for themselves that they will bring but litle harm to you in your land, unless they do it by unlawful encroachment. But before you go, you will stock the main strongholds in every city and castle with food and arms. And the archbishop of Brice!® will have all those who do any wrong to you in your lands excommunicated in every church. And he will himself pronounce the excommunication of all barons in the land, and he will order the knights to shun them likewise. “And today you will see such a strange thing happen, when I give you my help, that the boldest of men will be utterly frightened. And you can be sure [93] that whenever you need me, you have my services and you will want for nothing. And just as soon as I cry out to you ‘Now at them!’ have your gates opened, let your horses run toward the barons, and storm into their midst. I tell you, they will be so astounded that they will run away bewildered in utter defeat!” “Sir,” said King Arthur to Merlin, “many thanks!” So they left their meeting. And the archbishop of Brice climbed high up on the walls and excommunicated all those outside who were doing any kind of wrong to King Arthur and were seeking his ruin. And King Arthur had his men armed and fitted out with armor, and they waited in readiness. And Merlin gave King Arthur a banner that was full of meaning. There was a dragon on the banner, which he had fixed on a lance; it seemed to breathe out fire and flames through its mouth, and it had a very long, twisted tail. That dragon I have just told you about was made of brass, and no one ever knew where Merlin had got it; it was wonderfully light in weight and easy to handle. And Arthur handed it over to Kay the Seneschal to carry, and such was the custom that ever afterwards, all the days of his life, he was the head standard-bearer to the kingdom of Logres. Thus did Merlin outfit King Arthur’s household. And they waited before the gate, at the ready on horseback. And the barons outside had their pavilions set up in the meadow below, which was very wide and beautiful. Merlin climbed high up in the keep and cast a spell on l5sommer’s text has brete (“Britain”?) for brice (92, |. 39). The Story of Merlin them, so that all their tents caught fire, and they were so bewildered that they ran back out into the middle of the meadow. But by the time they got there, there were many injured and burned. And Merlin came straight to the king and said to him, “Sir, now at them!” And they opened the gates and rode out as fast as their horses could run, holding their lances under their arms and their shields before their chests, and as many as could get there drove into the midst of the barons. And they were so astounded and frightened that even the bravest would not have wanted to be there for all the gold in the world, for they had not known that so many people were inside. And Arthur’s men attacked them with their lances; they brought down a great number of them and killed many, for they were so dazed from the heat of the fire that had struck them that they defended themselves poorly. When those outside saw the great damage that Arthur’s men were doing to them, they all gathered on one side and said that they would be greatly shamed if Arthur got away from them. They were very good knights, skilled and brave, and they were fast friends. King Neutres of Garlot said that he would free them from Arthur very soon. For if King Arthur were killed, the war with the others would be quickly ended. “Then go right now,” said the other barons, “and if you need help, we will come quickly to save you.” King Neutres left his companions at once. He was very tall and very brawny, a good knight and wonderfully strong. He took a short, thick lance with a sharp iron tip, and he rode straight out to meet King Arthur. When King Arthur saw him coming, he reigned in his horse, holding a short, thick lance of ash with a [94] sharp steel tip; he spurred his horse and ran against him so fast and with such an uproar that all the barons who saw him riding so were amazed: he stood so solidly in the stirrups that his horse reared under him. As they met riding very fast, they traded such hard blows that their shields flew into splinters. King Neutres broke his lance on King Arthur, but King Arthur struck him so hard when he came alongside him that he drove King Neutres’s shield into his arm and his arm into his side. The blow was so hard that it brought King Neutres to the ground over his horse’s rump, and the ground shook with the sound of his falling. But he hurt him no more than that. When King Lot of Orkney saw him thrown to the ground, he was very upset and sorrowful, for they were first cousins and their wives were sisters. He spurred his horse to ride against King Arthur, whose lance was still whole. When King Arthur saw him coming, he rode very boldly to meet him, as if he did not fear him at all. They traded such strong blows that when each one’s lance struck the other's shield, their lances broke apart. And when they meant to go on by, their bodies and shields crashed together so hard that King Lot was stunned. He flew back over his horse's rump and fell to the ground. Then a great hue and cry rose up from both sides, and a very great and awesome battle began, for King Neutres’s men struggled hard to come to his rescue, and King Lot’s did likewise, while King Arthur’s men made every effort to help him and block the others’ 21? way. So the great and wondrous slaughter began on both sides, and both kings were put back on their horses. After King Arthur had been brought back to his senses, he drew his sword from its scabbard, and it cast a great light, as though two tapers had been lit. This was the sword he had pulled out of the stone. And the letters that were written on the sword said that it was named Excalibur—this is a Hebrew word that means in French “cuts through iron and steel and wood,”!6 and the inscription told the truth, as you will hear in the story a little farther along. When the king had drawn the sword, he struck out into the greatest part of the throng and hit one knight between the shoulders so hard that he cut his body in two. The blow was great, and the good sword cut through the saddle blanket and sliced through the horse’s backbone from one end to the other, so that knight and horse fell down into one heap. Then he struck right and left and stirred up such an awful fracas that all who saw him were terrified. They did not dare face up to him, but fled and yielded the ground to him. When the six kings saw the damage and loss they had borne because of King Arthur, they grew very distraught and sorrowful. They said to one another, “Now let’s get him! Let’s drive him to the ground. Otherwise, we won't defeat him.” They all agreed, and they took strong, straight lances, and they rode against him as fast as they could drive their horses. They struck him on the shield and on his hauberk, but it was so strong that [95] not one link broke. And they drove against him so hard that they bore him and his horse to the ground, and they fell in a heap. When Kay, Bretel, Antor, Ulfin, and their kinsmen saw that King Arthur had been thrown down, they spurred their horses to help him. And the six kings rode to where he was in order to block the way. But Kay struck King Aguisant of Scotland, who had stopped right next to King Arthur, and he broke through his shield and hauberk right at his left shoulder, and he drove his lance all the way through and brought him from his horse to the ground. He was impaled by the lance, and the ground shook with the sound of his falling.!? Kay struck King Caradoc and his horse so hard that he brought him to the ground head over heels. Ulfin and King Neutres knocked each other down, so that their horses fell on top of them, but King Yder and Bretel broke their lances on each other's shield without doing any more harm. The barons had stopped right next to Arthur, who was still lying on the ground, and they rained harsh blows down on his helmet. When Kay saw them attacking him so dreadfully, he drew his sword and rode to where King Arthur lay beaten down. He struck King Lot on his helmet so hard that he thrust him forward over his saddle hom, then he hit him again and again, put him in such a state that he did not know where he was, and knocked him 16] acy relates the name Excalibur to Geoffrey of Monmouth’s Caliburn (9: 4) derived from Latin and Greek chalybs (“steel”); see Norris J. Lacy, ed. The New Arthurian Encyclopedia (New York: Garland, 1991), s.v. Excalibur. 171m Sommer’s text the reference to the ground’s shaking is missing; however, the full expression occurs earlier (94, 1. 10). 220 senseless from his horse to the ground. There the fighting was fierce, and many men were slain on both sides. King Arthur’s men struggled until they got him up from the ground and back on his horse. Then the common folk came out of the city carrying axes, cudgels, and sticks. The cry rose up all around the countryside, and they killed and brought down as many as they could reach. They all said that they would rather die on the spot than that King Arthur should be harmed when they could have defended him. They struck such blows against the six kings’ men that they killed or wounded many of them, so they sent them on their way whether they wanted to go or not. The townspeople said that they would not be satisfied until they had taken their revenge, and the only ransom they would take would be their heads. And King Arthur, who had become enraged, angrily charged after them ahead of all the others. He happened to come upon King Yder. He raised his sword and meant to strike him on the helmet, but his horse carried him farther forward than he wanted, so the blow fell on the neck of Yder’s horse and cut it all the way through just above the chest armor, so that he brought both rider and horse to the ground in a heap. Yder’s men were afraid to see him wounded, so they turned around to come help him. There the fighting and the uproar were wondrously fierce, for the ones were struggling to help King Yder, while the others tried to block the way, and more harm was done there than in the battle just before. For King Arthur inflicted great damage on men and horses with his sword Excalibur, and he was covered with so much blood and gore and dirt that none of the paint or varnish on his armor showed through. Nevertheless, Yder’s men could at last put him back on his horse, and they rode away in defeat. The pursuit lasted for a long time, and the six kings lost a great deal. Of all the goods they had brought there, they took back with them scarcely two pence worth, for everything had been burned up in the fire that Merlin brought down on their tents, except for their gold and silver dishes and their coins. [96] When King Arthur had routed the six kings with Merlin’s help, just as you have heard, he went back to Carduel in Wales. He sought out fighting men everywhere he knew them to be and bestowed on them clothing, money, and horses, and the poor knights throughout the country took him in such love that they swore never to fail him even in the face of death. And King Arthur had the main strongholds in cities and castles well fortified. It happened one time that he held court in the city of Logres, which is now called London in England, on the feast of Our Lady in September. At that court King Arthur made many a new knight with his own hand. All of them paid him homage and swore fealty to him, and he gave them incomes from lands and such other gifts that they had the means to live. They accepted him in such love that never afterwards did they fail him even for fear of death, and the king later had very great help from them, as you will hear me tell. After this, Merlin took King Arthur aside, along with Ulfin, and said to him, “Sir, there is something I want to show you and teach you about myself and what I do. In truth, there is a worthy man in the forest of The Story of Merlin Northumberland, in the wildest place there is, and he is a hermit and my very dear friend, because he once saved my mother from being burned to death, and I will tell you how.” So he began to tell his life’s story and his mother’s and how she was almost burned for a crime she had been accused of; how Vortigern sent people out looking for him; how his mother took the veil in a nunnery where he left her; how the tower that Vortigern had built stood up and the meaning of the two dragons that killed each other; how, after Vortigern’s death, he became a friend of Pendragon and Uther, Arthur’s father; how he foretold to them the great battle in which Pendragon was slain; how afterwards he was very close to Uther; how he helped him lie with the duchess Ygraine in the castle of Tintagel (“And there,” he said to the king, “you were conceived”); how Ulfin thought up the way Uther could wed the duchess Ygraine, who had five daughters, three by her husband the duke and two by her first husband, one of whom King Lot took as his wife, King Neutres another, King Urien the third, and Caradoc, who was father of King Aguisant of Scotland, the fourth, who had died, while the fifth was in school in Logres.}8 “And you should know that King Lot has five sons by his wife, one of whom you sired in London when you were a squire. They are handsome young men, and the eldest is Gawainet,!9 the second Agravain, the third Guerrehet, the fourth Gaheriet, and the youngest Mordred. You can be sure that, of all knights ever born, Gawainet will be the most faithful to his lord, and he will be one of the best in the world. He will love you the most of any, and, as long as he lives, he will raise you up above everyone else, even his own father. There can be no doubt that through him you will have all your lands back, and out of fear of him all your liegemen will bow down to you and yield to your will. “King Neutres has a son, a very handsome lad, named Galescalain. Urien has one named Yvain the Great, whose heart will be filled with every kindness, [97] and he and Gawainet will love you and serve you until they die. They will not be dubbed knights by any man before you do so yourself, and they will bring over to you many sons of highborn barons who will serve you for love of them and their fellowship. “Across the water in Little Brittany are two kings who are brothers, and their wives are sisters. Those two kings will have sons, and they will be good knights, no one could find better anywhere. The elder of the brothers who are kings is called King Ban of Benoic, and the other’s name is Bors of Gaunes. They have a very wicked neighbor, also a king, who will yet bring them trouble and grief out of envy and because he cannot overpower them. “Since they are such worthy and faithful men, I would like very much for you to send them word that you wish to see them and that you beg them to be here on All Saints’ 18Farlier (Sommer, 73), only two (or three) daughters are mentioned. See also above, ch. 4 n. 14. 19The form is a diminutive, which obviously reflects Gawain’s youth and inexperience. Similar diminutive endings are attached for a time to the names of Wain and Sagremor but then dropped, whereas with rare exceptions the Merlin uses it for Gawain until the end. The Story of Merlin Day, because you will hold court in Logres and are sending for all throughout the land who mean to swear fealty to you. Some will come for the sake of good, others for ill, but those two will come for their inborn kindness, because they are worthy and faithful men. So you will become their friend and offer to serve them, and they will think themselves rewarded and will be most grateful for it, and they will gladly swear fealty to you. “And when it is time for your court to end, you will tell them in trust that you are set on going to Carhaix in Carmelide to serve King Leodagan. Take them with you, for they are very worthy men and good knights, and they will prove to be very useful to you when you are ready to come back into your land, for your enemies will do their utmost to keep you from coming back in, but they will not be able to withstand you, because of the help you will have from the two kings who will be your companions.”° “And I want you to know that I want to keep going back to the woods, and this is by the nature that came to me from the one who sired me, for he does not seek out any companionship that might come about from God. But I do not go into the woods for fellowship with him, but to keep company with Blaise, the holy man. You can be sure that you will never have need of me but that I will come to counsel you. But you will very often see me in another likeness from what you see now, for I don’t want everybody to know who I am every time I come to talk to you. But I want you to swear to me that you will reveal to no one anything I tell you, for if you gave me away, more harm than good would come to you.” King Arthur swore this very willingly, for he truly wanted to have his love and friendship, and he swore never to say anything, if he could help it, that went against Merlin’s will. And Merlin assured him of his love, and he said that he would help Arthur so well that he would be forever grateful. This is how the pact was made between the king and Merlin. And the people rejoiced throughout the city for their new king, who was such a good knight at arms, for they had never seen in his time such a good knight for so young a man. The burghers had a dummy set up in the middle of the meadow for a target, and the new knights tilted at it for a long time, their shields at their necks. The merrymaking lasted a good, full week. When it was over, the king began preparing for the great festival he was to lead on All Saints’ Day. He sent orders to all who were to hold lands from him to come swear fealty and pay him homage. [98] Some of them came and some stayed away, and the king made known to the ones who did not come that they would have to make amends. And King Arthur sent Ulfin and Bretel for King Ban of Benoic and his brother King Bors of Gaunes, and he bade them, if they held his love dear and wanted to be his friend forever, come to him in Logres in Great Britain on All Saints’ Day. Ulfin and Bretel were very friendly with the two 2°The phrase beginning “because of” represents an incomplete sentence in Sommer’s text (97, Il. 21-22) consisting only of a subordinate clause introduced by car (“for”). A variant reading supplied by Sommer from the Harley manuscript is not helpful in correcting the apparent scribal error. e2i kings they were going to find, for they had come to love one another in the time of Uther Pendragon. They crossed the sea and went straight to Little Brittany. They made their way through Little Brittany and rode through a land laid waste where they found many a town burned to the ground. At length they came to a city named Benoic, which is now called Bourges in Berry, and it had belonged to King Claudas of the Land Laid Waste. This Claudas I am telling you about was laying claim to a castle that King Ban had had built on his own land, and he contested the claim by saying that the piece of land where he was strengthening his hold belonged to him, while King Claudas said that it did not. This is how the war began between them, for King Ban did not stop building the stronghold when Claudas had forbidden it. So Claudas overran King Ban’s land without even challenging him. He inflicted great damage, taking plunder throughout the land, and he set fire to the towns he found without walls and left charred ruins. But he could do nothing to harm the stronghold that King Ban had had built, because it was well fortified with soldiers and crossbowmen whom King Ban had put in the keep. He had also posted there one of his stewards, a very worthy man named Gratian, whom King Ban had made his fellow godfather of a little boy”! he had had baptized, and the child’s name was Banin. This Banin was afterwards well known for his very great prowess in King Arthur’s court, but the story does not tell about him right here, but rather it speaks of King Ban, who was very sorrowful and distraught at the harm Claudas had done him without first challenging him. So he rounded up a great army and went against him as quickly as he could, for he knew very well how to get through the countryside all about. When the two armies had gathered, each one ranked against the other, there was a very great battle with fierce fighting and many slain on both sides. King Ban killed so many with his own hand that the heaps lay scattered through the fields as though they were sheep or swine. King Ban did so much on his own and with the help of his men that King Claudas turned in flight and lost all his equipment and plunder, and the prisoners who were being taken away were brought to safety. Furthermore, King Bors, who was King Ban’s brother, moved into the land of Gaunes, and he burned a great deal of King Claudas’s land and set fire to many of his towns, and he took as much booty as he could, for he laid waste the country so that you could not find shelter under cover anywhere within fifteen leagues other than beside rocks or in cellars below ground. And King Claudas had been brought so low and made so poor that he kept quiet. He did not dare move into King Ban’s land for a long time afterwards, but then he brought very grievous harm to the two brothers, as you will hear in the story farther along. This is why [99] King Arthur’s two messengers found that the land had been laid waste, and they were amazed that it could be so and wondered how it could have happened. They rode until they came to Trebe, which was 2lThe words dung petit enfant (“of a little child”) are missing in Sommer’s main text (98, I. 22) and are supplied from the Harley manuscript as quoted in Sommer’s note. 222 the castle King Ban had had built. It was very strong, and it sat on a high piece of land. In this stronghold was Queen Elaine, King Ban’s wife, who was a very worthy lady of great beauty, and she was not yet twenty-six years old; King Bors had wed her sister, who was a very noble and worthy lady. When Ulfin and Bretel had come to Trebe, they asked for King Ban. And they were told that he had gone to Benoic to take counsel with his brother, King Bors. After they heard this, they took leave of lady Elaine and left Trebe wearing their armor, for the land they had to go through was not at all safe, for there were many outlaws roving about the land. And when they had ridden about five leagues, they saw seven knights of the household of King Claudas who were coming from the wilderness, and they were going about looking out for anything they might win for themselves, but the countryside had been so stripped of anything of worth that they found nothing to take, for all the folk had fled into the cities and strongholds with everything they owned. When the seven knights saw the two messengers, they said to one another, “Look at those two horses they are riding! We would be bad indeed if we let them take them away!” “It doesn’t seem to me,” said one, “that they are from this country, for they are not wearing armor like what is made in this kingdom.” “In truth, whoever they are,” said another, “they look like worthy men-at-arms. If they have served someone else, it certainly must have been a very noble man.” “What do I care whom they served?” said a third. “Let's go take their arms and horses from them, for we could surely use them!” Straightway one of them spurred his horse and rode away from his companions after the messengers, shouting, “Stand still! Don’t go on, or you are dead, if you belong to King Ban or his brother Bors. But if you are King Claudas’s men, you needn't worry, for we guard the roads and ways through this borderland, so that none may pass who serves anyone else. This is why we ask for your toll. You haven't paid it yet, so you must leave your arms and horses! What's more, we mean for you to be grateful that we are letting you go without killing you or taking you prisoner.” . When Ulfin heard him shouting at them and threatening them, he said to him, “Now, don’t be in such a hurry. I don’t know who you are, but by your speech, you are a loud-boasting blockhead! Curses on a low-life knight who asks for a toll from a knight errant! And you don’t even ask courteously!” When Bretel heard Ulfin speaking in this way to the knight, he said, “Knight, you'll be sorry for even thinking that!” And he spurred his horse toward him, and when the knight saw him coming, he fastened his shield on his arm with the armbands and fixed his lance in its holder. They traded such hard blows on their shields that they broke through them, so that the knight’s lance came to a stop on Bretel’s hauberk. And Bretel spurred his horse forward and dealt him such a great blow that he drove the iron tip of his lance right through his left shoulder, so that the broken pieces of his shield came out the other side [100] more than a yard, and he hit him so hard that he bore him from The Story of Merlin his horse to the ground impaled on his lance, and the knight fainted from the pain. Bretel withdrew his lance still all in one piece, then he said to the knight, “Now you can stay here as long as you like and guard the road so that no one passes from whom you don’t get the toll that is rightfully yours!” With that, he galloped away after Ulfin, giving free rein to his horse and brandishing his lance. Ulfin had seen the fight between the two men; he was very glad, and he held Bretel in higher esteem than he had before. When the other knights saw their leader fall down wounded, they were very distraught, and they said that they would never be happy until they had avenged him. Two of them broke away from the others and took off after Bretel and Ulfin as fast as their horses would go. And when the messengers caught sight of them, they turned their horses’ heads and bent down behind their shields like the good, fearless knights they were, and when they met they traded hard blows with their lances. Bretel, who bore his weapon high, drove his lance through the other man’s throat and knocked him down dead from his horse. Ulfin hit his man so that the tip of his lance went through his hauberk and came out the other side between his shoulder blades; he brought him down to the ground from his horse with the lance still in him. After this two of the four knights who were left broke away from the others and shouted to the messengers that they would avenge their companions or die trying. When the messengers saw them coming, they turned their horses’ heads, and each urged the other to do well. Ulfin rode to meet the one who came in front, and Bretel met the other one. The two knights broke their lances on the messengers. Bretel struck his man and drove his lance through his shield and hauberk right into his body, and he bore him down from his horse and left him laid out on the ground dead and covered with blood. Ulfin came against his man so hard that he brought both the rider and his horse down in one heap; the rider broke his neck in the fall. And when the last two knights saw what had happened to their companions, they turned tail and took to their heels. Then Bretel said to the dead men words that were heard far and wide: “My lords,” he said, “go ahead and threaten us! Now we give you leave to guard the roads!” The two messengers then made their way until the evening, when they came to the castle of Benoic, where they saw a good many people whom the two kings had ordered to come. The two messengers came straight to the main hall, got down from their horses, and gave them to be looked after by a squire they had brought with them. Then they went up into the hall and asked for King Ban and his brother. They were told that they were in another room in a private meeting. When the messengers heard this, they were very glad to know that they had found them together, so they stayed there until the meeting ended. While they were waiting, a knight named Pharian came up to them, and when he saw who they were, he welcomed them joyfully. He asked them if they wanted to speak to the two kings, and they said they did. Then he took them by the hand and led them into the room where the brother kings were. The Story of Merlin When the two kings saw them coming, they rose to meet them. With them was a knight named Leonce of Payerne. They all embraced the messengers and welcomed them. Then they went to sit down on a bed, and King Ban asked them [101] what business had brought them there, for surely they had come there for an important reason. The messengers then told them the whole truth from beginning to end: they told them what had happened between King Arthur and the six kings, the awful havoc Merlin had wreaked on them with the fire, and the young king’s awesome feats of arms. One of them told them that King Arthur was summoning them on Merlin’s advice and said that they should make up their minds very soon. The two kings answered that they were sorely distressed by a war they were waging against King Claudas. “And we are afraid,” they said, “that when we leave this country they will storm us and we will suffer very great harm.” “My lords,”2? said the messengers, “we would not want that to happen. But Merlin sends word that you will not have to worty while you are away.” When the two kings heard what the messengers told them, they were greatly astonished that Merlin would know things that had yet to happen. Then they promised the messengers that they would go with them three days later without delay, and they thanked them wholeheartedly. And King Ban had a servant take their armor off, for he would not allow them to take lodging anywhere but with him. Then the two kings asked them where their shields had got so beat up, and they entreated them, on their allegiance to King Arthur, to tell the truth. They told them how they had been set upon by seven knights and how it had all gone. And when the two kings heard how they had rid themselves of the seven knights, they held them in very high esteem. They were very well served with many good things to eat, and Leonces of Payerne and Pharian were at pains to care for them because they had done them great honor in Great Britain in the time of King Uther Pendragon. King Ban got himself ready to leave in three days, and King Bors did, too. They entrusted Leonces of Payerne to keep their lands—he was their first cousin, a faithful, worthy man—and Pharian stayed behind with him, along with the stewards of Benoic and Gaunes. And the two kings told them to send for them if they needed to, for they did not know what would happen, and King Ban gave him his ring as his token. Then they took to the road and made their way for many days until they reached the sea, where they took a boat and crossed to the other side, and they had no trouble or disturbance. But now the story stops talking about them for a while and will tell about King Arthur. 22sommer’s text has the singular, as though only one of the kings were being addressed (101, 1. 9). 223 6. The Brother Kings, Ban and Bors, Pay Homage to Arthur. Here the story says that when the messengers had left King Arthur, the king fortified all his strongholds with fighting men and crossbowmen. Then Merlin went to the king and told him that he was happy that his messengers had done their job well. And Merlin told him everything that had happened to them along their way and how they had rid themselves of the seven knights. He said that the two kings had already started across the sea, “so think about how to do them honor and welcome them in a fitting way. Go out to meet them, for, although they are your liegemen, they are of higher birth than you, and their wives are as well. So I recommend that you have all the streets of Logres overhung with damask and samite wherever they are to go, and have the maidens and young ladies of this town go out to meet them dancing and singing. [102] And you will go out yourself with a throng of knights. They will get here Sunday before the hour of tierce.” And when King Arthur heard Merlin, he said that he would do everything as he had explained it. Then King Arthur prepared to welcome the two kings, and he waited until Sunday. Then the king, his barons and household, and the archbishop of Brice mounted their horses and went out to meet them in a grand procession. When they met, they traded kisses and showed how glad they were to see each other, and they came back into the city with all kinds of dancing and with great merrymaking. When they had come to the main hall, King Arthur bestowed gifts of great worth on those in the two kings’ households according to their rank, and he gave them warhorses, saddle horses, and beautiful, costly arms. The king did this all on Merlin’s advice, and he did so much for everyone around him that they all loved him and held him in great esteem, and they swore that they would never, ever in their lives, let him down. That day the archbishop of Brice sang Mass, and when it was over, they all went up into the main hall, where a great meal, rich and bountiful, was ready. The three kings sat at one table, and the archbishop of Brice and Antor, who had reared King Arthur, were with them. And Kay served at the tables, as was right. Two new knights served with him. They were very skilled and worthy young men, sons of two castellans: one was named Lucan the Wine Steward, and the other Girflet, son of Doon from Carduel, who had been Uther Pendragon’s woodman; and they served with Kay the Seneschal, with Ulfin, and with Bretel, all of whom were very capable. Everyone there was served with the highest courtesy, and they had rich, plentiful food. After the meal a target dummy was set up, and the young knights held a tilting match. Later they put together a tournament with some knights on one side and others on another, and each side had about seven hundred. Three hundred from the kingdom of Benoic alone fought on one side. As the tourney was getting underway, King Ban and King Bors came to a window to see,* along with one of their 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 101-9. 2The verb phrase is lacking in Sommer’s text (102, I. 27). ze brothers, a very learned clerk who knew more about astrology® than anyone except Merlin; and King Arthur was leaning at the window with them and the archbishop of Brice and Antor. They watched the tournament take shape on each side, the banners waving in the wind, the warhorses prancing about and whinnying beneath their riders, so that the mountains and valleys resounded with the din. When the two sides were close enough to meet, one knight left the formation. He was named Girflet, son of Doon of Carduel, and he sat on a great gray warhorse that ran wonderfully fast. On the other side, a knight from Benoic rode to meet him. His name was Ladinas, and he was very skilled at arms. They traded such hard blows that they broke their lances, for they were both strong and brave, and they were good knights. One was eager to win acclaim, and the other wanted his fame to spread, so each landed such smashing blows on the other’s shield and body that they thought their eyes would fly out of their heads. They took each other’s horses to the ground on top of them, and they lay in a faint [103] without moving, so that everyone believed they were dead. They all said that they had never seen such a hard-fought combat between two knights. With that, knights broke out of the formation on each side to come rescue their companion. They fought with one another and jousted so beautifully that all were glad to watch. Some unhorsed one another and broke their lances without falling, and after their lances were broken they drew their swords and began the wondrously violent battle. One knight worked wonders all by himself, and he was known for this far and wide throughout the country. His name was Lucan the Wine Steward, and he was the cousin of Girflet the son of Doon, who had been in the hardfought single combat. Lucan brought knights and horses down, and he began to wield his weapons so well that none could withstand his blows. He tore helmets from heads and shields from necks, and at last he was able to get Girflet on his horse, while the other knight got back on his. When they had got their wind and cleared their heads, they went back into the fray. Then Girflet began to fight alongside Lucan the Wine Steward, and they did so well that they won ground from the knights from Benoic. : Then three hundred knights came in; they were all fresh and had not yet struck a blow. The battle was awesome and hard-fought! When lances were broken, knights grabbed their swords, and the fighting started yet again and lasted a very long time. They saw many a fine example of knightly skill on both sides, for there were many good bachelor-knights who fought well. Girflet the son of Doon and Lucan the Wine Steward were clearly the best of all who were there. When the hour of nones came, the tournament had died down somewhat. And Kay the Seneschal, who had not yet struck a blow there, sprang out with five or so companions from where they had been lying in wait. They were riding horses of great worth and had their shields at their necks and their lances in their grasp. When they drew near the formation, they rushed in headlong, just as the 5The Old French word is astrenomie (Sommer, 102, 1. 28). See above, ch. 2, n. 8. The Story of Merlin falcon or hawk swoops down on starlings, and they bore the first ones they met to the ground. After their lances had been broken, they drew their swords and began to fight so skillfully that Kay won the tourney prize along with Girflet and Lucan the Wine Steward. And just below them came Duke Malruc of the Rock, Guinan the Pale, Drians of the Wild Forest, Belias the Amorous from the Castle of the Maidens, Flandrin the White, Gratian the White the Castellan, Drulios of the Hamlet, Blioberis of the Wilderness, Meliaduc the Pale, Median the Curly-Haired, and Placides the Merry. These did so well that after they began fighting, no one in the tournament could withstand them. But later King Ban’s companions were able to push the whole throng back to where everyone had started out, for the companions of the kingdom of Logres had withdrawn to change their helmets, which had been broken in and smashed to bits. When they saw that the tide had turned against them, they hurried to take up new lances and rode straight back into the throng as fast as their horses could run, and they rushed into the thickest fray they saw there. Kay came spurring his horse ahead of all his companions, for he was very eager to do well, and he came into the ranks [104] brandishing his lance. He was a wondrously good knight—if only he had been a man of few words! He spoke too much, and his slanderous speech kept him from the good graces of his companions and strangers who heard about him and later refused to go with him on the adventures of the kingdom of Logres, as the story will explain farther on. Kay received the bad trait, which the story says he had, from the nurse who suckled him, and not from his mother, who was a good lady, wise and faithful. But those who knew his ways did not mind what Kay said, for he did not do it out of any ill will he harbored toward anyone; it was his way that, when he started to say something, he did not know the words he was going to speak before they flew out of his mouth. Those who knew him would very often laugh about it, for his speech could be quite witty; furthermore, he was of the best fellowship that anyone could have. And when he came to the tournament, as you have just heard, he met Ladinas. Ladinas had fought very well that day, and he and his companions tried very hard to drive the men of Logres off the field, and they had already distressed them somewhat. And when Kay saw this, he was very sorrowful. He drove his spurs into his horse and lowered his lance, and struck Ladinas so hard in his shield that he went all the way through it, and the tip of his weapon came to a stop against his hauberk. Then he thrust at him again very fast and knocked him down to the ground, where he lay all stretched out, and in the same bound Kay rode on and struck Gratian of Trebe and brought him and his horse down in a heap, and he broke his lance. Then he put his hand to his sword and shouted “Clarence!” (the king’s battlecry). And those of the side of Logres took heed and saw that they were being helped by their companions, all of whom they believed they had lost, and they found their strength again and began to fight better than they had all day. King Arthur, King Ban, and King Bors saw Kay’s joust clearly, and they said that the seneschal was a very skilled The Story of Merlin knight, and they gladly watched him. And when Lucan the Wine Steward saw that Kay was fighting so well, he said that he would hold himself to be unworthy if he did not go help him. Then he drove his spurs into his horse and rushed into the thickest fray, and he struck Blioberis so hard that he brought him to the ground and laid him out, and his lance flew into bits. Then he drew his sword and jumped into the midst of them and began to fight so well that he was praised for it by many people, and he began to push the throng back in order to rescue his companions. Then Girflet came, his lance in its holder, as fast as his horse could run, and he saw three? knights who were bringing Kay up short in a sword fight, and he needed help, for there were three of them and Kay was all alone, and those three were the best knights on the other side. Placides had already hit him so hard on his helmet that he had bent him down over his saddlebow. And when Girflet saw that, he was filled with dread, so he went to strike Blioberis and rained such blows down on him that he brought him and his horse down in a heap. Girflet’s lance flew into bits, then he drew his sword and struck Placides on his helmet so hard that he leaned [105] over his saddlebow, and he hit him again and again until he was so stunned that he fell to the ground head over heels. And Kay, who was in great danger, got up again and was able to see that it was Girflet who had helped him, and he deemed that he should reward this good deed if he could, and so he did, and he did not tarry long, just as the story will set it down. This is how they first became companions, and they loved each other with great love ever afterward all the days of their lives. When Girflet had freed Kay, as you have heard, he looked all around and saw Geroas, who had sorely bothered him throughout the fight that day. He then drew his sword and rode against him in great anger. He dealt him such a hard blow on his helmet that the blade? flew off and hit the ground, and if his sword had not twisted in his grasp, he would have killed him. The sword went down onto his left shoulder so hard that his hauberk broke and the mail came apart, and it cut the strap of his shield. He drove the sword down to his shoulder blade, and he flew to the ground all covered with blood. Then there arose a hue and cry, because those who saw the blow thought that he had been killed with no chance to recover. Then his companions came to the rescue. And from the other side came Kay the Seneschal’s companions, and there began such a dreadful tumult that many men were unhorsed or wounded before they could come to help their companions and get them back on their horses. And when the six companions I told you about before saw the fray, they drove to that side so hard that the first six knights they met flew to the ground. Then they rushed in and started such a good fight that those who saw it wondered how they could hold out so long. There the tournament heated up on both sides, and the six® and the others as well fought long and hard until 4Sommer’s text has ij. here (104, 1. 35), but .7ij. and the number spelled out (trot) two lines below. 5Sommer’s text has fus (“hilt”) (105, 1. 10). ®Sommer’s text has .vij. (105, 1. 23). Eg night came. The three kings went down from the great hall and came straight to the field where the tourney was, and they saw that everyone was showing himself to be as good as the others, so that no one knew which one would prevail. So they separated the two sides and said that it was high time to stop, since it was very late for fighting. So they left the field, and each one went back to his lodging to rest, which they all needed badly. And the three kings went to hear vespers, and afterwards they went to supper. After supper talk grew lively, and they asked one another who it seemed to them had done the best. They said that King Ban had sixteen knights who had done better than all the others, and these sixteen had fought wonderfully and should be highly praised. But all of a voice they awarded the top prize to Kay the Seneschal, Lucan the Wine Steward, and Girflet the son of Doon; these three had done the best of all. When the tables had been taken away, the three kings got up, along with the archbishop, Antor, and the clerk Guinebal, and they went into some side rooms off the main hall that looked out over the garden along the river, and they talked together about many things. Then the king looked at Ulfin and Bretel, and he began to laugh out loud because he recalled what Merlin had told them when they went on their mission and how they had been attacked by seven knights in the wilderness and fought them off. Then he called the two knights over and implored them by the faith they owed him to tell him how they had done on their mission. When they heard this, they were certain that the king knew it already from [106] Merlin, so they answered him, “Sir, why should we tell you what you already know? Our words would be wasted for nothing.” “Whatr” said King Ban. “Who told you this?” “In truth, sir,” said Bretel, “the wisest man in the world.” “And what is his name?” asked King Ban. “Sir,” answered Bretel, “his name is Merlin, and he is in this room, right over there resting. By his advice my lord sent for you.” “Ah! sir,” said King Ban to King Arthur, “let us see him, for we have wanted to for a very long time because of the wonders we have heard about him.” And he said he would gladly do so. He sent Ulfin, and as soon as Ulfin moved away to go get him, he met him. Merlin told him to go back to the king and ask him why he was sending for him, and he did so. And King Ban crossed himself for the wonder he felt. Then Merlin went in and told him not to worry that he was bewildered. Then he began to tell him a part of his life’s story and some of his ways. The clerk Guinebal stepped forward and asked him many things, for he was very learned, and Merlin answered everything he asked. The disputation between the two of them lasted a long time, until at last Merlin told him that there would be no end to his endeavors: the more he asked about, the more he would find out! And Merlin told those all around that he had never found a clerk who had talked to him on so high a level; not even Blaise, who was a very learned and holy man, could ever ask him so much for so long. 226 Why should I go on telling any more? The two of them talked together and became fast friends. Then Merlin went up to the two kings who were brothers and said to them, “My lords, you are very worthy and faithful men indeed. Look, here is King Arthur. He is my lord and he should be yours. You must hold your two kingdoms from him, and he must uphold you and help you against all men, if need be.” They asked him to tell them how he had been chosen king. They also asked whether Antor knew that Arthur was the son of Uther Pendragon, and he answered, “Yes, indeed.” Then Merlin told them the truth about the results of the sword test, and the archbishop of Brice and Ulfin bore witness to it. “Merlin,” said King Ban, “we would like you to assure us of one thing we ask. We know that you are such a worthy man that you would not lie for all the land that belongs to the crown.” “Ah! sir,” said Merlin, “you want to have my oath that what I have told you is true.” And they began to smile and said that, indeed, no one was more learned than Merlin. And Merlin told them that he would very gladly swear it if they waited until the next day. With that, they went their own ways to go to sleep. The three kings lay in one room. Merlin and Guinebal became better and better acquainted: Merlin taught him many a fine trick, and Guinebal remembered them all like the intelligent clerk he was; he worked some of them many times later, and people talked about it for a long time afterwards, as the story will spell it out. [107] The next morning they all got up and heard Mass. After Mass Merlin swore them the oath that King Arthur was the son of Uther Pendragon and that he had fathered him on Queen Ygraine the night the duke was killed, and Ulfin swore the same thing. When the two kings had accepted these two men’s oaths, they swore fealty to Arthur very graciously, as was fitting, and King Arthur, in tears, received their homage very kindly. Then there was such rejoicing as there had never been before, and they went to eat and were very well served with all things befitting the highborn. After they had eaten, King Arthur, the two brother kings, and Merlin went to confer by themselves, and Ulfin, Bretel, and Kay the Seneschal were there as well. Then Merlin said to them, “You are all very worthy gentlemen, and I know you as well as you know yourselves. Here is King Arthur your lord, who is a very young man, and he will be quite a good knight in his own right, and he already is. You are aware that he is having trouble with the barons of his land, for they will not accept him as their lord or swear fealty to him as they ought, but mean to do him as much harm as they can, if they ever can. Therefore I beg you, do as I advise.” And they all said that they would very gladly do so. And Merlin said to them, “My lords, you know very well that King Arthur has no wife. I know of a maiden who is the daughter of a king and a queen. She is highborn and beautiful, and no maiden could be more worthy. She is the daughter of King Leodagan of Carmelide, who is an old man and has no other children than this girl, whose name is Guenevere. His land must fall to her. But he is now waging war against King Rion, who comes from a line of The Story of Merlin giants, and he is a very wealthy and very powerful man. If he should happen to defeat the kingdom of Carmelide, which borders on King Arthur’s kingdom, you can be sure that King Arthur will never again hold his kingdom in peace, so many wars will he have on so many sides. And if it weren't for the knights of the Round Table who are helping King Leodagan defend his land against the giants, he would already have lost his land some time ago. So I beg you, take King Arthur there as your leader in battle, and stay there with him a year or two until you have got to know him well, and it will not be long before he loves you more than those who are with him now. And you should know for a fact that Leodagan will bid King Arthur to take his daughter as his wife; thereby he will be able to hold his kingdom free and clear.” Then King Ban said to Merlin, “Dear, kind friend, if we go to faraway lands and leave our own lands as they are, what will happen to them? Right now we have ruthless neighbors who lay waste our lands, and the very country where we are now is not very safe, for the barons who ought to be the king’s liegemen are waging war against him. It is very dangerous to leave one’s lands to go off to defend another's.” “Ah! sir,” said Merlin, “you are speaking from the way things seem to you. But one must back up before taking a long jump. And you can be sure that for every penny you lose over here, you will earn a hundred over there. And for all your outriders who come over here, you will not lose a single castle or [108] city, and you will win over there a kingdom which will forever defend this kingdom as long as King Arthur is alive.” “I don’t know,” said King Ban, “what to say, but I'll do everything you advise, for you are more clever than all of us put together. Now all we have to do is get ready, and we will set out when you wish.” “We have time,” said Merlin, “to get everything ready, for we will not set out before we have fought a battle against the barons of this land, for they are gathering a great army. And you will summon all the men you can find as stealthily as you can, and you will set up their camp in a heath within Bredigan Forest. Don’t be afraid, for you will do far more harm to our enemies than they will to you.” “Merlin,” said King Ban, “if my brother and I sent for men in our country, could they get here in time?” “Yes,” said Merlin, “you can be certain.” “Then we will send out the call,” said King Ban. “That is good,” said Merlin. “And I will go myself, for I can get there faster than any messenger you might send. We must hurry, for the battle will be fought on Candlemas in the Bredigan meadows. Your army will have to ride day and night to come fast enough. You can know for a fact that I will be in Gaunes by tomorrow night.” And when the two kings heard this, they were utterly astounded. They threw their arms around his neck and showed him how glad they were. Then Merlin said to King Arthur, “Sir, now, as quietly as you can, send for as many knights, men-at-arms, and crossbowmen as you can find, then have a great plenty of food taken to the heath I have told you about, and have it divided among the people, for they will be in dire need of it, and you will give each man enough food for forty days. The Story of Merlin And you, sir,” he said to King Ban, “entrust me with your ring, and I will carry it to your cousin Leonce of Payerne so that he may believe me when I talk to him.” When the two brothers heard Merlin talking that way, they were quite bewildered, for they did not believe that any man alive could know what he was telling them. “What is wrong, my dear lords?” said King Arthur. “Don’t be amazed or troubled about what he told you, for you should know that he knows everything he wants at a single word, and nothing can be hidden from him.” And they said to him, “Since this is so, we will entrust the ring to him, and may he do what is right for us and for you, for we are well aware that he loves you more than anything.” “By my head,” said Merlin, “you have spoken like shrewd and learned men. And you will win enough to know how much I love you.” With that, King Ban gave him the ring. He took it and commended them to God, and he left that place and went off, as I have told you. And he came straight to Blaise and told him all those things, and Blaise put them all down in writing, and this is how we still know them. And Merlin left Blaise and went the next morning at the hour of prime to the city of Gaunes. He told Leonce what the two brother kings had sent him to do, and he showed him the king’s ring with his seal, and he believed everything Merlin told him. He sent far and wide for so many men that, a week before Christmas, fully ten thousand came to the city of Benoic all armed, riding their horses. Then they set up guards in the towns, as was needed. One of the guards was Lambegue, a young nobleman [109] who was faithful and valiant of body. He was posted in the main stronghold of Gaunes, and Pharian, whose nephew he was, entreated him to do his job well, and he said he would do the best he could. And in the city of Benoic they posted the Lord of the High Wall, who was a tall man and good knight with his first growth of beard. And in the city of Trebe they left Banin, son of Gratian, who was King Ban’s godson, and the two sister queens were there because it was the best and strongest castle in the two kingdoms. And in Montlair, a stronghold that belonged to King Bors, they posted Placides, one of Leonce’s nephews, who was a good knight, wonderfully skilled, brave, and faithful. When they had thus fortified all the land and countryside, they started out and made their way to the sea, where they took boats. On the other side of the sea, King Arthur made ready just as Merlin had ordered him to do, and at length he gathered a good ten thousand fighting men all mounted on good horses, for he did not want to call in footsoldiers. Furthermore, wagons from throughout the land made up a train that carried the food. And the king had the army led as stealthily as he could to the heath within Bredigan Forest, for it was one of the most out-ofthe-way places anyone knew about. And Arthur did what Merlin held to be very wise: as soon as the army and the wagon train had moved into the heath, he had good guards posted on every road throughout his land so that no one might pass by who was not taken and led before the king, because they did not want any spy to go in there who might tell the enemy anything about what the king was doing. Ze/ And throughout King Arthur’s land it was forbidden for anyone who owed him fealty to ride down the countryside until after Candlemas had passed: if anyone disobeyed, he could be taken captive, and all should know that they would lose life or limb, for the king had ordered it so. Everyone in his land kept still and did not move, and the common folk were amazed that it could happen. Thus the movements were so well hidden that no one ever found out where the horses were going, excepting only those who were privy to the king’s counsel. But here the story falls silent about them and comes back to the six kings and their companions, all of whom were routed at Caerlion, just as you have heard it told before now in the story. 7. The Six Kings’ Renewed Forces; the Brother Kings’ and Arthur’s Victory over the Saxons.’ Here the story says that the six kings were most upset that they had been routed and had lost all their equipment, so they swore all together that they would never be happy until, if they could, they had taken vengeance on King Arthur and his wizard, through whom they had suffered such harm. So the six kings went away filled with sorrow and downcast about the misfortune that had befallen them; because of that, they would be worse off for the rest of their lives. Some of them had themselves carried in a litter if they could not bear riding, so they made the trip at a slow gait until they got back to their lands, and they stayed there until they had been healed and brought back to health. At the end of a month, they held a meeting in a borderland between the kingdom of Gorre and the kingdom of Scotland, and there everyone [110] swore that he would send for as many friends and kinsmen as he had, and then they would move against King Arthur; they would take away his land and dispossess all his liegemen before driving him out. And they set a day when their army would gather in the meadows of Bredigan, and they summoned their liegemen and friends. Duke Escant of Cambenic came to help them with five thousand armed men. Furthermore, King Tradelmant of North Wales came with six thousand men, as did the King of Northumberland, whose name was Clarion, with three thousand, the King of the Hundred Knights, King Lot of Loonois and Orkney with seven thousand, King Caradoc Shortarm of the land of Estrangorre with eight thousand, King Neutres of Garlot with six thousand, and King Urien came with six thousand. They all rode short distances each day because they meant to plunder the countryside, and they sent out their spies throughout the land to find out what King Arthur was up to. But the guards, who were everywhere in the land, took them all and sent them to King Arthur, and they were shut up in prison, never to come out again, nor were they ever heard from. And the armies rode on and eventually encamped beneath the castle of Bredigan, and they were gladdened Corresponds to Sommer, 109-121. 228 because they believed they had won everything. They sent their raiders throughout the countryside, but they found little there to take, since everything that could be plundered had been taken away to the castles and cities. When they saw that nothing was left, they set fire everywhere and laid waste the land wherever they went. So they had to supply food from their own lands, and at length they had got a great deal. When the armies at last came together, they were more than forty thousand strong. But here the story falls silent about them for a while, and we will tell you about Merlin and the help he brought, for he had gone to sea, as the story will set it forth from here on. [111] Here the story says that when Merlin set out on the sea along with the company he had brought from the land of the two brother kings, they sailed until they landed in Great Britain. After they had come ashore, Merlin ordered all their equipment to be packed away in trunks, for he did not want them to encamp, but they made their way day and night until they came to the place where they wanted to be, and they made camp on Merlin’s orders. So they rode on until, on the fifth day, they came into Bredigan Forest, where they found King Arthur’s army, and the two armies greeted each other joyfully when they saw each other. Then they settled in in tents and pavilions, and they rested until the next morning. They stayed there for a full week. Merlin was with the kings, and they were making merry. Ulfin said to him in jest, “Merlin, beware of the men on the other side, for they have slandered you dreadfully.” “I am well aware,” said Merlin, “that they don’t like me very much, and they are right! But they will never get their hands on me! And they have no worse enemy than I or one who will do them as much harm, as long as they keep bothering King Arthur—and I won’t have to start this fight! “But be careful not to let anyone leave this army, for we could never make up for the loss. The king’s enemies are encamped in the meadows beneath Bredigan, and there are at least forty thousand men-at-arms on horseback. We must work with very great intelligence, otherwise we will all be killed by them.” Then Merlin took the three kings aside by themselves and said to King Arthur, “Sir, now listen to what I have to tell you. You are a very young man, and you have a very big kingdom to keep up, and the barons have no regard for you at all. The common folk would have dire misgivings about you if it [112] weren't for the huge gifts you have bestowed on them. This is why I tell you to be more generous from now on than you have ever been before, for you cannot ever enjoy your people’s high praise or win their hearts if you are not unstinting in giving. You will have everything you need in return, and I will tell you how that will be, if you wish to hear it. “I want you to know that this piece of ground holds the greatest treasure there ever was, but you won’t take any of it until you come back from the battle. For you will have a great many other things to share among yourselves. You will take a hard look at the lie of the land so that you will know how to get back here again.” The Story of Merlin Then he took them? to the spot where the treasure was. They put a marker there, and the three kings were greatly amazed at what he had told them. Then they went back to the army. King Arthur’s tent was beside a most beautiful, clear spring. The weather was very cold, for it was the month of January, a week before Candlemas, and they had been encamped there for two days. On the third day Merlin came to the three kings and told them that it was then time to go against their enemies and to tell their men-at-arms who would go in front and who behind. “For you will go,” he said, “in such a way that the enemies will not know a word about it before you are on top of them. You have two leagues to go before daylight. If they catch sight of you too soon,? there are so many of them that you can’t hold out against them. But don’t worry, for they won't be able to hold out against you!” Then the three kings put on their armor and got ready, so that all they would have to do was get on their horses. They split their army into battalions and gave Kay the Seneschal the king’s standard to bear, and he led the first battalion, and Girflet, Lucan the Wine Steward, Malruc of the Rock, Guinan the Pale, Drians of the Wild Forest, Belias the Amorous, and Flandrin the Noble* were also leaders in the first battalion, which was four thousand strong. The second battalion was led by Bretel, a man of very great worth, faithful, and skilled with his hands, and he had three thousand men all well armed and riding good horses. Ulfin led the third battalion, and King Arthur was in this battalion with four thousand worthy men who would never forsake their lord even if it meant their death. The battalions formed as they had been chosen, and they all left riding at a slow gait, in tight formation, just as Merlin, who led them riding in front on a great black horse, had ordered them to. Next King Ban split up his and his brother’s men. He gave Pharian the first battalion to lead and his brother King Bors’s standard to carry, for he was a very worthy man, clever and wise, and a good knight, and with him were Ladinas, Moret of the Way, Palet of Trebe, Gratian the Pale, Blioberis, and Meliaduc the Black,? and three thousand knights all on horseback were with them. The second of King Ban's battalions was led by Leonce of Payerne, a very good and worthy knight, and it was a good four thousand men strong. King Bors of Gaunes led the third battalion; he was a skilled leader, and at least four thousand men all on horseback were with him. The fourth battalion was led by King Ban of Benoic, who was the best knight in the whole army, and he gave his standard to his seneschal Alelme, a very good knight, to carry; there were four thousand men with them, [113] wonderfully mounted on horseback, and they would not forsake him even if it meant their death. And when they were all on horseback, they set out on their way riding at a slow gait, keeping their ranks in order. It was 2Sommer’s text has the singular (112, 1. 9). 3Not in Sommer’s text (112, 1. 18), but the urgency of “too soon” is implicit. 4Called Flandrin the White above (Sommer, 103). 5Called Meriaduc the Pale above (Sommer, 103). The Story of Merlin almost midnight; the moon was shining very bright, and it was still and calm. Here the story falls silent about them and speaks about the Saxons from Ireland and the Irish, whose lands bordered the lands belonging to the kings who were waging war against King Arthur. When King Brandegorre, King Margarit, and King Hargadabran, who were the nephews of Aminaduc, king of the Saxons, uncle of Hengist, whom King Arthur’s father killed, just as the story tells it earlier—when they heard that the six kings had left their lands and gone against King Arthur, they gathered an army from far and wide, until there were a good thirty thousand men all riding horses, not counting the footsoldiers, and there were a great many of them. So they moved into the lands of the kings who were waging war against King Arthur, and they took plunder, burned towns, and laid waste the countryside everywhere they went, and they killed many people. They besieged a castle named Vandalior in Cornwall, and they were there for a very long time, and the siege could not be broken by the forces that the ten barons had after King Arthur had driven them out, when the barons reached an agreement against him with the Saxons.® Now the story falls silent about them and does not say anything more right here; rather we will tell you about King Arthur and Merlin and their companions, how they fared in the battle against the six’ kings, who were in the meadows before the castle of Bredigan. Here the story says that after King Arthur and King Ban had put their battalions in order—and the story has told before just how they had started out on their way to meet their enemies—the six kings never mounted watches to guard their army that night, but everyone went to sleep. In fact, it happened that all the chief leaders slept in the tent of the King of the Hundred Knights, and they did not believe that they had to be on the lookout for anyone. As they were sleeping, it happened that King Lot had a very vivid, fearsome dream. It seemed to him that he saw a wind rising so great and so strong that it brought down all their houses and the church bell tower. Afterward thunder and lightning came so strong that everyone shook with fear. After that a great, loud flood came that swept all the houses and a great many people away downstream, and he himself was in danger of drowning in the flood. And while the king was in such a fright, he awoke and crossed himself, for he was terrified by his dream. He got up, dressed, and went to his companions, woke them, and told them his dream just as it had happened. They asked him what direction he had seen the water coming from, and he told them that the whole storm came from the forest, so it seemed to him. They told him that they knew for a fact that soon they would surely fight a great and fearsome battle, so they got up and woke all the knights who were there, and ordered them to mount their horses and ride out through all the countryside. And the king himself put on his armor and arrayed himself very well. 6 An allusion to the aftermath of the Battle of Salisbury? 7Sommer’s text has .x. (113, 1. 20), carried over from the recent discussion of the ten barons. Jaigg) And Merlin [114] ordered King Arthur’s army to hurry, for he knew what was happening in the enemy camp. And Arthur’s men moved so fast that before they knew it, they were rushing against them. Merlin was the first one the enemy knights met, and they asked him who was attacking them. And Merlin answered that they belonged to King Arthur, who was coming to claim the land of anyone who harbored anything against him. When they heard what he said, they turned about, spurring their horses, and they came back to their army and began shouting, “We’ve been betrayed! Lord knights! get your armor on! You'll need it now more than ever before, for the enemy is coming!” They sprang from their beds and ran to get their arms first and not their clothes. Luckily, their horses were saddled, but, for all their rushing, they could not get themselves armed and ready before the enemy was at their throats. They were hampered all the more by a great wind and storm that Merlin sent against them, for all their tents fell in on their heads, and a fog came down on them so thick that they could not see one another without great effort, and it hindered them so much as they tried to arm themselves that they suffered great harm. For King Arthur’s men rushed headlong into their midst and brought down or killed as many as they got to. But the six® kings had got away and come back together in the open field beyond the tents. They had a trumpet blown loud and clear to rally their men so that they might get away from the enemy, who were merciless against them; and many of them had been slain, and the enemy had done away with about a third of them before they could tell one man from another in daylight. And when enough light came for them to recognize each other and see that the enemy had a very great army, they turned about and fled toward their standard, where they heard the horn blowing; for the kings had stopped at the edge of the forest beside a small stream, and all who could slip out of the enemy’s hands gathered there. Their numbers grew little by little until there were about twenty thousand, while the others who could not get to where the standard was fled here and there in utter disarray; they were distraught and upset, bewailing their losses and the harm that had come to them. When King Arthur saw that the whole camp was left to them, he came straight to Merlin and asked him what he should do. “I will tell you what you'll do,” said Merlin. “You will go along this side of the stream to a ford, where more than twenty thousand men have stopped. And you will fight there with them, and you will make them come to terms with you. King Ban and his brother will cut through the forest and storm them from behind when you hit them from the front. And they will be so bewildered that they will no longer have it in them to defend themselves.” With that, each went his own way, and King Arthur found that the six? kings had stopped. They thought they had nothing to fear from anyone and that they could defend themselves well against a bigger army than theirs. 8Sommer’s text has .x. (114, 1. 18). %Sommer’s text has .x. (114, 1. 37). 230 And King Ban turned to go through the forest, while King Arthur rode until he came to the place where the barons had blown the horn. When King Arthur got to the ford, he and his men struck helter-skelter into their midst. There you would have seen shields and lances shattered, knights’ heads lying in the ford so that the water was all red from their blood. And Kay struggled so hard [115] with the standard he was carrying that his men went on beyond him. And the six!° kings saw that very few men had broken through them and put them to flight, for they were only three thousand against their more than twenty thousand, they were deeply ashamed and began to defend themselves very forcefully. They held together so tightly that no one could break through. King Arthur’s men could not hold out for long, but Ulfin brought help and comfort to his companions, and they rushed across the ford. When they got to the other side, they rushed into the enemy so hard that people could hear the din more than half a league away. The fighting there was ruthless and fierce, with hammer blows on helmets and shields; many brave knights lay dead and wounded, and the loss was huge. King Arthur’s men were becoming exhausted, when Bretel came bringing them help. He saw that Ulfin had fallen in the midst of the throng, but he was still brandishing his sword and defending himself forcefully. When Bretel saw him he let his horse run, and he struck the man he was fighting so hard that he bore him from his horse to the ground. When King Clarion saw him lying on the ground, he was sorely distressed, and he said that he would avenge him if he could, so he spurred his horse to that part of the battlefield. And when Bretel saw him coming, he spurred his horse to meet him, and they struck each other's shields so hard that they broke through them, for the worthy knights were strong, healthy, and full of anger, and they shattered their lances as they went past. Then they traded such mighty blows with their shields, bodies, and helmets that they were stunned; they were so dazed that they flew down from their horses onto the ground, and they did not know whether it was night or day. The men who were looking on thought they had killed each other, so they rushed to the rescue from both sides. When Kay the Seneschal came to help out, his side could not suffer very great loss. The three kings came from the other side. The fighting was fierce when they came together, for those from King Arthur’s side numbered eight, and there were twelve from the other side. Girflet was struck down and Lucan the Wine Steward, King Brandegorre, King Yder, King Aguisant, and King Urien. Then the struggle to rescue them grew so mighty and fearsome that no one would believe it! Kay did a wondrous thing there when, with his sheer strength, he brought Girflet up onto King Neutres’s horse, and he struck King Lot with the stump of a lance so hard that he wounded him. Into the fray came the King of the Hundred Knights, and with him he had forty knights he had chosen. When he saw that Kay the Seneschal had struck down King Lot, he was very distraught and said to himself that Kay would think 10gommer’s text has .x. (115, 1. 2). The Story of Merlin himself worthless if he let him get away after that. He then sped to where Kay was and struck him so hard that he bore him from his horse to the ground, where he lay motionless, and he took his horse, led it to King Lot, and said, “Sir, take this horse, and set your mind to taking vengeance for our distress, for you have lost a great deal today.” And King Lot got on the horse. And when Girflet and Lucan saw Kay on the ground, they were most distressed. They had found new lances, so they spurred their horses and struck two of the enemy down to the ground. They took one of the horses and gave it to Kay to ride. And the King of the Hundred Knights and King Lot fought for so long that the three enemy kings and Escans of Cambenic had time to get back on horseback. [116] When these kings had got back on horseback, they said that they would bring grief and harm to the enemy around them or die trying, so they spurred their horses and sped all together toward the fray, and the eight worthy fighters on King Arthur’s side rode them down. But they might soon have suffered dreadful losses, had King Arthur not arrived to bring them welcome help, for as soon as he had crossed the ford he spurred his horse and found Bretel on foot and Ulfin grievously wounded on a horse, and he was sorely distressed. So he grasped his lance hard and held it straight, and he flew against the formation wherever he saw the thickest fighting. He met Tradelmant, king of North Wales, who had come fresh into the battle, and he struck him so hard through his shield and hauberk that he grievously wounded him in the left side, and he bore him to the ground so fiercely that he broke all his bones, and his own lance flew into pieces. And King Arthur took his horse by the gilded reins and handed him to Ulfin. He very gladly mounted the horse and said to King Arthur, “Sir, thank you very much.” As soon as he had got back on horseback, he rushed into the fray and began to strike out and fight so hard that he broke up the press. Meanwhile,!! King Ban and his men had come fresh from their march through the forest, and those on the other side were quite distraught, although they were half again as numerous, so they attacked them all in a body, and the fighting grew all the harder and more dangerous. There King Arthur wrought wonders on his own, and even those who had never seen him before recognized who he was, and even the bravest gave him wide berth, for they did not dare face up to him. When the King of the Hundred Knights saw King Tradelmant thrown to the ground, he was filled with awful sorrow, for he loved him a great deal. He spurred his horse and met King Arthur, who was wonderfully seated on his horse, and he struck him so hard on his helmet that he dazed him. When King Arthur felt the blow, he was very worried indeed, and Kay, who was with him, was as well. And the king rode against the King of the Hundred Knights first, grasping his sword, and he raised his arm to strike him on his helmet. When the King of the Hundred Knights saw him, he thrust his shield between them, but King Arthur hit him so hard that half of it flew into the middle of the field, and the blow bore down on his helmet, shattering it utterly, MNot in Sommer’s text (116, Il. 14-15), The Story of Merlin then glanced down onto his horse’s head and cut him just behind the ears, and horse and rider fell to the ground. Kay looked about and saw a horse running riderless, so he gave it to his father, Antor, who was on foot. And he got on, took hold of a lance, and struck Marganor, the seneschal of the King of the Hundred Knights, so hard that he lodged the iron tip between his shoulders and sent him to the ground spit on the lance; then his lance split. He took the horse and handed it by the rein to Bretel, who was very glad to have it, and he mounted quickly. When he was on the horse, he looked in the middle of the fray and saw Lucan the Wine Steward being trampled beneath the horses’ hooves, and Girflet had stopped near him and was defending him so fiercely that Lucan found him most worthy and praised him, for there were still fourteen men on top of him and he was fighting all alone, yet they could not take him or drive him away despite their strength. When Bretel saw him in such distress, he spurred his horse over to where he was and hit the first man he came to so hard on his helmet that he split his head down to his teeth; he struck off the second man’s arm and sent it flying still strapped to his shield, and then he hit [117] the third man so hard on his left shoulder that he tore it off his body. And when Girflet saw that he was helping him, he struck one man so hard that he split his head open down to the neck, and he fell down dead on the ground. Then Girflet took his horse and gave it to Lucan, who was very upset about being shamed and was very eager to avenge it. He then took a strong, hard lance and headed toward King Aguisant of Scotland, who had run down Malruc of the Rock, and with all his might he struck him so hard on the collar of his hauberk that he sent him to the ground all in a daze. When Malruc saw that he was freed, he quickly got on his horse, and ran headlong into the throng, where the fighting only got more heated, and found Belias and Flandrin, who were in dire straits because they were having trouble getting two of their companions onto their horses, and the press was so great there that they could not do it. So they fought and landed blows so hard that it was nothing short of awesome, and they both struggled until at last they had put their two companions back on their horses. Elsewhere King Arthur and his men were also fighting, and a great hue and cry went up for the two kings they had brought down. Knights spurred their horses in from both sides, the ones to rescue the two kings and hamper King Arthur, and the others to hamper the two kings and help King Arthur. There was hard fighting there in the fray, and they killed and maimed one another. Nevertheless, the two kings were able to get back on their horses, but not before a very hard struggle, for King Arthur held them pinned down and they could not throw him back. Had it not been for a stroke of luck that befell him, they could never have got him away from them for all their strength. But he happened to run to help Kay the Seneschal and Girflet, whom King Lot, King Neutres, King Brandegorre, and King Urien had thrown off their horses and were trampling dreadfully; only Lucan the Wine Steward was there to defend them, and they were so hard-pressed that they were very badly off. When King Arthur saw that they needed help, he turned toward where they were and rushed into their midst 25) raging like a lion. He struck blows to the right and the left and killed as many as he hit, until at last they gave way to him. Kay and Girflet spurred to the king, who was fighting fiercely. Furthermore, Ulfin, Bretel, and Antor were fighting against the duke of Cambenic, against Tradelmant, and against the king of Northumberland, and they brought them down right where King Arthur was fighting and working wonders of knightly skill. There was much jousting, for the main battle was being fought there. But for the single-handed help that King Arthur gave, his men would have been cut to bits, for those on the other side were very good knights, and there were more of them by half. And they were not far from suffering dreadful harm when King Ban of Benoic and his brother King Bors took the enemy by surprise from the forest.!? They were then spreading out along the edge of the forest, where they did not believe they needed to be on their guard against anyone. When the brother kings’ men saw them, they let out such a loud yell that the whole forest and riverside resounded with it, and when the enemy heard this they knew that they would have to suffer the brunt of a dreadful attack. Then the rebellious barons gathered at the edge of the meadow, and they worked out among themselves what they could do. “I don’t know,” said King Lot, “what each one of you [118] will do, but I am sure of what I'll do as long as I can find four or five men to joust against: I'll take vengeance for the trouble and harm that have come to me, for I have lost everything.” When the King of the Hundred Knights heard what King Lot said, he was very sorrowful, and he said that he would do likewise. And King Caradoc, King Neutres, Duke Escant of Cambenic, and King Clarion of Northumberland said the same thing. “Now I'll tell you,” said King Lot, “what we will do. Six of us should go to meet those who have come fresh from the march through the forest, and five will stay in the fighting here. Let the battle last as long as they can hold out. Half of our men will go against the ones who are coming in just now, and the other half will stay here. We will keep fighting close to the wood, near this river, until nightfall, so that they can’t close in on us. This way, we will be able to mount a better assault than we could now, for if we took to the road and fled right now, we would lose more than if we stood our ground.” All the barons agreed to do what King Lot had said. They drew aside and then split their army in two. King Lot, the King of the Hundred Knights, King Aguisant, and Duke Escant of Cambenic took twelve thousand men with them, and they made up six battalions with two thousand men in each one, and they rode out at a slow gait, all drawn up tight together, until they came to the narrow place between the forest and the river that King Lot had told them about. And his was the best advice that anyone could have given them. Six barons got ready to defend them. And the other five were locked in battle and were forcefully defending themselves against King Arthur’s men. Among the five barons who had been left behind were King 12sommer provides the predicate in a note completing the sentence from the Harley manuscript (117, n. 1). 232 Brandegorre, King Urien, King Neutres, King Clarion of Northumberland, and King Tradelmant of North Wales, and they had with them seven thousand men. They all held themselves a little hunched over, and they defended themselves very fiercely against men who were most worthy. What a great shame that such ill will came between them and King Arthur! There the hand-to-hand fighting was dreadful, and it lasted until the hour of vespers. On the other side came King Ban, King Bors, Leonce of Payerne, and Gratian, who led the first battalion, and they rode close together at a slow gait, and they could hardly wait to meet the enemy in combat. From another direction King Yder rode out against them, and when the two sides drew near to each other, they ran against each other so hard that you could have heard the blows from a half league away. The fighting was wondrous there and the fray was dreadful, and there was a great slaughter of men and horses. King Yder’s men could not withstand the onslaught, and in the rout they were driven back into the troop of King Aguisant of Scotland, who rescued them. The fighting was hard and fearsome to behold. Pharian’s battalion was charged again and again, and they would have come to a bad end if Leonce of Payerne had not come to help them. They joined forces and hit the enemy so hard that not one of them could keep his ground, and they drove them back into the duke of Cambenic’s men, [119] who helped them out very well indeed. When he saw the enemy coming in pursuit, he let out his battlecry and ran hard against them, and those who had been fleeing recovered, turned about against those who were routing them, and struck back, fighting without stopping until both sides were utterly tired out, and the fray lasted for so long that the blows they were trading had little effect. All at once King Bors came brandishing his lance, and his standard was indigo with little red diagonal bands edged in gold as finely wrought as anyone could do, and it had streamers that blew against him as far down as the horse’s neck.!3 And when King Yder saw him coming, he said, “Ah! my lord duke, defend yourself so that God may keep us this day from death and harm. I see plainly that we are all in danger of dying, for I see over there the standard of the man who is the least willing in all the world to yield ground for fear of being slain; moreover, he is such a good knight that all our men are like footsoldiers beside him, except his brother, whom no one can match in knightly skill, and this man is a very good and bold knight.” When the King of the Hundred Knights saw and heard King Yder’s speech, he asked him who it was. And he said that it was King Bors of Gaunes, “and I don’t know when he came to this land.” “So help me God,” said King Lot, “I don’t know, but today it will be clear who is a good knight or not.” “I don’t know what each of you will do,” said King Caradoc, “but I am going out to meet him. And if I need help, please give it to me.” 13The clause describes a heraldic ensign in the form of a pennant which has long tails (langhes) with ends (baligot) (119, Il. 6-8). Compare with the description of King Ban's standard just below. The Story of Merlin And they said that they would do so. “Go with God, and may He keep you from harm.” Then King Caradoc left the others, and he avoided all the battalions and went off at a slow gait right up to King Bors’s company. And when they were as near to each other as a bowman could shoot an arrow, they began running at each other as fast as their horses could go. They broke their lances when they met, and it looked as if they might have inflicted deadly wounds on each other,!* then they drew their swords and began to fight with wondrous fierceness. Then King Bors went to a godson of his whose name was Blaris, and entrusted his standard to him, he was a good knight and did not dare refuse. And the king said that he wanted to know how well the British could fight on horseback. Then he took a lance and rushed into their midst so hard that the whole formation shuddered. He struck one knight so fiercely that all his armor could not keep the tip and shaft of the lance from going straight through his body and bearing him to the ground so that he broke his neck and the weapon flew into bits. Then King Bors took hold of his sword, drew it out of the scabbard, and began to fight with such strength that all who saw him were amazed, and they ran out of his way when they saw him coming toward them. King Caradoc would have lost everything, but the King of the Hundred Knights came to his rescue with two thousand very worthy knights who were very skilled at bearing arms. As soon as they gathered, they held themselves to be more than King Bors’s equals, but his prowess surpassed that of all others, and he worked wonders there. On the other side, King Caradoc and the King of the Hundred Knights matched him very well, but they suffered a great deal of damage on each side, and the fighting went on for a very long time without stopping. [120] All at once came King Ban of Benoic, who was very eager to join the fray. The standard in the hands of his steward had crowns of gold and indigo, with bands going across of green like meadow grass, and its six tails blew against Alelme the Seneschal down to his wrists and flew over the ears of his horse and all around its neck. And when the barons saw King Ban’s standard, it was very plain to them that soon they would have to fall back or die if they held out for too long; indeed, as soon as the fight began, they never held their ground, and then King Lot came to the fight with tears in his eyes, for he saw plainly that they had lost everything. Then you would have seen lances broken on both sides, shields driven through, and the ground shaking beneath the warhorses, and the woods resounded with the blows they traded, which could be heard clearly for half a league. When King Ban came into the fight, the barons held out for only a short time, and he drove them back on the six kings! and their companies. There was very great anguish and slaughter on both sides, for King Ban began to kill so many fighting men that they fled in all directions, and he rode through the ranks with his sword in his hand and struck right and left, meaning to cut down the whole M445 Sommer notes (119, n. 1), his text is unclear. 15sommer’s text has .v. (120, 1. 14). The Story of Merlin company of troops. Then came King Lot, the King of the Hundred Knights, and Marganor, and they moved against King Ban, and their troops rushed into the fray and became mixed up with each other. When the barons saw that King Ban was dealing them great harm, they were highly upset. Then the King of the Hundred Knights spurred his horse, his sword in his hand; he was a very good and bold knight, and he struck King Ban across the top of his shield with such a mighty blow that he sent a piece of it flying to the middle of the field. When King Ban saw that, he was most distraught; then he lifted his sword in anger and raised it high to strike the King of the Hundred Knights through his helmet; but the man, who feared this blow, leaned down and hit his horse with his spurs, and King Ban struck the horse on the mail blanket that covered it and cut it all the way through, sending it to the ground all in a heap. And when the King of the Hundred Knights found himself on the ground, he sprang up at once, his sword in his grasp and his shield over his head. And when King Brandegorre saw the King of the Hundred Knights hit the ground, he ran against King Ban and struck him across the shield with such a fierce blow that he split it in two and knocked a big piece to the ground, and King Ban struck him back on the helmet with such a strong blow that he sliced through the metal band and the mail coif, right flat against the head. If his sword had not glanced off, he would have killed him, but he sent him sprawling to the ground. After the two kings had got back up, the great fight began against King Ban, but King Ban defended himself so well that he brought worse harm to them than they did to him, and both of the other kings lost a great deal of blood, and both of them would have been grievously hurt, but the general battle moved into their midst and separated them in spite of their efforts. Then King Arthur happened to find King Ban afoot, because they had killed his horse, and he was defending himself so fiercely that no one dared face up to him, for he was a large, uncommonly strong knight. [121] He rushed on them right in the middle of the fray, but they gave him wide berth and let him go past, so much did they fear his blows, and there was none so bold that he waited for them to fall. And when King Arthur saw him, he went to the side where he was, his sword in his hand smeared with the blood of men and horses, for he was making awesome shows of fighting. And King Arthur reached one knight who was richly armed on a horse of great worth. He struck him through his helmet with such a fierce blow that he split him down to his teeth, and he fell down dead to the ground. King Arthur took his horse by the rein, led him to King Ban, and said to him, “Here, my friend, get on. Our enemies are having a bad day, and soon you will see them give way.” King Ban quickly got on the horse, and he and King Arthur rushed headlong into the enemy formation. And when they saw the great damage they were doing to their fighting men, they were so amazed and bewildered that they lost all will to fight, and they turned their backs and ran to the woods. But there many of them were slain or wounded, and they were pressed so hard between the army 233 and the stream that they were almost utterly routed. There they stopped and made a stand, for they knew that if they ran any farther they would all be killed. When King Neutres and all the other kings saw this, they drew aside together, and Marganor told them, “Hold out until nightfall; otherwise we are all as good as dead.” And they said that was the plain truth. Thus King Ban and King Arthur, riding ahead of all the others, ran after them, until they came to a thundering torrent, where the fleeing army had built a bridge out of branches and logs and crossed over in droves. King Arthur and King Ban came to the bridge and wanted to set out after them. But Merlin came to them and said, “King Arthur, what are you trying to do? Isn’t it enough that you have thoroughly beaten your enemies? Go back to your land, take your friends with you, serve them and do them honor as best you can. I must go away into the woods to do what I must to be in the company of my master Blaise, who is also my very dear friend.” He suddenly left King Arthur and went away into the forest, where he found Blaise, who had been waiting and wishing for him for a long time. And he asked him where he had been for so long, and Merlin told him that he had been with King Arthur in order to give him counsel. And Blaise told him that he was mad not to stay there with him, unless it was simply good for him to counsel the new king. Then Merlin told him everything that happened since he had left him, and he told how the Saxons had invaded the barons’ lands and how they were fighting them. And Blaise put it al] down in writing, and thanks to him we still know it. But now the story falls silent about Merlin and Blaise and speaks of King Arthur and the other kings who were their companions. 8. Merlin as a Bird Catcher.} Here the story says that when King Arthur had routed the six kings* and the duke of Cambenic on Merlin’s advice, just as you have heard, King Arthur started back gladly, heartened that Our Lord [122] had given him victory over his enemies. And he made his way back to Logres, and they all encamped in the meadow outside and set up their tents and pavilions. They posted the watch and slept until daybreak. And when it was daylight, they heard Mass and then went to eat. After they had eaten, King Arthur had all the goods and other spoils of war they had taken put into a heap, and the three kings divided it up among those they knew needed it the most, more to some, less to others, according to their standing, and they gave it out to the poor knights and poor men-at-arms, and not one penny was left. Then they divided up the riding horses and warhorses and silk cloth, and gave out everything until there was nothing more to be given. Then they sent all of their knights and men-at-arms back home, except for only forty, who were to go with them to the kingdom of Carmelide. Pharian and Corresponds to Sommer, 121-124. 2Sommer’s text has .x. (121, I. 38). 224 Leonce of Payerne took their armies back to their country to protect their lands and see to it that King Claudas did them no wrong. The knights who had got generous gifts bought fiefdoms and holdings back in their lands, and they lived very honorably from them all the days of their lives. And King Arthur stayed with the two kings at Bredigan, which was the chief city of Great Britain and Carmelide, and there they awaited Merlin, who was to come to them. The day after King Arthur had come, and he had eaten, there was great merry-making. The three kings went into the galleries that stood by the river in order to look at the meadows and gardens. Then they looked downstream and saw a huge peasant, a lowborn freeman, coming through the meadows along the river; he carried a bow in his hands, and he had arrows. There were wild ducks on a brook bathing, as their nature bids them to do, and the freeman strung his bow and shot one of them, breaking its neck. Then he let fly another arrow and killed a mallard. Then he picked them both up, hung them by their necks on his belt, and went off toward the galleries where the three kings were looking out, and they had watched his shooting. When he had got within an arrow shot of the pavilions, he called King Arthur, and as he drew still nearer the king asked him if he wanted to sell the birds he had killed, and the freeman said, “Yes, very gladly.” “And how much are they worth to you?” asked the king, and he did not answer a word. The freeman had great cowhide shoes on his feet and was dressed in a tunic and coat of burlap and a cape, and around his waist was a knotted sheepskin belt. He was big and tall, black, and hairy, and he looked ruthless and evil, and he said, “I do not respect a king who loves his treasure too much and brings sorrow. Curses on a woebegone king who does not make a poor man wealthy when he can! I'll give you the birds,” he said, “for I have nothing else that is worth anything, as you can see. You don’t have the heart to give a third of your wealth, which, in any case, will rotin the ground before you can dig it up! You can be sure that this weakens your honor and glory.” When King Arthur heard the freeman’s speech, he looked at the other two kings and said to them, “What devils have told this freeman that I have buried treasure?” Then King Ban called the freeman over and asked him who had told him that. He answered not a word, but told King Arthur to have someone take the birds and he would go away. “Now [123] tell us,” said King Ban, “for the sake of your soul, who told you that the king had buried treasure?” And the freeman answered, “A wildman named Merlin told me, and he said that he would come today to talk to the king.” While they were talking, Ulfin came out of a room and went straight to where the king was pleading with the freeman. “Say, now,” said the king, “how could I ever believe that you have spoken with Merlin?” “If you want to,” said the freeman, “believe me; if you don’t want to, don’t believe me! I have got nothing from you, so let’s say we’re even.” The Story of Merlin When Ulfin heard him, he began smiling, for he knew right away that it was Merlin. And when the freeman saw Ulfin, he said to him, “Steward, take these birds and give them to your king to eat tonight. He doesn’t have the heart to make a rich man from a poor man who could still reward him well! You may be sure that today he has spoken to a man to whom wealth means very little, even though he is among the greatest on earth!” Then Ulfin began to laugh out loud, and he said to him, “Sir, if you like, I would very gladly talk with you.” And he said that he would very willingly do so. The king looked at Ulfin and saw him smiling broadly, and he asked him why he was laughing, and he answered that he would know in time. And the freeman went inside dressed as he was and said to Kay, “Here, my lord seneschal, now you can have these birds plucked, and may your king eat them as gladly as I give them to him.” “Sir,” said Ulfin, “this is not the first gift you have given him!” At these words came Bretel, who had heard what Ulfin had told him, and he recognized straightway that it was Merlin. So he began smiling, and the king asked him why he had smiled, and he answered that he would indeed tell him if the freeman wanted him to. And the freeman said that he did. Then Ulfin said to the king, “Sir, don’t you know your friend Merlin? And wasn’t he to talk to you today just like this freeman?” “Yes,” said the king. “Why do you say this?” “Sir,” said Ulfin, “I say it because you do not know him so well as I would like. You can see people two or three times and not recognize them, and I am amazed!” When the king heard Ulfin, he was so bewildered that he did not know what to say, except to entreat him to tell him who the freeman was if he knew. “Sir,” said Ulfin, “don’t you know Merlin?” “Of course I do,” said the king. “Then look closely at this good man,” said Ulfin, “and see if you have ever laid eyes on him. But he can well say to you that he has wasted his time serving you, for this is Merlin who has served you and loved you and helped you as much as he could against all those who wished you ill.” And King Arthur crossed himself, and the other two kings were greatly astounded, and they asked him, “Merlin, is this you then? We never saw you in such garb!” And he answered that it might well be so. “My dear lords,” said Ulfin, “don’t be astonished. He will surely show you the likeness he had when you saw him the first time.” And they said that they would like that. “Now come into this room,” said Ulfin, and they went in with him. And Ulfin said, “Dear lords, don’t be bewildered by the things Merlin does. He’ll show you many likenesses. Whenever he wants to he changes himself by the powers of the art of necromancy, which he is full of.” And Guinebal, who was there, bore witness to the fact. And then Ulfin said that Merlin changed shape because there were many people in the country who wanted him dead. “Now let’s all go [124] to him and see him in his true likeness.” The Story of Merlin And they went out and found Merlin in the hall in his true likeness. Then they ran to him and showed him that they were glad to see him because they loved him, and they began to laugh at the way he had looked and the words he had spoken to the king. Then King Arthur said to Merlin, “Now I am certain that you love me, for you willingly gave me your birds, and I will eat them for love of you!” And Merlin said that he would like that very much. So they stayed together, gladdened and finding solace in their companionship, until mid-Lent. And it happened that King Arthur, following Merlin’s advice, became friends with a maiden, the most beautiful ever born. Her name was Lisanor, and she was the daughter of Earl Sevain, and she was born at the castle called Quimper-Corentin. This maiden came to swear fealty to King Arthur, and other barons came with her, because they feared that he might take their lands away, so they came to him of their own free will. And as soon as King Arthur saw the maiden, he liked her very much, and, thanks to Merlin, he could at last talk to her alone, and they lay together all night. There Loholt was conceived: he was later a good knight and a companion of the Round Table. When it was mid-Lent, the king took leave of the young lady and got ready to go into the kingdom of Carmelide along with a body of forty knights. But the story does not tell any more about them right here, but it goes back to speaking about the six® kings who had been driven from the field of battle, and we will tell what became of them and where they went.4 9. Rebels’ Defenses Against the Saxons.’ Here the story says that the barons were sorely distressed by their loss. They rode all night bewailing their losses and the harm that had come to them, and they suffered from hunger and cold. The next day they came to a city called Sorhaut, which belonged to King Urien, and he welcomed them most joyfully. They rested and took their ease, which they very much needed to do, and the sick and wounded stayed there until they were brought back to health. But they had been there only three days when messengers came from Cornwall and Orkney telling their lords about the damage and destruction the Saxons were wreaking in their lands; they had laid siege to the castle of Vambieres, and they had settled so many of their own people in the countryside that they would never be driven out of the land. When the barons heard this news, none was so bold that his flesh did not crawl from fear. They spent two weeks there in all. [125] After one week, they all gathered in King Urien’s great hall, and King Brandegorre said to them, “My lords, you have heard that the Saxons have invaded your lands. They have plundered and laid waste a great part of them, and 3Sommer’s text has .x. (124, 1. 18). 4sommer’s text summarizes ou il deuindrent (124, 1. 19): “where they became.” 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 124-128. 220 they have besieged the castle of Vambieres. This is why we must quickly decide how they might be thrown out of the country. You know very well that we have lost in our march against King Arthur. We do not look for any help from him or his lands, any more than we do from King Leodagan of Carmelide, who would very gladly help us if he could, but King Rion, who is so strong, has been fighting a war against him for two years. We do not hope for help from King Pelles of Listenois, for he is watching over his brother Pellinor, who lies stricken with a sickness he will never be cured of until the one comes there who will put an end to the adventures of the Holy Grail. Nor do we look for any help from King Alan, who lies ill, before the best knight in the world comes to him and asks him where his sickness came from and what the Grail is that he is served from. “So we cannot decide what to do by ourselves unless Our Lord in His mercy helps us. What we need very much to do is to look to ourselves and see what we can do. You can be sure that the damage that was our lot when we fought against King Arthur happened because of Merlin’s sway, for he went to get King Ban of Benoic and his brother King Bors, who are the best knights in the world, and they have become King Arthur’s liegemen. And you should know that as long as Merlin is against us, we can never hold out against King Arthur; no one, no matter how strong or clever he is, can make himself safe against him, for he knows all things that are to come and that are done, said, and past. “This is why it behooves us to take care of our lands by ourselves and to see how we might strengthen them against those heathen enemies.” And when he had said this, he sat back down, and it was a very long time before any of the barons uttered a single word. Then King Tradelmant of North Wales rose and said, like the wise man he was, “My lords, the best advice I can give you is that we should go fortify the lands bordering the country where the Saxons are coming from. Let us send there as many of our knights as we can gather, and we will guard the roads and tracks so that no supplies or any kind of help can reach them. In the meantime, let us summon our friends, kinsmen, and men-at-arms from every land, and we will fight them as soon as we are all gathered together. I don’t see any other way to break the siege.” When the barons heard King Tradelmant’s speech, they found it praiseworthy, and they agreed to do what he had advised. Then they asked which border lands they should fortify. And he told them that as many men as [126] they had left would go to the city of Wissant and to Nantes,” which is a great, strong city, but they would send the first ones they could bring together to the city of Garles, which was not to be forgotten. “And if we can dishearten them and starve the besiegers, then we will win wealth and land.” And King Lot stood up and said to them, “Certainly, my lords, I do not see how we can fortify the border lands through which they come and go unless we take into account King Arthur and the help he gets from the two 2Sommer’s text has natanc (126, 1. 1), which is later corrected to nantes en bertaigne (127, 1. 1). 236 kings and Merlin, who knows so much about what we do and say.” And the King of the Hundred Knights got up and said, “My dear lords, King Lot says that he is afraid of King Arthur and those who help him running up and down the countryside, but we don’t have to fear them! Yesterday a messenger came to me and said that King Arthur, King Ban, and King Bors were getting ready to go into the kingdom of Carmelide to help King Leodagan against King Rion who is waging war against him. They are going to fight under King Leodagan’s command, and you can be sure that they are doing this at Merlin’s behest. They have well fortified the strongholds throughout his land, and they are aware of the great trouble that has overcome us, which is why they are going off all the more boldly. If King Arthur weren't leaving, I would advise making peace between us and him so that he might strengthen our numbers to help us drive the Saxons out, for they will never be thrown out unless God sees to it. And we must yet take a very strong castle the Saxons have in this land which they call Saxon Rock: its lady is a maiden who is very courtly, and she is the sister of King Hargadabran, who will surely help them out if we don’t take the castle quickly.” When the barons heard that King Arthur was going away and leaving his kingdom, they thought long and hard about why this was, but the only reason they were able to think of was that it could only be because of Merlin. At last they agreed to fortify the border lands of Galone and Gorre and the ones near Cornwall and Orkney. Then they sent for all their men who could bear arms and as many men-atarms from other countries as they could gather, and all who were eager for the spoils of war drew together little by little. But not a single one came from the lands belonging to King Arthur and those who held them from him; they did not want their wealth, for their lord had given them very much of his own and promised them still more. [127] The very first city the barons fortified was Nantes in Brittany, near Cornwall, because it was in the land where the Saxons had come to dwell. King Yder went there with three thousand men, all fitted out with iron armor, who had got away from the rout. And when King Yder came there, the people in the castle were very glad, for they had been quite frightened by the Saxons, who were overrunning the country. And King Yder recruited so many men that he had eight thousand or more following his standard, and they kept watch very well all around the countryside. They often fought with the Saxons, and they won a great deal. Their fame even reached the army of the Saxons, who did not dare ride out where they were without a great company of men. The other city which they sent out to fortify was called Wissant. King Neutres of Garlot went there, and he took with him three thousand men of those who had come through the rout with him. When he got there, the people welcomed him joyfully, for they had been greatly distressed by the great army of Saxons whom they had seen ride by in front of the city, taking away with them the plunder they had won thereabouts, for they had burned and laid waste all the cities. And as soon as King Neutres got there, he stocked the city well with foodstuffs; then he called in menat-arms, freemen as well as serfs, until he had over eight The Story of Merlin thousand, on foot and on horseback, not counting the burghers, who could have been as many as five thousand. They guarded the border land around them so well that hardly any supplies got through to the Saxons, and they very often fought the Saxons in battles where they lost more than they won, for King Neutres was a very good knight, bold and resourceful. And he had by his wife a son who was sixteen years old, and he was wondrously handsome. King Neutres’s wife was the half-sister of King Arthur, from his mother Ygraine, who had been daughter of Duke Hoel of Tintagel, and her name was Blasine. By her King Neutres had a son who was later a companion of the Round Table; his true name was Galescalain, and he later became Duke of Clarence, which King Arthur granted him after marrying Guenevere, his wife. That Galescalain I am telling you about heard the news that King Neutres had fought against his uncle, King Arthur, and he had heard about the great worth that was in King Arthur. So he came to his mother and said to her, ‘Dear mother, weren’t you the daughter of the Duke of Tintagel and Queen Ygraine? Her second husband was King Uther Pendragon, who fathered on her, as I have heard it told, his offspring whose name is King Arthur. He is so worthy and such a good knight that he routed eleven princes with just a few men, as I have heard it told. For God’s sake, tell me the truth! Is he the son of Uther Pendragon, who was in his time the worthiest knight in the world?” When the mother heard her son talking to her in this way, her eyes began to fill with tears, and she spoke, all the while weeping because her heart was breaking for the brother whom her son had brought to mind. “Dear, son,” she said, “you can be certain that he is my brother and your uncle, and he is your father’s close kinsman on King Uther Pendragon’s side, as I have heard my mother say many umes. The barons of this country did not want to accept him as their king, but Our Lord, who is so gentle and noble-hearted, showed in a miracle that he had chosen him.” Then she told him the adventure of the stone that had appeared with the sword, and she told him everything as it had happened. When Galescalain heard his mother’s words, [128] he said that he bore no good will toward any who were against King Arthur. “And may God never let me die,” he said, “before King Arthur has made me a knight. And it is a fact that, if I can do so well that he should be willing to gird my sword on me, I will never leave him as long as I live, provided he wants to keep me as his companion.” Then he left his mother and went into a room to think about what he might do to get to King Arthur, and he decided to send word to his cousin Gawainet asking him to come speak to him at New Castle in Broceliande? and telling him to come as secretly as he could and take care to be there without fail on the third day after Easter. Then Galescalain left the room, went to find a messenger, and 3In Sommer’s text, la noeve ferte de borceliande (128, |. 7; cf. 133, 1. 28): “the new stronghold of the Forest of Broceliande.” Sommer translates as “the New Ford” (133, marginal summary). The Story of Merlin sent him to his cousin Gawainet to tell him what you have just heard. But now the story falls silent about him right here, and we will tell you about the kings who stayed behind at Sorhaut. 10. King Lot’s Young Sons; Mordred’s Parentage.’ Here the story says that after King Neutres had left the barons at Sorhaut, just as you have heard, King Lot took? three thousand fighting men who had survived the battle in which he had been routed, and came straight to the city of Orkney, where he was welcomed very joyfully, for everyone had been afraid of the Saxons, who had the run of the countryside and were burning the towns. And King Lot sent orders to as many as he could muster and raised an army more than ten thousand strong, with foot soldiers and knights, not counting the burghers, of whom there were a good four thousand. So King Lot was able to protect the city and the countryside all about, and he very often fought the Saxons when he got word that they had come on raids, and the poor, young knights won a great deal in spoils; they needed it sorely, and he let them keep everything they took. This is why his fame spread far and wide and his honor grew. It is also true that his wife was one of King Arthur’s half-sisters, his mother’s daughter. This lady gave birth to Gawainet, Agravain, Guerrehet, and Gaheriet, who were all King Lot’s sons. Furthermore, she also bore Mordred, who was the offspring whom King Arthur fathered. And I will tell you how, for the history will be more worthwhile if I make you understand how Mordred was sired by him, for many people would find King Arthur less worthy because of it if they did not know the truth. As it happened, when the barons of the kingdom of Logres were gathered at Carduel to choose a king after the death of Uther Pendragon, King Lot brought his wife with him, and many other barons had brought theirs as well. King Lot happened to have a very beautiful hall for himself and his household. Antor, his son Kay, and Arthur had a part of that very same house off by themselves, as far from the others as they could get. But when King Lot learned that Antor was a knight, he asked him to eat with him, and he had him sit at his own table with his son Kay, who was newly knighted. And King Lot had a room made up where he slept with his wife, while Antor slept in the hall with his son Kay. Arthur had set up his bed [129] in a corner near the door to King Lot’s room, for squires should sleep away from knights. Arthur was a very handsome lad, and he was very clever. He had noticed everything about the lady. He had seen that she was beautiful and plump; he strongly desired her in his heart and loved her for it. But the lady did not heed this, for she was very faithful to her husband. 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 128-131. 2Sommer’s text has sen ala a une cite a (128, tl. 14-15): “went to a city with/that had.” Za7, It happened that the barons had agreed to set a day when they would come to court, conferring together at Black Cross. And the night before he was to leave in the morning, King Lot told his household, as quietly as he could, to saddle their horses at midnight and to get their arms ready. They did as they were bidden, keeping what they did under wraps as best they could; the king did not even speak to his wife about it, but got up as quietly as he could at midnight so that she never knew what was happening. So the king went off to Black Cross, and his wife stayed behind all alone in her bed. And Arthur, who had noticed that the king had gone away, got up and went to the lady’s bed and lay down with her. And after he had got in bed with her, he turned his back to her, for he did not dare do anything else. And it so happened that the lady awoke and, still half asleep, turned toward him, for she truly thought that he was her husband, and she put her arms around him. When Arthur saw that she had embraced him, he understood that she had not noticed who he was, so he put his arms around her and lay with her fully, and the lady gave him much pleasure, and she did it willingly, for she thought that he was her husband. And this is how Mordred was conceived. And when Arthur had done to the lady what gave him such great delight, he did not have to wait a very long time before she went back to sleep. He went back to his own bed very quietly, so that no one realized what he had done until the next day, when he happened to tell it himself when he was serving the noonday meal, cutting meat on his knees. And the lady happened to say to him, “Get up, my dear young man; you have knelt long enough.” And he told her in a low voice that he could never deserve the good things she had done for him, and she asked him what that was all about. He told her that he would not say unless she swore to him that she would not tell anyone or try to find a way to cast blame on him or do anything harmful to him. She answered that no harm could come to her from that, and she very willingly swore to what he asked, for she had no reason to worry. And he told her how he had lain with her the night before, and the lady was deeply ashamed and blushed, but no one knew what their secret was. So that is how Arthur lay with his sister, and it never happened again, but the lady knew that she was with child by him. When it was time for the child to be born, the news had spread through the country that the one who was Uther Pendragon’s son would be king. And in her heart the lady loved him better for it than anyone could ever say, but she did not dare show it because of her husband King Lot, and the war between King Arthur and those of her country sorely distressed her. One day it happened that Gawainet came home from the hunt. He was finely dressed in a homespun robe that was lined with ermine, and he was holding onto three greyhounds by the leash, and he was leading two hunting dogs behind him. Everything he did suited him very well, for he was the most handsome and best-shaped man for his size that anyone had ever seen. When he got up in the morning, he had the strength of the best knight in the world; by the time the hour of prime came, [130] it had grown twofold; at tierce, the same thing. At midday, he 238 went back to the strength he had at first, and at nones and all the nighttime hours, he always still had his first strength. When Gawainet went into the hall, looking just as I have told you, his mother was lying down in a room by a hearth where there was a great roaring fire. When the lady saw Gawainet, who was a big, handsome lad, and it was high time for him to be knighted, she began to weep. The lad was very sorry for her, so he asked her what was wrong. And she answered, “Dear, sweei son, I am right to weep, for I see you and your brothers waste time doing foolish things, when you should already be knights at King Arthur’s court. He is your uncle and the best knight in the world, they say, and you should serve him and work for peace between him and your father, What a great shame it is for there to be such hatred between those two and between him and the other barons who should be serving him and loving him. In their pride they do not deign to recognize him as their overlord, and it certainly seems that Our Lord is grieved by it because they have lost more in the warfare than they have won. Furthermore, the Saxons have invaded this country. They will utterly destroy us if God does not show us a way out, and we will not have help from the man who could drive them out, that is, King Arthur, who will have a hard time loving your father and the other barons! And you and your brothers are much to blame, for right now you should be working for peace between your uncle and your father, so that they might be good friends, but all you do every day is play around with these greyhounds! You are wasting your time and your youth, and I tell you that you ought to be ashamed of yourselves!” When Gawainet heard his mother, he said to her, “Lady, are you telling me the truth? This King Arthur who is so worthy, is he your brother and my uncle?” “Dear son,” she said, “there is no doubt about it. He truly is your uncle.” Then she told him from beginning to end how it had all happened. And when Gawainet had heard it, he said very courteously, “Dear mother, now don’t you worry. By the faith I owe you, I will never wear a sword at my waist or a helmet laced on my head before King Arthur girds me with arms, if he finds me worthy of being a knight. And we will go to court and help him defend his land against all those who would do him harm.” “Dear son,” said the lady, “I will not keep you from that, for 1 would be very glad to see the day when you could do that. And may Our Lord grant that your father and your uncle also become friends.” “Lady,” said Gawainet, “Let it be for now. You can be sure that I will never come back into my father’s house, once I have left to go to King Arthur’s court, until he and my father have come to terms with each other, even if I should have to go against my own father.” While he and his mother were talking, his three brothers came in and saw that their mother was weeping. And Agravain said to Gawainet, when he found out why, “You are more to blame than the rest of us, for you are the eldest, and you should have taken us to serve the one who makes all those around him better than they were before. Here we do nothing but waste our time in foolishness, and we are not looking ahead to a time when we’ll be in The Story of Merlin trouble, [131] just like the bird caught in a trap? The Saxons, who have laid waste the whole country, are a day’s ride away from here, and there is no army hereabouts and no way to drive them out except by the knightly valor of King Arthur. So let’s go and ask him to give us our amns, and we will help him defend his land against his enemies. This is the best thing I see for us to do, and here the game is so rich that we can win nothing.”* When Gawainet heard his brother’s speech, he thought him all the more worthy, and he praised him and told him that he would do just that. “Now all there is to do is get ready, for we'll leave within the next two weeks.” When their mother saw what they were undertaking, she was most glad, and she told them not to worry about anything, for she would fit them out with horses and armor, and they were very happy. But here the story falls silent for a while about them and their mother, and we will tell you about the kings who had stayed behind at Sorhaut. 11. Young Sagremor; Dispersal of the Routed Rebel Leaders.’ In this part the story says that the three kings had left Sorhaut to fortify strongholds, just as you have heard. King Clarion left after they did and came to Belande, one of his ciues, and he took three thousand knights with him. After that the King of the Hundred Knights left and took three thousand armed men with him and went off to the city of Malehaut, where there was a noble lady. This city bordered on his land, but he withdrew there because it was closer to the way the Saxons were coming in: this is what the barons begged him to do. He did for them what they wanted, and he protected the border land around them very well. After him King Tradelmant left the city of Sorhaut, and he went off to his stronghold, North Wales,2 with three thousand men outfitted with armor, and his liegeren were very glad to welcome him, because they were along the way to Saxon Rock, which had done them great harm. And after him King Brandegorre left with three thousand armed men and went straight to Estrangorre, his main stronghold, because it was close to Saxon Rock. He called in knights and men-at-arms from far and wide until he had gathered together a great many of them. This King Brandegorre had a wife, a very noble woman, who was the >Agravain’s wording is nous... serons pris ausi comme ki otsiaus au brai (130, 1. 43-131, 1. 1): “we'll be caught like the bird in glue.” The use of glue was a common means of trapping small birds. The reference to a bird caught in a trap is proverbial: A tart crie li oisiaus quand tl est pris (“The bird cries out too late when it is already caught”). See Joseph Morawski, Proverbes francais antérieurs au XVe siécle (Paris: Champion, 1925), no. 147. 4Another indication of Agravain’s tendency to use proverbial language. Cf. Morawski, no. 646: Endementres que bi geus est biaux le fait bon laisster (“While the gamie is rich, it is well to leave it”). 'Corresponds to Sommer, 131-133. 2In Sommer’s text, treated as the name of his city (131, 1. 21). See also 160, Il. 32-33. The Story of Merlin daughter of Hadrian,>? emperor of Constantinople. This lady had formerly had a husband who was king of Vlask4 and Hungary, but he died only five [132] years after he had wed the lady and left a son, the most handsome child ever to be bom of a man. This lad was handsome, worthy, and intelligent, and he was at the age when he should become a knight. People called him Sagremor. Afterwards he did many highly worthy deeds in the kingdom of Logres, which the story will tell you about farther on. Now I will tell you what happened to this Sagremor. Renown, who runs everywhere, went throughout the land and countryside, and people talked about no one but King Arthur and his openhandedness. And the stories spread as far as Constantinople, so that Sagremor heard about him. He was no more than fifteen years old, and he was the most handsome boy in the world, strong of limb and trim of body. When he had heard the news about King Arthur, he yearned for the time when he would be made a knight by his hand. And he often said to himself that only the very worthiest of men could be given the order of knighthood. His grandfather, King Hadrian, who was then still alive, wanted him to become a knight,® for he was the next male heir who would hold the empire after his death, but he told him that he would never be a knight until King Arthur made him one with his own hand. They talked about it from day to day until at last King Hadrian had his baggage made ready and sent him very richly off to Britain. But here we will stop talking about him for a while, until it is the right time, and we will tell about the kings who left Sorhaut to protect the border lands. Here the story says that, after King Brandegorre had left Sorhaut, King Caradoc had his baggage made ready and left Sorhaut with three thousand armored men, and he went straight to Estrangort,® his main stronghold, and very boldly set up garrisons there, for he was a worthy, fearless fighter. After him left King Aguisant of Scotland, and he was Ticher in lands than any other king in those parts, and he was the youngest, but he knew less about fighting than the others. He went off to Corentes in Scotland, which was avery great and wealthy city, and it was very much bothered by the Saxons, for they often went back through that neighborhood; it was only twenty Scottish leagues from there to the castle of Vambieres, where there were so many laying siege that the fighting men who gathered there every day were beyond counting. As soon as King Aguisant had set himself up in the city of Corentes, the burghers, of whom there were five thousand, were very glad. And he sent throughout the land for knights, mounted men-at-arms, and footsoldiers to come defend the stronghold, and about ten thousand, not counting the burghers, gathered there. They fought the Saxons who ran up and down the countryside, and King 3Sommer’s text has audeans here (131, |. 27) and andeaus elsewhere (132, 1. 15). 4Sommer’s text has blasque (131, |. 28). 5The clause is not in Sommer’s text (132, I. 13). Supplied from the Harley manuscript, as quoted in his n. 2. 6Not to be confused with Estrangorre, the city belonging to King Brandegorre (131, |. 24; etc.), or the birthplace of Goswain of Estrangot (153, 1. 39). aye Aguisant and the other princes won and lost many times there, but they held out for a very long time. And ‘after the kings, the Duke of Cambenic left Sorhaut with four thousand armed men, on [133] foot and on horseback. He made his way until at last he got to Cambenic, his stronghold, which was wealthy and well stocked with all kinds of goods. There were a good four thousand of his men in the city, and they were very glad when they saw their lord. And the duke sent far and wide for fighting men, and he got at least eight thousand, not counting those who were garrisoned in the city. So the duke lived very well indeed. And so, just as you have heard, the eleven leaders left and fought many times against the Saxons. The countryside grew ever poorer, for no wheat had been harvested for five years, and there was none anywhere except that which the Saxons and Christians took from each other, unless by chance a merchant ship came; and this is how they got through it all. And the Saxons overran King Arthur’s land, and they inflicted great damage until God sent help there in the form of handsome, noble, young men. I will tell you who they were who held King Arthur’s land until he came back from the kingdom of Carmelide. And the barons, as well as the Saxons, lost a great deal more than King Arthur, but the barons were angry with the king because he did not defend his land himself. But now the story falls silent for a while about them all, and it comes back to Galescalain, son of King Neutres of Garlot. 12. Young Galescalain and King Lot’s Sons; Battle with the Saxons.’ Now the story says that when Galescalain had learned the news about King Arthur, just as the story has spelled it out, he sent a messenger to his cousin Gawainet telling him to come confer with him as secretly as he could and to bring his brothers with him; he should take care to be there the third day after Easter. And the messenger made his way for long days at a time until he came to Wales, in the border land of Orkney, and at last he found the means to talk to Gawainet and his brothers and to tell them that Galescalain had sent for them. When they heard the messenger’s speech, they were very glad indeed, and they said that they would be there without fail, for they were well aware that he would not send for them unless they were needed. So they gave the messenger a good horse, and he made his way back to Galescalain and told him the answer of his four first cousins on his mother’s side. And he equipped himself and, the day after Easter, went straight to New Castle in Broceliande.” When he got there, Gawainet and his brothers had not yet come. So he waited for them, and when he did see them coming, he greeted them heartily. And Gawainet said to him, “Dear cousin Galescalain, you sent a messenger to ask 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 133-137. 2See above, ch. 9, n. 3. 240 my brothers and me to come confer with you. But I want you to know that, if I hadn’t wanted to ask your leave, I would have gone to a place where I have much to do; I yearn for nothing more than to be there.” “Sir,” said Galescalain, “where do you need to go?” “You should know,” said Gawainet, “that I am on my way to see the embodiment of all worthiness, all [134] wondrous things, all noble generosity in the world, I have never heard more good things said about anyone else.” “For God’s sake,” said Galescalain, “who is this then? God grant that it be the one for whom I have asked you to come.” “In truth,” said Gawainet, “his name should not be hidden, but declared before all worthy men. His name is King Arthur, and he is our uncle and yours. But all the barons of this land have done him wrong by fighting him, yet they are the ones who should most love him and hold him dear. As God is my witness,” he went on, “I will never have a sword at my side before he girds it on me himself.” When Galescalain heard him, he had never been happier. He ran to him with open arms, and he showed him as much joy as if the whole world belonged to him. He said to him that he had sent for him for no other reason! And he told him word for word how his mother had encouraged him, and Gawainet told him in return what his own mother had said to him. Then they made their plan to set out together within two weeks’ time. And they all hurried back home to get their armor and horses ready, as was fitting for young men who were the sons of kings. Why should I say any more about it? Galescalain worked until he had mustered two hundred of the best-armed knights and squires he could have chosen to his liking, and he left without his father knowing anything about it, and they rode, taking the most out-of-the-way roads they knew, until they came to New Castle in Broceliande. Galescalain stayed there until Gawainet and his brothers came. And they had been able to muster five hundred men on horseback, knights and squires, who were all sons of earls and knights. But they had only nine knights, and of the men Galescalain had brought, there were only twenty. When they came together, they greeted each other very joyfully, then they talked about where they would go. They agreed to go to Logres in Britain, King Arthur’s chief city, “and we will hear news there sooner than anywhere else, and we can avoid the Saxons who are about in the countryside, for if we met them, we would suffer great harm.” It was at the beginning of May, in the springtime when the birds sing clear and sweet and all things are kindled with joy, when the woods and gardens are in bloom and the meadows turn green again with new grass shoots and all kinds of sweet-smelling flowers among them, when smooth waters again flow in their beds and newly-awakened love gladdens youths and maidens whose hearts are made merry and gay by the sweetness of this time of renewal. Then it happened that Gawainet, Agravain, Guerrehet, Gaheriet, Galescalain, and those who had come with them got up early because the weather would be very hot at midday and they wanted to ride during the morning when it was wondrously cool and calm and the air was soft. They were The Story of Merlin still young and unhardened against discomfort. They were fully armed and wore iron helmets on their heads like foot soldiers, and they had their swords hanging from their saddle horns, for the countryside was unsafe because of the Saxons who rode about plundering to get food, which was plentiful at that time, and it was a great shame to see such a rich land destroyed so wrongfully. [135] On the third day they had been riding, just as you have heard, they met King Leodebron, King Senigran, King Maldalet, and King Servagat of the Land of the Irish, who had laid waste the countryside, and they were bringing back much booty and plenty of food, enough so that the army would be well stocked with bread, wine, and meat for a long time to come, for they had stripped the countryside and the ports where ships came to dock, and there was so much food that five hundred pack horses and seven hundred carts were all loaded with it, and the train was so long and the dust they raised wherever they went was so amazing that one man could not tell who another was without looking into his face. And the fire and smoke were so thick throughout the countryside that people a half day’s ride away could see that a fire was burning. When the youths had got close to the train, they could hear the common folk weeping and wailing because of the harm the Saxons had done them. And there were fully ten thousand Saxons on horseback, not counting those on foot, who ran up and down setting fire to all the towns and mistreating everyone. When the youths saw the sorrow and bereavement, they asked the peasants, who they saw were very frightened, where King Arthur was. And they said that he had gone off to the kingdom of Carmelide in mid-Lent, and he had fortified the border lands and the strongholds in his own land so that no one could harm them. “But the Saxons are so distressed by the hindrances that they have laid waste the whole country, as you can see.” When the youths heard that the king was away, they said that they would fight the Saxons for his land and the plunder that they were taking off, and they would keep the country until the king had come back. When the peasants heard them saying these things, they asked them who they were, and they told them, and when they heard who they were, they were very glad to know them; they truly thought that King Arthur would win back his lands thanks to them and, through the sons who had come there out of noble generosity, he would have back the love of the fathers. Then the peasants joined them. And as soon as the youths saw the great harm the Saxons were doing throughout the country, their hearts grew heavy, and they cried out, “To arms now, noble squires! We'll soon see who is worthy, for we are fighting for what belongs to us. We must defend our rights against all who lay waste what is ours and plunder it.” Right away the squires ran to put their armor on. They got on their horses and lined up by rows and then squeezed tight together, just as the knights showed them to do. There were about eighty® who were good, faithful knights, and the peasants who had come along numbered more than five 3Previously, Sommer’s text gives the total number of knights as 29 (134, ]. 22). The Story of Merlin hundred, on horseback and on foot, and they went off together like a flock of starlings. The first thing they did was fall on the foodstuffs the Saxons were having driven back to their army, and there were more than three thousand who were to lead the train. And the story says that it was well after midday, and it was so hot and the dust had been raised so high that the men could not see each other a stone’s throw away. And as soon as the youths saw their enemies, they ran their horses over them; they hit, struck down, and wounded as many as they reached, so that none might get away from them. That day Gawainet killed more of them than all the others, and he and his horse were all covered with blood. He wielded an axe, and right away, any man he went after could do nothing to avoid [136] being split open down to his bowels. And his brothers fought so well that none dared face up to them. And Galescalain was always with Gawainet, and he fought wonderfully; he killed or struck down all he met in his path, and no one got away from him without having a foot or a hand or a leg or his head or some other part of the body cut off. But above them all, it was awesome to see the death and destruction that Gawainet meted out, for no iron or steel or man’s body, no matter how strong, could withstand his blows. They fought so long up and down the train that of the three thousand who were taking the plunder back toward the army, barely twenty got away. Ten of these fugitives turned back toward their cavalry, which was following behind. There were more than eight thousand of them, but they were not well armed, for they had had the squires pack their armor away because of the heat that was bothering them. And the ten runaways came in and shouted to them that everyone taking the plunder had been killed. When the Saxons heard that they had lost their plunder, those who had arms ran to get them. They put on their armor and made themselves ready as best they could. But a good third of them could not get to their armor, because their squires had gone off with the wagon train which the youths had taken, and they were having it taken back to Logres, driven by the very peasants who had joined them. Then the youths had followed the runaways and at last stormed them headlong. There they fought a fierce battle, harsh and wicked, that was a wonder to see and hear! There Gawainet killed King Thoas of Ireland, striking him hard with his axe, which he held two-handed, nght through the helmet and splitting him down to his teeth. And Galescalain struck King Segrain so hard that he sent his head flying to the middle of the field. And Agravain rushed into the midst of the fray and began striking left and right. And Gaheriet had run after Guinebal an arrow shot away from his companions, because he had struck his brother Guerrehet down with his lance (he had not looked closely, and Gaheriet thought he was dead); he ran on him, with his sword drawn, as fiercely as if he were a wild boar. When Guinebal saw Gaheriet coming, he turned in flight, for he did not dare face up to him because of the wonders and the slaughter he had seen him do, and without doubt he was of very wonderful prowess. For the account of the histories says that he applied himself just as trelessly as his brother Gawainet when he was old enough to be a knight. And when he saw the Saxon who was fleeing aa farther away from him, he swore to God and His Mother that he would not fail, in woods or on the plain, to avenge his brother. So he spurred his horse to a full speed and ran after Guinebal until he had left his own men behind him farther than a crossbow could shoot, and he caught up with him in a convoy of Saxons. Gaheriet hit him so hard right on his helmet that he knocked off a big piece of it and sent him slumping over his horse’s neck; then he sliced between his body and his shield right through the shield’s straps and cut his arm off, sending it flying to the middle of the field. And when Guinebal saw that he was so dreadfully wounded, he fell to the ground in a faint. Then Gaheriet twisted his head out of his helmet, for he was very [137] glad to have avenged his brother, and he prepared to go back, but the Saxons who saw him strike the blow would not allow it. King Guinebal shouted, “Now at him!” And straightway hundreds and then thousands of them broke their formation and closed in around him on all sides, and they struck at him with lances and brought him and his horse down in a heap. Gaheriet sprang to his feet after the lances had been broken, for he was very strong and he still had his wind, and he defended himself fiercely. None of the Saxons was so bold as to dare face up to him or take him, but they stood back and threw lances, spears, and sharp knives at him until they had brought him to his knees two or three times. He was close to being killed or taken prisoner when a squire who had seen him run after the Saxon shouted to Gawainet, “What are you doing here? You will soon lose your brother Gaheriet unless you help him right away! He had given chase to a Saxon and he caught him in that valley, where that fighting is, and they have brought him down and killed his horse. Whata shame it would be to lose him like that!” When Gawainet heard him, he said, “Ah! Lady Mary, Holy Virgin, maiden Mother of Jesus Christ, please don’t let my brother be lost to me! I would never again have joy in my heart if I lost him.” Then he shouted to his companions to follow him. “Now we'll see who loves me!” “Dear cousin,” said Galescalain, “why do you go on preaching? When there is such need, we shouldn't wait! Ride out fast, for I am afraid that they may kill him before you can get to him!” Then the youths broke out of their formation all together and rode off as fast as their horses could carry them. Gawainet ran ahead of them and took his axe in both hands, just as he had done in the slaughter before, when the whole field was covered with gore, and he looked until he had found Gaheriet lying sprawled on he ground. The Saxons had knocked his helmet from his head, and they tried to pull his mail coif away in order to cut off his head, but then they thought that they could take him alive if they could bring him to the Saxons’ army. They had laid him out on the ground and were trying to tie his hands behind his back when Gawainet came spurring his horse, wielding his axe, and he rode headlong into their midst as fast as he could make his horse run. He struck left and right and quickly killed or wounded every one he hit. When those who were holding his brother saw the wonders he did, they did not dare face up to him, and they took flight. And when Gaheriet saw his brother, he jumped 242 to his feet and quickly put his helmet back on his head; he picked his sword up and made ready to defend himself. And Agravain brought him a horse and said to him, “Dear brother, get on! You were unwise to go so far away from us.” And Gaheriet climbed on the horse, happy and smiling. And the Saxons gathered their forces over the whole countryside, and they formed their battalions. But now the story falls silent about the youths and the Saxons, and it speaks about the peasants whom the youths had sent back to the city of Logres with the plunder and the wagon train they had won back. 13. Gawainet and His Brothers Defeat the Saxons.’ Here the story says that the peasants who were to take the food the youths had won back from the Saxons went straight to the city of Logres, and they had a very hard time getting there safely, even though the city of Logres was only four Scottish leagues away from the place where the food had been won back. [138] When the burghers saw the valuable plunder and the foodstuffs, they asked to whom they belonged. And the peasants told them that Gawainet, King Lot’s son, and his three brothers, along with their cousin Galescalain, the son of King Neutres of Garlot, had come to help King Arthur, and they had left their own lands and countries, and they said that they would not let King Arthur down a single day of their lives. They had come with seven hundred companions, “and they met three thousand foragers who were taking this plunder, and they fought with therm until they had killed them all and cut them to pieces, and the Saxons had taken the goods from us to feed their army. And they fought with seven thousand Saxons who were taking this plunder away with thern. Open the gates and take it back, and we'll go help them, for it would be a great shame if they were cut off before their prime, for we think they are very worthy and valiant fighters.” And they opened the gates and welcomed them into the city. Afterward they all agreed that some of them would go help the youths, and they had a horn blown atop the highest tower. It was their custom that as soon as they heard the horn, throughout the town they would all put on their armor, so they all took up their arms and went out through the main gate. Then they waited for the castellan, Doon of Carduel, who was a very worthy man and faithful to his lord. And when he came out, he found that up to seven thousand men had gone out of the town. Then he came to them and said to them, “Dear sirs, it would not be well for the town to be left stripped of all fighting men, for we do not know what is to come of us or where we might find others.” And they answered that he had spoken well. Then he chose five thousand, and two thousand stayed to keep the town from being overtaken by anyone. Then they took to the road in the direction where the youths were and rode until they saw the battle raging wonderfully hot, but the youths were in great distress, for they had with 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 137-141. The Story of Merlin them only eighty knights, five hundred squires, and twenty who had not yet been dubbed, along with three hundred men on foot and on horseback who were from the countryside and had joined them, and in truth, they all said that, for as long as they lived, they would rather die than let them down. But Medelant and Guinemant had split their army into two companies with four thousand men in each one, for the Saxons who lived on the land had joined the invaders. The first to come was Guinemant, brandishing his lance, and he was large and strong and very bold. And Gawainet came out ahead of his companions; he held his sharpcutting axe, and he rode against them. Guinemant spurred his horse toward him and hit him in the chest with his lance so hard that the weapon flew into splinters, for his hauberk, which was strengthened with double mail, saved him. And the brave youth, so worthy and bold, did not move from the blow he had dealt him, but he made straight for him and gave him such a blow with his axe below his helmet that he sent him head over heels over his horse’s backside, and with the stroke glancing off his helmet, Gawainet cut the horse from one end to the other down across its back, so that man and horse spilled down together in a single heap. When the Saxons saw the blow, they shook with dread all around, for they were afraid that King Guinemant had been killed. Then all the men from one side spurred to his rescue, [139] and Gawainet flew headlong into their midst. They hurled their weapons at him and killed his horse under him. But he jumped up very fast and struck left and right. He was so lively, and twisted and turned so fast, that no one dared face him. Help came to him from every side, and the fray began all about Gawainet, it was very great and lasted for a long time, for the Saxons were eager to get Guinemant back on a horse and to hold Gawainet and take him prisoner. When Gawainet saw that they were bent on taking him, he said they would not take him “any time today” if he could help it. Then he came brandishing his lance toward a Saxon who was holding his brother Agravain hunched over his horse’s neck and trying hard to cut off his head. When Gawainet saw that, he almost went mad. He put his feet together, leapt through the fighting toward the Saxon, and raised his axe to strike him. When the Saxon saw that he could not get out of the way, he thrust his shield out, but Gawainet struck him so hard that he split the shield in half, and the blow came down on his left shoulder and sliced him down to the waist, and he fell to the ground. Gawainet took his horse and very quickly sprang into the saddle, and he shouted to his companions, “Now we’ll see who is worthy! As for me, I won’t let them get away in the woods or on the plain.” Then they charged into their midst, and they began such a slaughter that they left heaps of Saxons lying in the fields like piles of dung. Even so, the Saxons were at last able to get Guinemant back on a horse, and when he was dressed in his armor, he took a stout, straight lance and drove toward Agravain, who had killed one of his nephews right before his eyes, and with his lance he struck him a very hard blow below the armpit, and it went between the two layers of mail, grazing his side, so that the tip and shaft The Story of Merlin stuck out an arm’s length on the other side. And he brought man and horse down in a heap. When Gaheriet and Galescalain saw Agravain fall, they were very much afraid that he would be killed, so they very quickly rode over to help him. Galescalain was ahead, and with his sword he hit Guinemant so hard on the helmet that he made him hunch forward over the saddle horn. Gaheriet struck him on the arm so hard that he sent it flying to the middle of the field, then he hit him again, going between his neck and his shield, and sent his head flying to the middle of the field, and Galescalain kicked his body off the horse onto the ground. Then he took the horse and led it to Agravain, who was fighting hard to defend himself on foot, and he got on the horse as fast as he could. Then they began fighting wondrously well together, but of Gawainet they knew nothing, for he had fought his way into the midst of the Saxons, and it would not be an easy thing to find him. But when the Saxons saw King Guinemant dead, they were quite taken aback, and they rode in flight into King Medelant’s division. There Gawainet was taken along with them.? He had been coming and going so much that he had lost track of his brothers, but when he saw that the Saxons were being routed, he stopped until he saw his companions, and they gathered in order around him. Medelant was riding with a great many men, a good eight thousand all drawn tightly together. He could only inflict great harm, which would have been grievous for the kingdom of Great Britain. But help came from the city of Logres: there were a good five thousand of them riding good horses and well armed, for they had equipped themselves very well. [140] When the young men saw help coming from Logres and the standard that Doon of Carduel was bearing, the peasants who had joined with the youths said to them, “Now you can be safe and glad and joyful, for soon you will have help! Here come the men of Logres bringing you help!” They tightened their horses’ saddles again, mounted, fell into order, and rode in close formation. And the Saxons rode on toward them full of anger because of King Guinemant, who was dead. Then they all began striking one another, shattering their lances on bodies and shields, and the battle began great and fearsome! The young men were having the worst of it, when the reinforcements came and rushed headlong into the Saxons as fast as their horses could take them. There so many lances splintered against one another that people could hear the pounding for half a league. And when the lances were broken, they drew their swords and began a great and wondrous fray. There so many men and horses were slaughtered, so many feet and hands cut off, so many arms split away from bodies, that the blood ran down through the valley, and the dust was raised so thick that one man could hardly see or recognize another. And the fighting lasted all day, from first light until evening. 2Sommer’s text is unclear in light of what follows (139, Il. 3738): iluec rechurent li fuiant gauainet (“there the fleeing men received Gawain”). 2g3 There Gawainet fought so well that the men of Logres looked at him in wonder, for he struck down and killed men and horses so hard and fast that no one dared at all to face up to him. Then he happened to meet King Medelant, who had struck down Doon of Carduel. He was down on the ground, and he was holding Doon by the helmet trying to cut his head off, but Gawainet rode over and struck King Medelant right through the helmet with his axe, which he wielded with two hands, and the blow was so hard that he split him open down to his teeth, and he fell dead to the ground. When the Saxons saw King Medelant dead, they were so aghast that they turned in flight, scattering here and there, but they headed straight for Vambieres, where the great siege was. Then the pursuit began, and the dust was so thick that one man could not see another. The clatter was very great, for as soon as Doon had got back on his horse, he rode after them with all his might, but still the youths were out ahead, and they used their weapons so hard that the beating lasted for five leagues. Doon and the others struck down so many of the twelve thousand there had been at the beginning that not even three thousand got away. This is how the Saxons were routed. The pursuit lasted until nightfall, and then they happily turned back toward Logres. There they took winnings wonderful to behold, for the Saxons had brought together everything they had plundered and stolen from the countryside; so they took it all back to Logres with them. And when they got there, those inside welcomed the youths very joyfully when they recognized them. The men then brought out all the goods they had won and said to Gawainet, whom they held to be lord over them all, that he should divide them as he willed. And he told them that he would not put his hand to it ahead of Doon of Carduel, “for he can divide it up and distribute it better than I can, for he knows better than I do who the leading men are and the worthiest. So let him do it as he sees fit.” When they heard him speaking this way, they held him in high esteem; they praised him and said that he could not fail to be a worthy man, and they began to love him all the more for the great noble qualities they found in him. So the youths stayed and rested in the city of [141] Logres, and the Saxons did them no harm. Now the story falls silent about the youths right here and about their companions, and it goes back to King Arthur, King Ban, King Bors, and their companions, who are going into the kingdom of Carmelide to serve King Leodagan. 14. Arthur’s Support of King Leodagan Against the Saxons.’ Now the story says that when King Arthur and his two kings had left Bredigan, along with their companions, they rode for many days until they came to Carhaix in Carmelide, where King Leodagan was staying, on Easter Eve. And when ' Corresponds to Sommer, 141-145. 244 they got to the city, they rode until they came to the high hall, and they found King Leodagan. He was very frightened because King Rion had invaded his land with fifteen crowned kings; they had already routed him and driven him from his defenses. And they had laid siege to Aneblayse, which was a great, wealthy city. King Leodagan could not think of a way to drive them out, for he did not have enough fighting men in his lands. So he sought advice from the barons from his lands and those from the kingdom of Logres who had stopped there, and he asked them how he should go about driving King Rion out. And while he was talking this way with his knights, King Arthur came into the hall with his companions. They all took one another by the hand and came before King Leodagan one after the other; King Arthur was the fortyfirst in line, with Merlin. They were all very richly dressed, young knights with their first growth of beard, except for the two brother kings, who had gone first and were somewhat older. The knights were big and handsome, and all who were there looked at them with wonder, for they were so finely attired. And when they had come in and King Leodagan had seen them, he got up to meet them, for it seemed to him that they were important men of high birth. King Ban spoke first, and he greeted King Leodagan as courteously as he could. And the king told him that he was welcome, if he meant him no wrong. “To be sure,” said King Ban, “we did not leave our lands to harm you, rather we have come to serve you, and we will ask nothing of you that you will find burdensome. We beg you not to bother asking us our names or who we are before we tell you of our own free will. If you do not find this agreeable, then we will commend you to God, may He keep you from shame and distress! And we will very soon find someone who will take us on our terms, but we have heard that you accept any fighting men who come to you. Now all together, we implore you to tell us what it will please you to do with us.” Then King Leodagan answered that he would take counsel, if they did not object, and they said they did not. Then he called the knights of the Round Table in private and asked them their thoughts about what that knight had asked him for, and they said that there could be no harm in engaging them, for to them they seemed to be brave men, “So please accept them, for God’s sake. And beg them for love of [142] you to tell you who they are, as soon as it is time and place, and to let you get to know them.” With that, the king left them and came straight to the place where the barons were awaiting him, and he said to them, “Dear sirs, I am amazed that you have asked me to let no one know your names; I have never heard such a thing. But to me you seem to be worthy gentlemen, by the looks of you, and I would in no way deny you what you ask. So, I welcome you, and I engage you as fellow noble lords and as my companions, but you must swear to me that you will help me faithfully and lawfully for as long as you are in my company. But I also ask you by your mercy please to tell me who you are as soon as you can, and I will tell you why I ask—you could be such that I might be ashamed for not having served you as fittingly as you deserve. For perhaps you are higher men than I am.” And they said that they would never do anything that would not be to his liking, and King Ban swore to him that The Story of Merlin he would tell him their names when the time was right. Then they all swore to King Leodagan that they would help him in his war faithfully and well. Afterward they left King Leodagan and went off into the town to take the best lodging they could find. And Merlin took them to the house of a vavasor, a very worthy man, a wealthy young knight, and their lodgings were luxurious, beautiful, and pleasant. And the knight had a beautiful wife, good in things heavenly and worldly. The vavasor was a very worthy man, and he led a good life. His name was Blair, and his wife’s was Leonelle. When they came to the door of his house, Blair ran outside to meet them, and he said that they were very welcome. They asked God to grant him good fortune. Then they got down from their horses and went up into the hall, which was beautiful and elegant, while boys fed and stabled their horses. They stayed there for a full week, but they did nothing there that should be recalled in the book. And King Leodagan sent messengers to his people and summoned all those who could bear arms to be at Carhaix on Ascension Day without fail, armed and ready to fight as though their lives depended on it. And any who did not come put themselves and their wealth in jeopardy, for they would be brought to justice like murdering thieves. So he sent for his friends and kinsmen and as many men-at-arms as he could buy for gold and silver, and a great many of both kinds came there, and there were a good forty thousand of them on foot and on horseback; they were lodged in tents and pavilions. And in the town were more than six thousand, all in full armor. While King Leodagan was sending word to his people, it happened, on a Tuesday, in the evening before the first day of May, that King Roolant, King Plarion of Ireland, King Sornegrieu of the Land of the Irish, and King Sorhalt had left the main army with fifteen thousand armed men, and they were running down through the land foraging for food, which they sorely needed. So it happened that they came laying waste the countryside about Carhaix, where King Leodagan of Carmelide was lodged waiting for his men whom he had summoned. Then a hue and cry went up against those taking [143] plunder and robbing and stealing throughout the countryside. When those in the city found out what was happening, they closed the gates so that no one could get in who wished them harm. Then the knights who were staying there ran for their arms. They put on their armor, mounted their horses, and gathered just inside the main gate. Then the knights of the Round Table came out all armed, and Hervi of Rivel and Malés the Dark were their leaders, and there were two hundred and fifty of them by count, all of whom were good, faithful knights, and they were so skilled at fighting that there was no need to look for better knights. They made up a company all by themselves, for they did not want to be with the knights of the country. The knights who lived in the city also got ready, and there were at least four thousand of them. The seneschal led these, for he was a worthy man, and his right name was Cleodalis of Carhaix. It had been his duty to carry the king’s great standard, but ever since the knights of the Round Table had come there, no one but Hervi of Rivel had ever borne it. But Cleodalis carried a small, red banner The Story of Merlin with two long red bands in an indigo field with golden crowns. And the great standard that Hervi bore had four streamers of gold on an azure field. And when everyone was fully armed, they gathered in order at the gate and waited for the orders of the king, who was still putting on his armor. When King Leodagan was ready, he mounted a big warhorse of great worth and rode up to the standard borne by Hervi of Rivel, and they all waited until they saw a good seven thousand Saxons coming well mounted on good horses. Elsewhere, King Arthur and his companions were also on their horses, arrayed in rich armor. Merlin carried the standard that day, and he told them that if they held their lives dear, they should always follow his banner wherever he went, and they said they would. With that, they made their way down through the city, and they were more handsome and more richly armed than anyone else, and there were forty of them, not counting Merlin, who carried the standard, which one and all beheld that day with great amazement. The banner had on top a fairly small dragon with a twisted tail a yard and a half long; its mouth gaped open so wide that you would think its tongue always quivered inside, and fiery sparks shot out of its throat into the air. Just then, the giants and the Saxons came, and they struck at the gates of the town with their lances, then they turned about and rode into the meadows, where they gathered up the cattle that were near the town, for no one was there to defend them. And Merlin got away from those who were in the streets of the town, and he put himself between them and one of the gates along with his whole company. He then went to the gatekeeper and said to him, “Let’s go out from here, for it is high time.” And he said that they would not go out before the king had ordered it. “Then may it be your bad luck,” said Merlin, “to lord it over us about something I understand better than you!” Then he went to the bar on the gate, put his hand on it, and pulled it off. And immediately, the gate moved away from the wall as if it did not have a lock. Then they rode out of the city, whether anyone liked it or not, and took off after the Saxons. [144] When the forty-one companions were outside the city, the gate closed behind them as though it had never been opened, and King Ban and King Bors crossed themselves. And Merlin rode at great speed until he caught up with a company of Saxons a good two thousand strong, and they were taking away a great lot of plunder. And as soon as Merlin saw them, he rushed into their midst, carrying his banner, along with his companions. They struck and brought down as many as they came to, and in no time at all they had routed them before they had ridden half a league. But they had gone only a little farther when they saw the four kings coming with fifteen thousand men all in armor who were leading a great wagon train with a great deal of plunder they had stolen, and it was astounding how much they had. When Merlin saw them, he said to his men, “Follow me.” And they did so. It happened that as soon as Merlin had let out a whistle, the wind rose, and a mighty and amazing whirlwind 24) and dust storm blew from the direction of the city, and it came down on the heads of the Saxons and giants so thick and fast that they hardly knew each other. And the fortyone companions rushed headlong into them and killed or brought down so many that it was amazing. Then the king ordered the gates opened, and it was done, and the seneschal went out first with four thousand men in armor, and they found the gate closed behind the men who were fighting the Saxons outside so hard that it was a wonder. Then came Cleodalis with the banner, and he rushed hard into them. There lances banged together and swords rang down on helmets and shields, and the burghers in the city heard the noise as clearly as if they were in the middle of the battle. There was such a din of men and horses that no one could have heard God Himself thundering. And King Arthur and his companions did wonders. When the four kings saw that they had been attacked, they split their army into two halves, and eight thousand stayed in that fight and the other eight thousand moved out against King Leodagan’s banner, which they saw coming closer. They rode until they met them in a fierce battle. On both sides, they lowered their lances and traded hard blows on their shields; they knocked holes in them, they went through hauberks and broke the links of mail. Some were knocked from their horses and brought to their knees by a lance blow, and others came through unscathed. When the lances were worn out, they drew their swords, and the great and fearsome fray began. The companions of the Round Table did wonders, and there were only two hundred fifty of them fighting against seven thousand or more who came to grief. They had to waver, in spite of themselves, and give ground. But they held themselves tightly together, and no one could break through them at all. And when King Roolant and King Plarion? saw that so few fighting men were holding up such a great crowd as they were, they grew very bitter. Then they shouted their battlecries and said that their opponents would be damned if they got away. Then they mounted a great and dreadful attack, and on one thrust they brought down [145] more than forty of the enemy, and they did all they could to wound and maim them. But their companions stayed near them, for they were loath to leave them as long as they could fight with their swords. Then it happened that King Leodagan was struck down very dreadfully, and they took him and led him off to be imprisoned. They entrusted him to five hundred of their own who would take him to the army of King Rion of Ireland, and they carried him off gleefully, for they believed they had put an end to their war against King Leodagan, and so they took him away in defeat, and they rode hard to get there as fast as they could. When King Leodagan saw that so dire a stroke had befallen him that his foes had taken him and were leading him off against his will, he kept fainting away for the distress he felt from his wretched, woeful state. And they made their way far from the city, two leagues or more. Very great indeed was the hue and cry from the seven thousand fighting men and the weeping and wailing from the two hundred fifty knights of the Round Table 2Sommer’s text has plactens (144, 1. 40). 246 mourning for King Leodagan, whom they had lost. And they said among themselves that, since they had lost everything, they could not find help anywhere, and they promised to avenge their own deaths before they died. So they drew tightly together, the ones up against the others, and began defending themselves wondrously, and they slaughtered a great many men and horses all about them without even changing places. But they suffered such strife and hardship that the people who saw them from the windows of the great hall wept hot tears from the pity they felt for them. And when Guenevere, King Leodagan’s daughter, saw her father being taken away by his enemies, she was so stricken by the sorrow in her heart that she nearly killed herself. But right now, for a while, the story falls silent about her and her sorrow, and it will tell you about King Arthur and his companions and how they fared in the battle against the seven thousand men. 15. Guenevere Witness to the Battle Below Carhaix; the Two Gueneveres.’ Now the story says that the fighting was fierce and dreadful where King Arthur and his forty companions were, and the four thousand who were the companions of Cleodalis the Seneschal had attacked the eight thousand Saxons whom Sornegrieu and Sapharin were leading, and there were many dead and wounded. King Arthur’s companions had been fighting together for a long time, when Merlin rode away from them with the standard at a full gallop and shouted to them, “Follow me!” And they did so as fast as their horses could carry them, and they rode until they had all got away from the fray. They rode faster and faster straight for the siege, where the Saxons and giants were already. They rode until they came to a great, deep valley, and there they caught up with the five hundred who were taking King Leodagan away. And as soon as Merlin saw them, he shouted, “Now at them, noble knights! For you are as good as dead if a single one gets away!” And Arthur’s men charged them at full speed and struck them like worthy warriors. They brought down and killed as many as were in their path, and there every one of them killed or maimed his man. There you would have seen the forty-one companions* making such a slaughter of men and horses that it was hard for any to get away without being overtaken and brought to a frightful end, except for five who took to their heels [146] in flight. 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 145-149. 2Sommer’s text has .xl. (145, I. 39), the first instance of confusion about the number of companions. There are in fact forty knights including Arthur and not counting Merlin (124, 1. 17, and especially 143, 1. 27 [.xl. sans merlin]). Just above, the group “King Arthur and his forty companions” includes Merlin (145, 1. 26), and the number forty obviously excludes Arthur. Later Sommer’s text compounds the confusion by referring to the fortytwo companions, as though the original number had been forty excluding both Merlin and Arthur (147, ll. , 32, and especially 148). The Story of Merlin This is how they rescued King Leodagan. And when the king saw the killing and the slaughter that so few men had done against so many, he was deeply puzzled as to who they could be. Then he looked about and saw that Merlin was carrying the dragon standard. He recognized it and knew for certain that these were the men he had engaged, and he praised God and thanked Him for the help that He had sent him. And Merlin rode up to him and stopped at his side, and Ulfin and Bretel got down from their horses, untied him, and gave him arms. Then they had him mount a strong, fast warhorse, and Ulfin and Bretel got back on their own horses, and the king thanked them for the service they had done him. Then Merlin shouted, “Noble knights, what are you doing? Now follow me quickly, for I am off!” With that, Merlin spurred his horse around and rode back toward the city, where the knights of the Round Table were having a bad time of it, for of the two hundred fifty, only twenty were still on their horses, while the others were defending themselves on foot just like wild boars. And Merlin was ahead of the others with the standard, and he and his companions rode at full speed, so that their horses were dripping with sweat. And the dragon he was carrying kept throwing out such huge flames from its throat that they rose high into the air, and those standing on the walls of the city saw the light from half a league away and more, it seemed to them. And when they looked and saw that it was the forty-one companions the king had engaged, and that King Leodagan, whom they had rescued, was coming with them, they were gladdened mightily. When Guenevere, the daughter of King Leodagan, saw who they were, she leapt with joy, and she was greatly amazed at who the knights were in that fellowship. And they came along roaring like thunder and rushed headlong into the enemy, and they struck down as many as they found in their path. As soon as the forty-one companions and King Leodagan had fought their way through the giants, the hammering sound of the sword fight grew so loud that the maiden leaning at one of the windows of the great hall could hear the blows very plainly. There King Ban of Benoic landed many a fine blow with his sword Fury;? he always went against the first man he saw, and no matter how strong his shield, hauberk, and helmet, he could not keep King Ban from slicing through them in a single stroke. And King Ban struck there many times such fierce blows that he would cut through a knight and his horse and send them down in a heap. His brother King Bors did likewise. And the Saxons held them in high esteem for the wonders they did. And King Arthur also did wonders with Excalibur, his good sword: against that sword, I tell you in truth, no kind of armor could withstand, for its time was all used up as soon as he hit it with the right blow. While he was bent on breaking his way through the fray, King Arthur happened to meet King Caelenc, who was striving mightily to rout the companions of the Round Table. As soon as King Arthur saw him, he ran at him. He was very big and strong, and the story says that he was fourteen feet tall, in the feet they used then to measure. And King [147] Arthur bore down on him and landed a fearsome blow with his sword between his shoulders right 3Qld French coreuseuse (146, |. 29): “Wrathful.” The Story of Merlin above his shield, and he struck him so hard with his sword Excalibur that he split him through down to the navel, and his horse turned in fright and flew away with the body. The onlookers at the castle saw the stroke, and King Leodagan’s daughter Guenevere, who was standing high up at the windows of the great hall, saw it very plainly. They all talked about it to each other, and they wondered who he was. The battle was very fierce in the meadows below Carhaix, where the two hundred fifty and the forty-one4 companions gathered against eight thousand Saxons, and they fought so well that the eight thousand were reduced to five thousand, who were so upset that they had lost King Caelenc that they almost went out of their minds. And then it happened that King Ban made for King Clarion,” the biggest man in the army of the giants. And the story says that King Ban was big and strong, quick and bold, and he held fast to his good sword Fury and struck King Clarion so hard through his helmet that he sliced through him all the way from his ear down; his sword fell on his left shoulder and cut down along his side to his waist, so that his liver and lungs showed. And King Bors struck Sarmedon, their standard-bearer, and cut off his arm holding his shield, and the flag fell to the ground. King Leodagan of Carmelide saw the stroke and said, “Now all their knights who are left will have to help themselves out of dire trouble.” When the giants saw their lord dead and their flag on the ground, they turned in flight, some here, some there. Then rode out from the city knights and men-at-arms, as many as three thousand all wearing armor; thus began the pursuit of those who were fleeing. But Merlin did not go where they were running, but he went straight to where Cliodalis, the seneschal of Carmelide, was fighting very fiercely with four thousand men against seven thousand led by the two kings Sornegrieu and Sapharin. And when Merlin came to the battleground, he found Cleodalis unhorsed and back on his feet, and he was holding the standard straight up, for he would not willingly let go of it or lose it. And his men were in place around him, and they defended themselves very well like the worthy knights they were, but they were in great distress. They were about to suffer great losses, and that would come very soon, when Merlin rushed in among them with his standard and the forty-one companions who were with King Arthur. They came in thundering like a storm, such very good horses did they ride. And King Leodagan was still with them because he never wanted to leave them after they had rescued him. There was such bellowing there, such hammering, and such a din, just as if they were all carpenters working on wood. There you would have seen knights and horses falling thick and fast; there you would have seen horses running, dragging their reins between their legs because there was no one willing to take hold of them or stop them; there you would have heard such an uproar and such shouting that no one could have heard God Himself thundering. There the forty-one companions fought so well 4sommer’s text has .xlij, here (147, 1. 8) and elsewhere. The new count may include King Leodagan, but his name is not included in the list below. 5Not to be confused with King Clarion of Northumberland. 247 that people in the countryside and throughout the land talked about it long after they were dead, and the history says that they slaughtered and cut up so many that anyone could follow the trail for a whole day without having to ask where they had been heading, so clearly was it marked by the bodies of men and horses that died where they fell. (148] So it is right and just that the story should tell you the names of the forty-one and who they were, for it is fitting to name them ahead of all other worthy men: The first was King Ban of Benoic,® the second King Bors his brother, the third King Arthur, the fourth Antor, the fifth Ulfin, the sixth Bretel, the seventh Kay, the eighth Lucan the Wine Steward, the ninth Girflet, son of Doon of Carduel, the tenth Malruc of the Rock, the eleventh Drians of the Forest, the twelfth Belias the Amorous, the thirteenth Flandrin the Short, the fourteenth Ladinas of Benoic, the fifteenth Amores the Swarthy, the sixteenth Alcalec the Red, the seventeenth Whitehead of the Hamlet, the eighteenth Blioberis of Gaunes, the nineteenth Canodes, the twentieth Melaldon of Blois, the twenty-first Jesmeladant, the twenty-second Placides the Merry, the twenty-third Lampades of the Flatland, the twenty-fourth Gervais the Slender, the twenty-fifth Christopher of the Gray Rock, the twenty-sixth Aiglin of the Vales, the twentyseventh Calogrenant, the twenty-eighth Agusale the LongAwaited, the twenty-ninth Agraveil, son of the Wise Lady of the Forest of No Returm, the thirtieth Cliacles the Orphan, the thirty-first Kehedin the Fair, the thirty-second’ Meralgis of Portlesquez, the thirty-third Gornain Cadrus, the thirtyfourth Clariet of Gaul, the thirty-fifth the Ugly Worthy the thirty-sixth Amadan the Proud, the thirty-seventh Osenain the Stouthearted, the thirty-eighth Galesconde, the thirtyninth Gales the Bald, the fortieth Blaris, godson of King Bors of Gaunes, and the forty-first Merlin, who led them; and King Leodagan was with them, and he did not in any way want to leave them. These worthy men went all together to rescue Cleodalis, the seneschal of Carmelide, who was a very worthy gentleman, a faithful and fearless knight, and it was very clear that, for any base deed his lord the king may have wrongfully done against him, he would not willingly forsake him, whatever trouble he might be in; rather, he bore himself in such a way that others did not leave him who otherwise might have done so. And I will tell you why. In truth, King Leodagan’s wife was a very highborn lady of great beauty. When he had taken her from her father’s house and married her, the lady took one of her maidens with her who was very beautiful. This maiden greatly loved the seneschal, so that at last he asked her to be his wife. The king liked her a great deal because she had The list is set off in Sommer’s text by a section change (148, 1. 3). 7Extending the confusion as to the number of companions, Sommer’s text continues to insist on the number forty-two; however, the list skips from the thirty-first to the thirty-third knight before going on through the “forty-second.” The apparent error is corrected in the translation. 801d French Ui lais hardis (148, Il. 19-20): “the disagreeable bold man.” 248 served him wholeheartedly; she was faithful in her service, and the king gave her to him most willingly. When the seneschal married her, she was sitting at table among the ladies eating. She was dressed very richly, and the king found her to be very beautiful; he fell so deeply in love with her that he could not get her out of his heart. Without any doubt, she was one of the most beautiful ladies in the world. But he put off doing anything about it right then. At length, one Saint John’s Day, the king happened to have sent Cleodalis to ride against the Irish, who were waging war against him at that time. And the lady had stayed with the queen to keep her company, for they loved each other very deeply. King Leodagan had fathered on his wife a little girl whose name was Guenevere, who [149] later grew to be very beautiful. And King Leodagan’s wife was a very good lady who lived a very holy life, and there were very few nights indeed when she did not get up and go to matins and listen to the service until after Mass. On the very night her daughter Guenevere had been conceived, she went to matins and came to find the seneschal’s wife, but she found her sleeping and did not want to awaken her, so she left her alone and went off to the church, which was nearby. And King Leodagan, who had for a long time yearned to lie with that lady, got up as soon as the queen had gone, put out the candles, then went to lie with the seneschal’s wife. When the lady felt him getting into bed with her, she asked him fearfully who he was. He said that it was he, and he told her to keep quiet: if she shouted a single word, he would kill her with his sharp sword, or if she thrashed about in the least. The lady defended herself with words as much as she could, but she did not dare speak out loud, so her arguments availed her very little. The king lay with her and fathered a daughter on her, and it was the very night his daughter was conceived by his wife. And it happened that, when the queen had given birth, she found a little mark in the small of her daughter’s back that looked like a king’s crown. And as soon as she was born, the seneschal’s wife began to scream from the pain in her belly, and she gave birth to a very beautiful daughter who looked like the queen’s daughter, and no one could tell the one from the other but for the mark of the crown the queen’s daughter had on her back. And each one was baptized Guenevere, and they were always nursed together. And until his wife the queen died, King Leodagan never cooled of his love for the wife of his seneschal Cleodalis. He took her and locked her up in a castle because he did not want the seneschal to speak to her, and he held her for more than five years, until the seneschal’s friends came to speak to him about it. He told them that the seneschal would not have her as long as he was unfriendly toward the king, yet for all that, the seneschal never stopped serving him. But now the story falls silent from talking about this, and it begins speaking again about Cleodalis the Seneschal and how he was on foot in the midst of the giants and the forty-one companions had stopped near him. The Story of Merlin 16. Rout of the Saxons at Carhaix.’ Now the story says that where the seneschal Cleodalis was on his feet, there was a great and awesome fight. There you would have seen one dead man falling over onto another and many a good, running warhorse flying through the fields with their reins between their legs because their masters lay dead on the ground, and many noble ladies wept for their brothers, their sons, and their husbands. And all the while the giants were being thrown back, like it or not, by Merlin’s powers. When Somegrieu and Sapharin saw the great damage and slaughter that so few men were wreaking on them, they were very angry, for they had many times more men than the others. They blew their trumpets and beat their drums to rally their men, and Sornegrieu kept his men about him. And while he was getting them together, Kay the Seneschal, Girflet, and Lucan the Wine Steward broke out of the formation and ran headlong into their midst, for each one had got a new lance, good and strong. And Kay the Seneschal struck Sornegrieu so hard that he bore him from his horse to the ground, [150] where he lay for a long time sprawled out without moving a foot or a hand, and Girflet, and Lucan struck two others down dead and bleeding. When the Saxons saw Sornegrieu on the ground, they tumed and rode that way to rescue him, but the forty-one companions stopped near him with their swords drawn. The Saxons came there to put him back on his horse, but the companions defended themselves so well that the Saxons could not get him out. And the king was trampled upon many times before he could get back on his horse, because the great throng of Saxons was gathering so close And Merlin, who bore the standard, came to help the three companions who might soon have come to harm. The midst of the battle came to be there. Cleodalis had got back on a big gray horse, and he held the king’s banner in his hands and very fiercely let out his battlecry. He and his men struck out into the fray as fast as their horses could carry them. There they fought a wondrous battle, hard and fierce, but there were so many Saxons that they could not break through their formation, so they struck blows and fought endlessly. And then it happened that the eight thousand who had been routed before Carhaix fled back to where Somegrieu was and came in among Sapharin’s troops. The men stopped their flight and began to drive the king’s men back, so that Sornegrieu was able to get back on his horse; he was so racked with pain and so battered by the blows he had taken that every part of his body hurt, and his men were keen to avenge the shame the others had brought him. And he and his men ran against them and struck them so hard with their lances and swords that they did them great harm. Then Merlin dashed headlong into the fray, carried by the strength of his horse, holding the standard in his hand. Corresponds to Sommer, 149-156. The Story of Merlin And the two hundred fifty knights of the Round Table, all of whom had got fresh horses and armed themselves anew, rode slowly back into the battle, drawn tightly together, never breaking their formation. And when they saw ahead of them the dragon standard Merlin was carrying, they swung over to follow it, for it had been of very great help to them when their lives were in jeopardy. Then they rode headlong into the fray so hard that they struck to the ground as many as blocked their way, and when their lances had broken, they drew their swords, and the fighting became so fierce and so bloodthirsty it was a wonder to behold. Meanwhile, Cleodalis the Seneschal and his men were keeping up their fight. But strong as they were, they could not hold their ground, and Sapharin was ruthlessly driving them back toward the city. The three thousand? from the city came to help them—those who had driven the fleeing Saxons back into Sapharin’s battalion, where they stopped their flight. And when they saw the seneschal’s standard and the great crowd of men running after it, they turned toward it and struck out into the fray so hard that they brought down more than a thousand right at the first. Then Cleodalis’s men stopped giving ground, and the renewed fighting was so fierce that the din could be heard for half a league, and on both sides they fought so hard that no one could tell which were better; although on King Sapharin’s side there were many more than on the other, they behaved as though they were the same. Elsewhere, the knights of the Round Table were fighting alongside the forty-one companions, against Sornegrieu’s men, who were a good eight thousand strong, and they were in very great jeopardy because they were only three hundred eight? men against eight thousand. They could not last much longer when Merlin called to [151] King Ban and said to him and the other knights, “What are you waiting here for? Why don’t you send them on their way?” “Sir, how would we do that?” they asked. ‘T'll tell you,” said Merlin. “On the battlefield are only ten4 giants who can keep you im at all, and I tell you that, if you can rid yourselves of them, you will soon see the rest of them gone from the field.” “Where are they?” asked King Ban. “In truth,” said Merlin, “Ulfin, Bretel, Lucan, Girflet, and Kay have already started fighting them. Now follow me, and soon we will see who can do the best in this company.” Then Merlin spurred his horse, which carried him away forthwith, and he flew headlong into the fray, which was very fierce, with six knights fighting against ten giants who were big and strong beyond belief. And King Ban, who 2Sommer’s text has .ij, with a superscript m (150, |. 31), but earlier, when the company leaves the city to engage the Saxons, they number three thousand (147, 1. 22). Confusion arises because these are knights and men-at-arms summoned by Leodagan from all over his kingdom who are lodged in the city, of whom there are six thousand in all (142, !. 37), while Cleodalis’s four thousand men, also de la cite (“from the city”), actually live there (143, 1. 10). 5The official count is, of course, two hundred ninety-one, since the knights of the Round Table number two hundred fifty. 4sommer’s text has .v. here (151, 1. 3), but .x. occurs just below (I. 10), and ten in all are named just afterward. eto was a big knight and bold, came in ahead of the others, and he happened to meet Sornegrieu first of all. King Ban held up his sword, which was filthy with blood and gore, and struck him right on top of the helmet and cut through the steel ring; the stroke came down along his face, and the blade sliced through his lips, and it was so strong that the blade went on down to cut the strap of his shield along with the left wrist that held it, and his hand went flying into the middle of the field. And when Sornegrieu felt himself so badly wounded, he swung about and took flight; he let out a loud, dreadful bellow and went away moaning in agony. King Bors struck Marganant through the helmet, so that he split him down to the teeth. King Arthur hit Sinelant so hard that he knocked off a fourth of his helmet, and his sword slid down to his left shoulder and cut all the way through, and he flew from his saddle to the ground. And Ulfin struck Balanc so that he brought him down dead and bleeding. Bretel hit Cordant, and Kay Candenart, and Lucan Malec; Girflet skew Mendamp, and Meralgis Sardup, and Gornain Cadrus Dorilas. As soon as the Saxons saw them brought down, they were so thunderstruck that for a long time they did not move from where they had been making their stand, and they said among themselves that anyone was a fool to keep on fighting, “for those are not people, but devils come from Hell. No armor we have can hold up under their blows, no matter how strong or tightly made.” When the knights of the Round Table and the fortyone companions saw that the Saxons were so bewildered, they began slaying them and cutting them up, and all the Saxons whose horses could carry them away took flight and rushed into the fray where King Sapharin was fighting Cleodalis the Seneschal. And they came in so hard and fast that they drove everyone from the battlefield right up to the gate of the city of Carhaix. And the men from the city were very frightened when they saw their people being treated so ruthlessly, for they did not see the standard of King Leodagan, which the knights of the Round Table were carrying; they truly believed that they had lost him for good, for they thought that he had been killed or taken prisoner. Furthermore, they did not see the dragon that the knights had been carrying, and that filled them with very great dread indeed. Since they saw their foes at the gate, it was no wonder that those from the city took flight, for their lives were in jeopardy, and there were only seven thousand of them and twelve thousand Saxons. They were also very much afraid for the knights of the Round Table, about whom they [152] had no news. And that is why they came across to the gate that was right at the first bridge; then they drew tight together, closing their ranks, and the Saxons swept upon them very boldly. There was an awesome fight there, and the fray lasted a very long time. And you should know that about a thousand fell in the fray and the throng, and they could never get up again. And so the fighting was dreadful and ruthless. When the knights of the Round Table and the forty- one? companions had routed Sornegrieu and his army and 5The nun:ber in Sommer’s text has increased to forty-three (.xkij.; 152, 1. 6). 250 sent them flying, Merlin drew them to one side of the field and said to them, “Dear lords, let them go now, and don’t bother about running after them, for you can do that in due time. But withdraw and dismount from your horses. Get your harness straightened out and let your horses rest, then saddle them again.” And they did as he ordered. When the knights of the Round Table saw that they had stopped, Hervi of Rivel said that they would not go on until they could go with them. They got off their horses and got their gear in order, for they very badly needed to. And King Leodagan came to Merlin and said to him, “Sir, are you willing to keep company with those good men?” “Certainly, sir,” said Merlin, “we truly are, and they are very welcome, for we would be worth all the more if we were in an echelon together.” “Sir,” said the king, “many thanks!” Then King Leodagan went up to Hervi of Rivel, who was carrying the standard, and said to him, “Dear friend, come along with us, you and your companions; you will be the companions of those good men, and you will be much worthier for it.” “Sir,” said Hervi, “very gladly, if they are willing.” “In truth,” said the king, “they want very much to be peers and companions with you from now on.” “May it so please God,” said Hervi. “Fellowship with such worthy men should not be refused.” Then they all got on their horses and gathered themselves into a single body. And Merlin set out ahead of them, and they followed him everywhere he went. While they were riding as you have heard, Cleodalis the Seneschal was fighting with six thousand men in his company against King Sapharin, who had more than twelve thousand in his. Cleodalis’s men were in disarray and struck out here and there, wherever they thought their blows might fall the best, so they had been brought to grief and suffered great harm; they had already undergone so much that some of them were being put to rout, and they were all on the verge of leaving the battlefield, for their bold fighting availed them little, and they yearned for nothing better than to flee. And then they saw the dragon coming that Merlin was carrying. It threw smoke and fire out of its throat, from time to time, in such great billows that the air was all red. And when the ladies who stood on the walls saw it all, they said to Cleodalis, “Put your mind to fighting well! Look toward the shadowy valley and see the help they are bringing you!” When Cleodalis heard what the ladies told him, he looked and saw what he longed for so much, and then he knew for certain that in time he would be helped, and he praised God for it. Then he called his men back together, gathered them in order, and said to them, “Now take heart, for you see the help coming to us that we have longed for so much!” And when they saw help coming, no one had to ask whether they were overjoyed. Then they ran against [153] the Saxons and stormed into their midst, and another great and fearsome battle began. And all this time, Merlin rode at a slow gait, keeping his companions in order, until they came within a stone’s throw of the battle. Then he led his companions charging into their formation so fiercely that The Story of Merlin they brought down more than three hundred who would never get up again, and they drove so deeply into them that they were as lost as if they had fallen into a bottomless pit, but they went on boring their way through them until they came to Cleodalis’s standard. And when they had come together with them, Merlin shouted, “Now we'll see how you will fight, for now you are all put to the test!” When King Arthur heard Merlin shouting, he smiled and said to King Ban and King Bors that there was never one better to wake you up.© And Merlin yelled to him, “Now stop making fun! You'll be able to joke and laugh soon enough!” And when they heard him, they rushed in among their enemies, wild and full of anger. There the fighting was fierce and awesome, and the fray was more ruthless than any other had been all day. There King Arthur worked wonders all by himself, for he made such efforts because of Merlin’s banter that everyone looked at him in amazement. And King Leodagan’s daughter and all the ladies and maidens raised their hands up to Heaven and prayed the Savior of the world to keep him from death and danger. And they wept in pity for him and his companions and the torments of warfare they were suffering, for they were astounded that he could take so much for so young a lad as King Arthur was. For he struck left and right with his sword Excalibur. He cut off arms, hands, and heads, he struck down knights and horses, and he worked wonders all by himself. And he had taken notice of all those round about him who were helping him and keeping him out of all kinds of trouble, for the two kings who were his companions were very worthy men. Against all of them no armor could hold up, nor were they ever hemmed in so badly that they could not cut their way through with their sharp swords. All the renowned knights who had come with him fought very well indeed, and the knights of the Round Table are not to be forgotten. When Sapharin saw that he had lost so much and that so many of his men had been slain, he swore on his faith that he would never leave until he had hurt them in return. Then he called Sortibran, Clarion,’ Iguedon, Senebalt, Malore, and Freelenk—these were all his kinsmen, and they were worthy and bold. And he said to them, “Now we’ll see who the real knights are!” Then twenty knights, big and brawny, rode out and ran into the fray as fast as their horses could go, and Sapharin struck Hervi of Rivel so hard that he bore him sprawling from his horse to the ground, and afterward he gave Antor such a stinging blow that he brought him and his horse down in a heap. Then he hit Girflet in the side and knocked him flat on the ground. And each of his companions struck down his man, but there was not one among those who fell who was killed or wounded. Lucan the Wine Steward was one, Meralgis another, Gornain the third, then Blioberis, Gales the Bald, Guiret of Lambale, ole onques mats st boins viellars ne fu (153, 1. 10). Simply calling Merlin a viellars (“old man”) might not elicit Arthur’s smile (or laughter) or Merlin’s retort. Perhaps Arthur is playing on Old French vieillart (“old man”) and veillier (“watch, be vigilant, stay awake”), 7Not to be confused with the Christian king Clarion of Northumberland. The Story of Merlin Goswain of Estrangot, and Bretel was the eighth? —all these fell because they were struck by a lance or because their horses were hit. There was a most dreadful din. And the Saxons all stopped near the fallen men and tried their best to kill them, but they were worthy fighters and strong of heart, and they sprang to their feet holding their naked swords, [154] and they fought hard to defend themselves. But their efforts were coming to naught, when Merlin came to help them bearing the dragon standard in his hand. And Sapharin, who was striving to hurt them, let loose and struck King Leodagan through his shield, and he bored right through him; then he lowered his lance and struck his horse in the side through the blanket, and he brought the king and his horse to the ground in a heap. When those from the city saw the king struck down, they started to quake because they were afraid he had been killed, so they rode very hard to the rescue. When King Arthur saw the giant who jousted so hard that he brought down three worthy knights, he swore that he would test himself against him. Then he left the formation and went to get a stout lance with a sharp iron up, then came back at a fast gallop. King Ban came to meet him and said to him, “Sir, what do you mean to do? Whom do you want to joust against? Don’t fight that giant, he’s too strong for you! You are too young to try such a thing! Let me go against him. I am older than you are, stronger and bigger.” “May God never help me,” said King Arthur, “if I send in someone besides myself. The more he does to make everybody dread him, the more gladly will I pit myself against him! I'll never know my worth if I don’t pit myself against each and every one of them!” When Merlin saw him he shouted, “Who is this coward? Why don’t you do quickly what you've started out to do? Everyone can see that you are afraid!” When Arthur heard Merlin calling him a coward, he was deeply ashamed, and he spurred his horse toward the enemy formation. And King Ban said to Merlin that he was wrong to send a man as young as King Arthur to fight against such a huge devil. “He has nothing to worry about,” said Merlin, “but take a lance and go after him with your brother and Ulfin.” And they did what he said and rode off after King Arthur with all the speed they could get from their horses. When King Sapharin saw King Arthur coming, he rode hard to meet him. And when those in the formation saw him riding toward the young lord, who was so youthful and small compared to him, they were very frightened for him, and they rode out as fast as their horses could run against the enemy and split their shields with their lances. The iron tips of the lances stopped against their hauberks, which had very tight mail that held together. Sapharin broke his lance and wounded King Arthur a little on his left side, but Arthur hit him so hard that he broke through his shield and his hauberk and drove the tip of his lance right through his body from one side to the other, so that the tip and an arm’s length of the shaft stuck out his back; and he 8sommer’s text has £ noefismes (“the ninth”) (153, |. 40), but only eight names are listed. 251 had thrust so hard, when he came at him at such great speed, that he bore him sprawling from the horse to the ground already dead and broke his lance as it went through him. That joust was seen by Guenevere, the daughter of King Leodagan, who was standing by the windows of the great hall, which was somewhat close to the walls of the town. They all praised the young lord and held him in high esteem, and they asked those who were with him who he was, but they could not tell them except to say that he was one of the knights her father had engaged. “In truth,” said the maiden, “whoever he is, he comes from good stock. For no man [155] of low birth would dare undertake such a battle unless he had a very noble heart. He and those worthy gentlemen over there have all done wonders with their fighting!” The maiden spoke of the knights at great length. King Ban and King Bors had ridden into the formation, and each had a strong, stout lance, and they spurred their horses on. King Ban struck Sortibran, King Bors struck Clariel, and Ulfin attacked Iguedon, and each one unhorsed his man and brought him to the ground dead. And in the same charge, one hit Morat, another Landon, and the third Senebalt so hard that they died before they could be taken from the battlefield. King Arthur had drawn his sword, and he struck Malore very hard on his helmet, for he had stopped right on top of King Ban along with Freelenk, who was trying to chop off his head, for one was holding him by the helmet and the other was pounding him between the shoulders with a huge cudgel. When the king saw them, he spurred his horse toward them, grasping his sword. And he hit Malore so hard that he sent his head flying to the middle of the field. When Freelenk saw his cousin and companion slain, he raised his cudgel high in the air to hit King Arthur on the head, but the king thrust his shield to ward off the blow and struck him so hard that he flew to the ground. It was a mighty blow, and it had come down so hard on his left shoulder that he hunched over his horse’s neck; but he had raised his cudgel again and meant to strike again, but King Arthur, who was lively and quick, spurred his horse, went past him, grasping his sword, then swung around toward him and struck Freelenk so hard that he split him down to his teeth. The Saxons’ yelling and shouting grew louder, for this attack frightened them mightily, and they saw that their only hope for help was Randol,? who bore their standard. And King Ban went straight for him and struck him so hard that he sliced his arm off still holding the standard, and he went flying to the ground. Then the hue and cry went up that all should turn in flight, and the pursuit began that lasted for a long time, from before vespers until nightfall. There were many killed and wounded; of the fifteen thousand there had been at the start of the battle, only five thousand got away, and they went straight to King Rion and the siege. They told him — 9Sommer’s text has ralidol here (155, 1. 23), but randol in 1. 24. West prefers the form Ralidol (259a—b); see G.D. West, An Index of Proper Names in French Arthurian Prose Romances.(Toronto: University Press, 1978). eee about the harmful losses they had taken and the killing they had suffered. And when King Rion heard the news, he swore his oath that they would never leave that land until they had taken vengeance on King Leodagan and led him away as their prisoner. Then he sent word to the land of Denmark that all men high and low should come to him and bring enough food to last two hundred thousand men for two whole years, for now he wanted, he said, to pursue this war even more vigorously than they had done before. And they all began coming, and more and more gathered every day, until before the month was out two hundred fifty thousand had come together there, with twenty crowned kings not counting King Rion. And they had a great wagon train bringing their food from everywhere, and the army was so well supplied that they never again rode out to forage for food, for they had a great plenty coming from the lands of the twenty kings who were in the army, and the weather was [156] good for them. And attacks against the city of Aneblayse came thick and fast, but it was so strong that it had nothing to fear but being starved out. They asked King Leodagan many times to come help them because they were in a great deal of trouble. But now the story falls silent about King Rion and his siege, which was very harsh, and about those who were inside the city of Aneblayse, and it begins speaking again about King Arthur and his companions. 17. The Victorious Arthur Falls in Love with Guenevere.’ In this part, the story says that those of the kingdom of Carmelide were very glad and joyful about the Saxons, who were routed, as you have heard, and driven from the battlefield by as few men as were there. For at the beginning, they numbered no more than six thousand three hundred, and there were more than fifteen thousand Saxons, and they were routed thanks to the wisdom of Merlin, who helped out a great deal, and the help of the knights of the Round Table and the forty-one fighting men engaged by King Leodagan. And the story says that after they had run after the Saxons until nightfall, they came back rejoicing to Carhaix and found the king, whose men had got him back on his horse. And when he found out that the men he had taken on were coming back, he went out to meet them and offered them the greatest feast in the world. They found Antor, Girflet, Kay the Seneschal, Lucan the Wine Steward, and all their other companions safe and sound, and they had been very much afraid that they were dead or in prison. There they were all awarded winnings wonderful to behold that the king gave out to the knights he had engaged. For he could not put it to better use, he said, for they were the ones who had won it all, and “as for myself, they rescued me from certain death and imprisonment.” When they saw the great honors the king was bestowing on them, they thanked him heartily and said that 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 156-159. The Story of Merlin they would take nothing from him and would make up for it another time, if they took enough plunder and earned enough gifts. And King Leodagan said that, since he wanted none of the spoils, they should split them up and give them out wherever they saw fit. Then Merlin came to the three kings and told them to take their winnings, and they took them and gave them out where Merlin told them to, keeping nothing for themselves worth a single penny, and they praised Merlin and held him in greater esteem. And they stayed in the land for so long that thanks to their generosity—and Merlin’s urgings—people throughout the countryside spoke of no one else but them. And Arthur gave his host and his host’s wife riding horses and palfreys, robes, and so many goods that for all the days of their lives they were wealthier and more powerful thanks to him. King Leodagan would not allow them to take lodging anywhere but with him, and thereafter he would never let them be without companionship, above all with the knights of the Round Table. And when their armor had been taken off, King Leodagan had his daughter brought in arrayed in the richest clothing she owned, and he had her take the hot water in silver basins, bring it before the kings, and serve them. But Arthur would not allow her to serve him until King Leodagan and Merlin bade him to. Then the young lady herself washed his face and neck and very gently dried him with a towel, and then she did the same to the two kings; afterwards, King Leodagan had the other Guenevere, daughter of the seneschal’s wife, and the rest of the maidens serve the other companions. [157] When King Leodagan’s daughter had served the three kings, she served her father; and when they had all washed, the young lady dressed each of them in a mantle tied at the neck. King Arthur was filled with great beauty, and the maiden stared at him and he at her. And she said softly to herself that a lady had reason to be very happy if such a good and handsome knight as he asked her for her love, and shame on her who refused him. No sooner had the tables been set up than the food was ready, and the knights all sat down. But the knights of the Round Table sat side by side at a table off to themselves with the knights whom the king had engaged, and King Bors and King Ban seated Arthur between themselves, for they did him the highest honors they could. And King Leodagan took notice of who was sitting beside whom at that table, and in his heart he thought, from the honor they bore Arthur and the service they did him, that he was lord over them all, and he wondered mightily who he could be; he would have given anything to know who he was. “And may it please you now, Lord God,” he said, “that he should wed my daughter! In truth, I would not have believed that such a young lad could have the worthy knighthood there is in him, and he could not have it at all unless he were a very highborn man indeed! And I might just as well believe that he is a spiritual being whom Our Lord has sent to me to fight for this kingdom and keep it safe, not for love of me, but to raise up Christendom and Holy Church and keep them, and that is how they were able to leave this city against the gatekeeper’s will.” The Story of Merlin This is what King Leodagan thought to himself long and hard as he was eating, and he brought to mind how the forty-one companions had saved him in the deep valley against five hundred knights when they were taking him away as their prisoner, and he recalled all the worthy deeds he had seen him do. He pondered so hard that he half forgot himself and stopped eating, and Hervi of Rivel took notice of this and was greatly distressed by it. He went angrily up to the head of the table, moved in beside King Leodagan, and told him that he had never seen him do anything so discourteous, and he had never been so upset, “for you should be bringing gladness to those worthy men, but instead you are worried and lost in thought, and I wonder what has happened to your mind.” And the king came to his senses, looked at him, and said to him, “Hervi, I was thinking about something having to do with myself and about the worthiest man in the world, and I couldn’t keep from it. If you knew what my mind was on, you wouldn’t blame me at all.” And he answered, “Sir, that could well be. But for now, let it be, and think about it when and where you ought to, for this is not the right time or place; you should be showing these gentlemen a good time and enjoying yourself, In truth, right now you are behaving wrongly toward them.” “I beg you, dear friend,” said the king, “please go take your seat. I am ashamed of myself.” Then Hervi went straight back to sit with his companions, and the king began talking to this one and that one. King Leodagan’s daughter served King Arthur wine in her father’s goblet, and King Arthur looked at her long and hard, and he very much liked what he saw before him. For she was the most beautiful woman in all Britain at that time, and she was endowed with a very fine [158] body.” On her head she wore a golden coronet with precious stones. Her face was clear and so naturally made up with white and red that she needed not more nor less. Her shoulders were straight, and the skin lustrous, and her body was very well put together, for her waist was slender and her hips low, and they suited her wonderfully. Her feet were pale and well arched, her arms were long and rounded, and her hands were white and plump. Why should I go on telling you about the maiden’s great beauty? If she was indeed beautiful, then she was endowed with even greater goodness, generosity, courtesy, sense, worthiness, sweetness, and nobility. When King Arthur saw the maiden, who was of such great beauty, kneeling before him, he was very eager to look at her, first of all because her breasts were firm and hard like little apples, and her skin was whiter than newfallen snow, and she was neither too plump nor too thin. And King Arthur so yearned for her that he lost himself in thought and stopped eating, and he turned his face away because he did not want the two kings or anyone else to notice anything. And the maiden bade him drink and said to him, “Young lord, sir, drink up! And please don’t be bothered if I do not call you by your right name, for I don’t 2Sommer’s text seems somewhat garbled, and he notes that it “is not clear” (158, n. 1). The text of the Harley manuscript, reproduced in that note, is translated. 23 know what else to call you. You should not be shy at table, for you indeed are not on the battlefield, and that was clear today when you were being watched by five thousand people who did not know you except by sight.” And he turned toward her and said to her, “Dear maiden, I was glad to do that. Many thanks for your fair service, and God give me the strength and the ability to reward you.” “Sir,” she said, “you have already given me back a hundredfold, more than I could ever deserve; you gave it to me when you and your companions rescued my father when they were taking him away as their prisoner.” And the king fell silent. “There’s still more,” she said. “Before the gate, at the foot of the bridge, you showed that you were sorry for his troubles when he was struck down in the midst of his enemies and his horse was slain under him, for you killed the one who had brought him down. You risked your life to save him, and you did everything to get him back on his way.” This is how King Leodagan’s daughter spoke to King Arthur, but not a word came out of his mouth. Instead, he took the goblet and drank very gladly. And he told the young lady to sit, for she had been kneeling for a very long time, but her father the king would not allow it; rather, they were served in all the ways tongue could tell. When it was time to take away the tablecloths, King Ban asked King Leodagan, who was sitting beside him, “Sir, I am quite amazed that you, whom everyone takes to be such a worthy man, have not wed your daughter a long time since to some highborn man. She is well brought up, and clever, and you have no other children your land could go to after your death; yet you could have given yourself heirs long before now wherever you put her.” “In truth, sir,” said King Leodagan, “I have put it off only because of the war, which has lasted so long and done me so much harm. King Rion of Denmark and Ireland has not stopped waging war against me for more than seven years, and never since then has any man come into my land to whom I might give her, and no one has sent me word asking for her. But, God help me, if I [159] could find a worthy knight who could stand toil and hardship, and who would keep up my war for me, I would give him my daughter and all my land, if he wanted to have it after my death, and I would not care about his birth or his wealth. Please God, if such a man as | have in mind, and in my heart, were here right now, in truth not three days would go by before she would be wed to a young knight, handsome and worthy, and I truly believe that he is of higher birth than I.” And Merlin began to smile, and he looked at King Bors and gave him a sign that he had said these things about King Arthur, and indeed he had. Then they all began to speak about many things, but steered their talk away from what King Leodagan had said, for they did not wish to speak further of it at that time. King Leodagan understood that they were unwilling to hear about it, although he would very much have liked them to draw him out on the subject, so he fell silent and tried to see if he could learn, from anything in their looks and behavior, where they came from. And he was heedful of their merriment and the joy 24 they took in Arthur, and this was what bothered him the most, and the two worthy gentleman and their companions were so happy to be with him that all who saw them were amazed and bewildered. And Arthur loved and yearned for the daughter of King Leodagan, and he was daydreaming so about her that he forgot where he was; he very much wanted to have her as his wife and helpmeet, if he could. And the story says that she was the wisest woman in Great Britain, the fairest and best loved who was in that whole land, excepting only Elaine the Peerless, wife of Persides the Red of the Castle of Gazevilte and daughter of King Pelles of Listenois of the Castle of Corbenic; she was the niece of the Fisher King and the king ailing from his wounds. The first was called Alan of the Isle in Listenois. The second was ill and had been wounded with the Avenging Lance, which is why he was called the Maimed King, and he had been wounded through both his thighs; his right name was King Pellinor of Listenois. King Alan and Pellinor were brothers. The maiden I told you about was their niece and the daughter of King Pelles, who was the brother of the two I have just named for you. That maiden was the most beautiful woman who had ever been in any land, and the noblest, and she kept the Most Holy Grail until Galahad was conceived. But now the story falls silent about her and says no more about her for a while, but you will be enlightened as to how it was taken away from her and why, and how the adventures of the Holy Grail drew to an end; rather it will speak about the companions of the Round Table seated at supper in the city of Carhaix in Carmelide in the great hall of King Leodagan. 18. News of the Young Heroes; the Battle Before Arundel.’ Now the story says that they had sat relaxed at supper and had been served meats and wines. And when the high and low tables had been taken away, Merlin took the three kings by the hand and led them aside and said to them, “Do you want me to tell you what has happened in Great Britain?” “Of course,” said King Arthur, “I would like very much to know, if you will.” “In truth,” said Merlin, “there has been a great battle, hard and wondrous, in the plain before Logres against the Saxons, who had plundered the countryside and laid waste the whole [160] seaside and the ports as far as Dover. And when they were coming to the stronghold of Logres, they had a huge wagon train that was being driven along with the army, and there were ten thousand Saxons on horseback. And as they were riding, they met with five young men, who are your nephews.” And he told them how the youths had come there, how they had left their mothers without their fathers’ knowing anything about it, how they had met the foragers, just as you have heard in the story, and how the battle had been when the Saxons were put to flight, the rich spoils they had won, the rout they had dealt the Saxons, the joyful 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 159-164. The Story of Merlin celebration the burghers made with the youths, and how the boys had said that they would not be made knights “until you yourself armed them with your own hand. Now you don’t have to worry about defending your own lands, for they will be safeguarded until you come back. “Now be happy and make merry, and think about doing right, for the help that is coming to you is growing stronger all the time. The grandson of the emperor of Constantinople is coming into your land with three hundred squires, sons of princes and high barons, to serve you so that you will make them knights.” “Merlin,” said the king, “who are those boys who have come to Logres, and what are their names?” “Sir,” said Merlin, “King Lot has four sons. The eldest is named Gawainet, the next Agravain, the third Guerrehet, and the fourth Gaheriet. Those four are your nephews, sons of your sister and King Lot. And there is another one called Galescalain, and he is the son of King Neutres of Garlot and another of your sisters.* And the grandson of the emperor of Constantinople is called Sagremor; he will be of wondrous prowess. And still others will come very soon who will have your well-being at heart and be your friends.” While Merlin was saying these things, all of their companions came around him, and when they had heard the news Merlin told, they were very glad and very joyful. With that, all the knights left there and went straight to their lodgings and went to bed for a good rest. And they stayed in the town for a very long time and did nothing but eat and drink. Meanwhile, their armies were gathering. Bui now the story stops speaking about King Leodagan and the fighting men he engaged, all of whom were heartened and gladdened and overjoyed by the news that Merlin told them about the young men who had gone into the kingdom of Logres as he said; and it begins speaking again about King Tradelmant of North Wales. Here the story says that when King Tradelmant had come into North Wales, his fortified city, he called so many men together that they numbered fully ten thousand, and with them he held the land and the countryside as best he could. And one evening a spy who had gone close to Saxon Rock came to him and said that at least ten thousand Saxons had invaded his land, and they were driving a very long wagon train with food supplies. And the king asked him where they could be. And he told him that they were between the Rock and Arundel. Then the king ordered his men to get their armor on quickly, and he told them to be on their horses right after the bedtime hour and to ride out of the town fully armed as though their lives depended on it, and they did as he said. [161] And when they were in the fields, they were a good ten thousand strong, and they rode in tight formation, keeping their ranks straight, until they came upon the Saxons. Then they split their army in two. And Pollidamas, who was the king’s nephew, led one part; he was a young knight, worthy and bold. And as soon as the army had been split, the main division made straight for Arundel, which King Arthur had garrisoned before he left the country. 2Sommer’s text reads, ambiguously, & de uostre seror ausi (160, 1. 20): “and of your sister as well.” The Story of Merlin After Pollidamas’s division had broken away from his uncle’s, they both found themselves close to the Saxons’ tents, and they rode headlong into the midst of them as fast as their horses could run. That day the Saxons’ lookouts served them badly, for they were aware of nothing before their enemies were on top of them. There many Saxons were brought down and many were slain, for they were set upon from two sides; they were unarmed and sleepy, for they were weary from riding, so there was a great slaughter of them. And Tradelmant’s men knocked down and toppled tents and pavilions. The Saxons did not have time to take up their arms, but turned in flight toward the Castle of the Rock on foot and on horseback, setting out through the nearby forests. Tradelmant’s men brought down and killed as many as they caught up with, so that at least fifteen thousand of them were slain before they could get to their stronghold. And when the knights inside saw the great rout, the men fleeing everywhere, and the great slaughter of the Saxons, they shouted “Now to arms!” And all in the castle armed themselves as well and strongly as they could, and they rode out as quickly as they could. They made a huge army, and they were all highborn men and powerful, and they were on very fine horses. And when they were outside the stronghold, they numbered a good fourteen thousand. All at once, they let their horses run against Tradelmant’s army, and each side struck out very fiercely against the other. And there was a wild and wondrous slaughter of men and horses. While they were fighting, all the men in Arundel who belonged to King Arthur rode out, and there were a good five hundred of them, all of them strong and swift young men. They seized the foodstuffs, of which they found a good lot in the army, and they won a great deal of booty. Then they rode back into the castle and shut the gates and watched to see what would happen. So they had withdrawn to one side. And Pollidamas and King Tradelmant kept fighting fiercely, but they suffered great hardship because the fleeing Saxons had drawn together, and there were at least seven thousand of them mounted and armed very richly; meanwhile, fourteen thousand had come out of the Castle of the Rock. So the Saxons ran hard against them, for they were very sorrowful about the harm they had done them, and they drove them back hundreds of yards, and King Tradelmant’s men did not stop withdrawing until they had come bzlow Arundel, where they had to hold their ground by main force or die trying. There they started to defend themselves mightily, and there a great many men and horses were brought down and slaughtered on both sides. And King Tradelmant lost a great deal in that attack, for of the ten thousand men he had at the beginning, he lost at least three thousand; and the Saxons lost a good four thousand of their men who had ridden out of the Castle of the Rock. It would not have taken long for King Tradelmant and his companions to be utterly routed, when the King of the Hundred Knights came to help him; he had heard the news [162] that the Saxons were riding about throughout the land and plundering everything. And his men came straight into the battle, and they struck hard. And the knights from the stronghold at Arundel had ridden out before the King 2) of the Hundred Knights came into the battle, for they felt great sorrow for King Tradelmant and his men, because they were so overwhelmed; and without a doubt, if they had not gone out to help him, King Tradelmant would have been killed or taken prisoner. And when the King of the Hundred Knights had come there, the shouting, the screaming, and the uproar grew to be so loud that the Saxons were dumbfounded, so much so that they stopped defending themselves, for they saw that they could not hope for a rescue, so far were they from the Valley of Vambieres, where help was. And they were well aware that in the Castle of the Rock there were not left even two hundred men who could defend themselves, for they had all come out when the cry was raised. So they saw clearly that they could not do anything to help themselves but flee. When the King of the Hundred Knights, his seneschal Marganor, King Tradelmant, and Pollidamas saw that the Saxons were withdrawing, they rode hard against them. The Saxons did not dare make a stand, but made their way toward Saxon Rock. But before they could get there, they were being pursued so closely that not four thousand of their men got away without being killed or wounded. And when those from the castle of Arundel saw that the Saxons were routed and had taken flight, they withdrew from the pursuit on the counsel of a young man who was named Wonet of the White Hands, and went back to where the fighting had been. And they took horses and coins, gold and silver, food and armor, all they wanted of the best they could find. And they provided themselves so well with everything that they lacked for nothing as long as they were in the stronghold. And when they had gone back inside, they closed the gates and raised the bridges. Then they climbed high up on the walls to see how the others would fare. And the Saxons fled to the Castle of the Rock, and they rushed inside where they knew the entrance was. But before they could all get [163] in, many were killed and wounded. And when they had gone inside, the two kings saw that they had got away from them, and they drew back, for they were afraid of the arrows the crossbowmen inside were shooting down on them. And when they had put about half a ieague between themselves and the stronghold, the two kings greeted each other joyfully, and they took off their helmets and kissed and embraced each other. When they had spent a long time delighting in each other’s company, King Tradelmant said to the King of the Hundred Knights, “Sir, I am greatly amazed at how you came here today! And I can thank God for it! For if you had tarried the slightest bit, I could not have avoided being killed or taken prisoner, and all my men with me.” “Sir,” said the King of the Hundred Knights, “our Lord God, who is so loving and noble-hearted, will not forget His friends wherever they may be. But it sometimes happens that the ills and griefs we suffer please Him mightily, and we undergo such hardships in order to raise up His true religion. This is why He has sent the Saxons to us in this country, and they do nothing but grow stronger and more plentiful every day, so that we see plainly that they will never be driven out of the country by any army we can 256 raise; and for as long as we live, let us avenge our dead. This is the best I can make out of what is happening; and if anyone believes me, we should do just as I say, and we will come out of it better than any other way.” “Howe” said King Tradelmant. “What do you have in mind?” “I'll tell you,” said the King of the Hundred Knights. “My advice would be to send word to our companions that every one of them should come with his armed men, as secretly as he can, to the Castle of Lindesores in Broceliande, and then we should call together as many of our people as we can. And then let us ride against the Saxons and fight them in God’s name. And to whomever God grants a good outcome, let him have it. For it is far better to die in good faith and with honor than to live in shame, lose everything, and then die dishonored.” “For the love of God,” said King Tradelmant, “what are you saying? We know very well that there are so many of them that for every one of us they number thirty. And you can be sure that what you advise us to do will not work. Nevertheless,> as for myself, I am ready to do whatever you and the other barons are willing to undertake.” “Indeed,” said the King of the Hundred Knights, “I will send out my messengers right away, and I will tell the barons in my own name just what I have said to you, and they are to let me know whether or not they are willing to do it.” “Then may it be as God wills,” said King Tradelmant. “As for me, I will do what you and the others want. Iam but a single man, no less than you, but you cannot suffer any harm thatI do not share in.” With that, they took to the road and went straight toward Arundel, to the spot where the first battle had been. There they found a very great wealth of everything a man needs for his well-being, and each one took his fill of what he wanted, for they did not need to split the booty into shares. So the wealth and the foodstuffs were enough for everyone. And the two kings parted company and did nothing more at that time. King Tradelmant went straight to North Wales, his stronghold, with seven thousand armed men who were left from the fighting. And the King of the Hundred Knights went to Malehaut with eight thousand men. Then he chose his messengers and sent them to the [164] barons, of whom there were ten by count, and he relayed to them the words he had spoken to King Tradelmant. But here the story falls silent about him and his messengers and begins speaking again about Aguisant of Scotland, who had come straight to his own lands when he left Sorhaut. 3sommer’s text appears to be garbled. The sentence begins & por ce ne le di iou mie que (163, ll. 28-29): “And I am not saying this so that. . .”; but it continues as follows. The Story of Merlin 19. King Urien’s Sons and Nephew; King Neutres Against the Saxons.’ Here the story says that when King Aguisant had come to his citadel at Coranges, he brought together knights, menat-arms, and crossbowmen, on foot and on horseback, until he had at least fifteen thousand under arms. And it happened on a Monday morning that the Saxons had more than fifteen thousand men on horseback, and they were riding between Coranges and Lanvernis, and King Aguisant was going after the plunder that Oriel, Meliaduc, Sorbares, Maglory, Braidon, Pignoras, Pincenar, and Salebrun were taking away in their army that was before the city of Vambieres. As they came, they laid waste all the land, and they leveled villages, towns, and castles, and set fire to everything, for they meant to reduce the whole countryside to nothing; as they took plunder, they carried it off with their army. And they committed such dreadful slaughter throughout the land that, no matter how hard or wicked your heart, you would have been moved to pity for the ladies and young women whose children they so grievously and wrongfully killed in their arms. And when the common folk hid in caves or any other place of refuge, they threw firebrands inside and burned them up. So the news ran so fast throughout the countryside that King Aguisant heard it, and he ordered all his barons to take up arms. And so they did. They got on their horses and rode two leagues before daybreak. They went at a slow gait until after the hour of prime, when they looked down the road toward Lanvernis. They saw the air billowing and thick with dust and red with the fire the Saxons had set to the countryside, and they heard the uproar, the howls and screams the common folk uttered over their losses, the harm that had come to them, and their friends, whom they saw going to their doom. King Aguisant and his men were filled with sorrow and agony, and they began riding faster. They were a good fourteen thousand strong, and King Aguisant put himself in the vanguard with eight thousand men, and Waldin of the Fearsome Vale* led the rearguard with seven thousand knights who were all young men, worthy and skilled at arms, and they rode good, strong, swift horses. This Waldin was King Aguisant’s cousin on his father’s side, and he later did many beautiful feats of arms before the stronghold for love of the maiden Lady of Branlang, whom he wanted to take by force to be his wife, and before the wealthy town of the Narrow Wood, which was so praiseworthy until Waldin won it by his prowess, just as the story will yet set forth, if there is anyone who can tell it to you, but it is not yet time or place. For now it is right to tell you about King Aguisant of Scotland, who rode with his companions until they came upon the wagon train and the plunderers, about which nothing more was said or done. But as soon as they saw each other, each side struck out against the other as fast as their horses could take them. There was a very great slaughter of men and horses there, and right from the start the Saxons took very great losses in ' Corresponds to Sommer, 164-171. 2In Sommer’s text, gaudins de val esfroi (164, 1. 29). The Story of Merlin men because they were not ready to fight, for they had spread [165] throughout the land, some here, others there, and King Aguisant and his men killed more than six thousand of them. But when the king of the Saxons got to the place where the battle was being fought, King Aguisant and Waldin suffered great losses, for he had more than forty thousand men on horseback and ready to defend themselves, while they were only fourteen thousand strong, and they did not believe they could keep up the fight. And they could not hold out for long, for the Saxons only grew in number, and there were only ten Scottish leagues between them and the main Saxon army, and the ten kings® I have told you about were all riding back and had their armor on, and they had so many men that the whole countryside was covered with them everywhere, and they had sent them on their way, willing or not. And King Aguisant suffered there very great losses in men-at-arms and knights, for before the hour of nones had gone by the Saxons struck hard at them and harried them, for the Saxons could see on two sides just the fourteen thousand men, riding good horses and able to fight, whom King Aguisant had with him; in the end, there were left not six thousand of them whom he could gather together who were not killed or wounded. And you should know in truth that, if it had not been for a stroke of luck that happily befell them, not one of them, however many they might have been, would have got away, for they would all have been killed or taken prisoner. But King Urien had come out that morning to the fields along with his nephew Bademagu, who was a good knight, skillful and bold, and they had left behind in the city Wonet,* who was a good and worthy lad, and another one; he had fathered Wonet® with Brimesent, King Arthur's sister, who was a very good lady. With Wonet was Meleagant, who on that day was a very young boy, and he was the son of King Bademagu with his first wife. Those boys guarded the city very well, but they were not yet knights, for they were too young. And with them was Yvain the Bastard, who was also the son of King Unien with his seneschal’s wife, who was so beautiful that he cast his own wife aside for more than five whole years and kept her in his castle against his seneschal’s will, and with her he had a son. When the boy was born, such a great interdict was raised against the land that he had to let her go, like it or not, but he had the boy taken away with him, and he reared him until he was big and handsome and could ride a horse. And the king, who loved him very much, gave him a share of his lands so that he could have an income to keep up his household. That Wain, who was called the Bastard, was handsome and skilled at arms, courtly and bold, and for the great love the king bore him, he made his companion his son Yvain the Great. And because he was sired in adultery, he was Only eight are narned in Sommer’s text (164, Il. 9-11). 4The name Wonet is a diminutive of Wain. In the immediate context, the forms are used interchangeably. 5The syntax in Sommer’s text (165, Il. 20-21) makes it ambiguous as to whether Yonet or the “other one” (i.e., either Meleagant, who is mentioned next, or the other Yvonet/Yvain, the Bastard) is the son of Brimesent. a7 called Wain the Bastard.® And the other Wain, who was the king’s son and was to be the rightful heir to the land through his mother, they called him Yvain the Great when they used his right name. This Yvain was wondrously handsome; he was worthy and bold. But never, after they had heard tell of King Arthur, did either Yvain want his father to make him a knight, rather, they often said to each other when they were alone together—for they greatly loved one another—that they would never be knights before King Arthur made them so. And Wain the Bastard was younger than his brother Yvain the Great. [166] Those young men I have told you about were in the town to protect it, and King Urien and Bademagu had managed to come straight to the battle in which King Aguisant was routed, and he and his army were fleeing to Coranges the citadel. When King Urien saw that King Aguisant had been so put to flight, he was wondrously sorrowful, and he looked it very much indeed. As soon as he came upon the pursuit, he struck the Saxons harder than anyone else could. He was riding a horse worthy of such a man, and he had ten thousand men with him, fully armed and all on good horses. And they ran into the Saxons so hard that many were killed or wounded. There the fighting was fierce and awesome, for the household of King Urien was most valiant. They fought all day long, and they underwent such hardship that no one could have suffered more. And King Urien himself did wonders. King Aguisant had turned back because of the help that had come to him, and there was a great slaughter of men and horses, but King Urien could not have held out any longer if night had not fallen and put a stop to the fighting, for there were too many Saxons against him. So he went back into the city of Sorhaut, tired and weary from the blows he had given and taken, but the Saxons stayed behind in the plot of land that had been the battleground, and they lay there that night still wearing their armor. But there befell King Urien a beautiful stroke of good luck that should not be forgotten in the story, for he and his army met a company of Saxons in a heath, and they had rich stocks of food, arms, and other supplies.’ A good three thousand of them were driving this wealth in a train, and they had stopped and were sitting down to take food, of which they had a great plenty. They did not think they needed to be on guard against anyone, since they knew about the withdrawal of King Unien and the rout of King Aguisant’s army, so they split off from the main army in order to come more quickly to the army that stood before the city of Vambieres, as you have heard earlier in the story, and they believed they were safe in the place where they were. When King Urien and his nephew Bademagu saw the Saxons stopped as they were, and the tents and pavilions they had had set up, and the bright light burning inside the pavilions, they sent to ask who those people were. And those inside the pavilions answered right away that they 6In Sommer’s text, yvains li auoutres (165, etc.): “Yvain, the offspring of adultery.” 7Sommer’s text abbreviates sesnes & harnois (166, 1. 20): “Saxons and armor.” Sommer provides the fuller reading from the Harley manuscript, 166, n. 2. 258 belonged to King Brandegorre® of Saxony. When King Urien and Bademagu heard that they were Saxons, they shouted to their men that they “would now see who was worthy!” And they rode headlong into the midst of them, and they found them utterly unarmed, so they could hardly defend themselves. So the Christians began to bring the tents and pavilions down on their heads. There you would have seen a filthy jumble of tables overturned, cups and goblets spilled, and what they had held strewn about and trampled under the horses’ hooves! There was a great slaughter of the Saxons there, for our men hated them with deadly hatred! And the Christians numbered eight thousand, and they were fully armed, riding strong, swift horses, and there were only forty? thousand Saxons, and they were unarmed because they had been sitting at supper and did not believe they had to be on guard against anyone. And the night was beautiful and bright, and it was very clear, for the month of April had just begun, so the story says. And the Saxons were so badly slaughtered that no more than six thousand out of forty thousand of them were left who had not been [167] killed or cut up. And the ones who got away fled into the great, deep woods and forests, and they felt the greatest sorrow that anyone could conceive. And King Urien and his nephew took all the wealth they had won from the Saxons, who were so well supplied, and they rode straight to Sorhaut, and they were bothered by nothing else. And the city was again fully stocked with every kind of goods, and they took their ease, happy and gladdened by the good fortune that had befallen them in that land. After King Urien and his nephew Bademagu had left the battle, just as you have heard, news came to the city of Sorhaut about King Lot’s sons and Galescalain, how they had left their fathers without their permission and gone off to be given their arms by King Arthur. They had not found him, for he was away in the kingdom of Carmelide, but they had stayed in Logres and were doing very well protecting the borderland; they were waiting for King Arthur to come back to his country, and they had taken the most wealth in booty that anyone had ever won. So the news spread, and at length Yvonet, the son of King Arthur’s sister, heard it. And when he had heard it relayed, he spoke to his mother privately and said to her, “Dear mother, my cousins have gone to King Arthur’s court to serve him and to be given their armor by him, and they know him as their uncle. We could not be in worse straits than we are right now, yet I am happy with my lot so long as you are willing that it be so, Now tell me what you want, what you would like for me to do, for I would never do anything to hurt you. You are well aware that my father has given his land over to his nephew Bademagu, but there is nothing else he can take away from me except my life, which I hold from him, for your lands, which come to me from you alone, I can never lose, unless it is your will. But I 8sommer’s text has brangotre (166, ]. 30). 9Sommer’s text has .tj. with a superscript m (166, J. 38): “four thousand”, however, a few lines later, the text speaks of forty thousand (.xi with superscript m), of whom six thousand survive (166, 1. 42). The Story of Merlin would sooner lose it all than not go after my cousins to serve my uncle. Now get my things ready so that I can leave in a way befitting my honor! Come what may, I mean to go, for I would rather die in honor than live in shame in this prison where we are.” When the lady heard Wonet talking that way, she could not keep from weeping, for she was fully aware that his heart bore the traits of high nobility, from which he had come. So she answered him, “Dear son Yonet, where does the feeling that you must leave your father and go serve someone else come from?” And he said, “Lady, for God’s sake, everyone can vouch for the fact that King Arthur is your brother and my uncle, and my heart tells me this is so. My cousins have already gone to his lands, and I would be very cowardly indeed if I stayed behind where J couldn’t do anything worthwhile and help him keep his lands as my cousins are doing. And you can be very sure that if you do not give me your leave, I will go just the same. Now do what you must, if you do not want to lose me, so that I can go to court in a way befitting my honor.” “Dear, sweet son,” said his mother, “bear with me, and I will put your gear together so stealthily that your father will not know anything about it, for if he did, you would lose him utterly. You must seek out the companions you can and wish to take with you, and I will get the clothing, arms, and horses you will need.” “Lady,” he said, “thank you very much!” Then Yonet stirred himself and came straight to his brother, whose name was Yvonet the Bastard, [168] and he disclosed to him what was on his mind. When he had told him everything, his brother answered that never, God willing, would he go into a strange land without him, and he was ready to leave whenever he wanted. “I want us to set out,” said Yvonet, “in a week’s time.” They put their gear together, and Yvonet the Bastard sought out companions befitting one so worthy and keen until he had a hundred, and YWonet the Great found two hundred, and his mother got robes, money, and armor in great plenty. So they went, with the lady’s leave, one night after supper, in the middle of the night after bedtime, and Fragient, a noble youth who knew all the byways of the country, led them all the way to Logres. But with that the story falls silent about all of them and King Urien, and it does not talk about them anymore right now, but it begins speaking again about King Neutres of Garlot. Here the story says that when King Neutres saw that he had lost his son Galescalain, he was very sorrowful and upset, and he said wicked things to his wife and blamed her very harshly; he was so angry that he did not want to speak to her for another month. Then, one Thursday evening in April, it happened that a messenger came to tell him the great disaster that had befallen King Aguisant, how the Saxons had routed him, and how he would have been killed or taken prisoner had it not been for King Urien, who came to the rescue in time to halt the pursuit of King Aguisant. After him came another messenger who told about the defeat of the Saxons that King Tradelmant and the King of the Hundred Knights had brought about The Story of Merlin between Saxon Rock and Arundel, where they won a great deal of wealth. When King Neutres heard this news, he was sorely grieved for King Aguisant, and he resolved in his heart to go patrol the borderland near the Welsh Causeway between North Wales and Sorelois, where the strait was wondrously far across. But he had hardly made up his mind to lead the mounted patrol when he heard such an uproar raised throughout the countryside that you would have thought the land had sunk into a bottomless pit, and he saw the common folk running in flight on every side, so he asked the fleeing people what was wrong. They told him that all the Saxons in the world had invaded the country and were burning, tearing down, or killing everything they met with. They were coming in by every way in such great numbers that so large an army had never been seen. And they had dug in before the stronghold of Broceliande,!® on the river Severn,!! in the midst of the meadows, where they were awaiting the great wagon train that was coming with their foodstuffs. And their leaders, they said, were King Maragond, who was Hengist the Saxon’s cousin, King Braolant, and King Pignoras. “And the plunderers come to more than twenty thousand. They have spread out through the midst of our land, which they are burning and pillaging, and they kill everything in their path. And if you don’t believe me, you can hear it and see it for yourself.” When King Neutres heard this speech, he made up his mind that he could not stay there without great hardship. Then he shouted in a loud voice, “Noble knights, now to arms! Now we’ll see who’s worthy! For there is no knight who does not defend his land against his mortal foes!” Then a great many knights and men-at-arms ran to put on their armor, [169] and when they were fully armed there were at least twelve thousand of them. King Neutres took seven thousand of them and gave them to Dorilas to lead, and he entreated him to fight boldly. He was a very good knight, a kinsman of the king. He went in the direction from where he saw the common folk fleeing, and he rode until he came to the place where people were being killed and maimed. The Saxon advance force was a good five thousand strong, but they were not together in a formation, but spread out up and down the river, burning and plundering. When Dorilas saw them wreaking such harm, not believing in God, His religion, or His commandments, he let his men run on them as fast as their horses could go, and they struck them with sharp lances that cut them through; a great many Saxons were brought down and slaughtered, for they had been taken unawares and had not seen them before they were running them through. They had killed more than two thousand of them before King Neutres got there, and those who were left turned in flight toward the castle of Broceliande, where the four kings were encamped, but King Neutres and his men followed hard on them, brought them down, and killed them, and they pursued them until they had driven them into the tents and 10gommer’s text has briolande (168, |. 33). l1lgommer’s text has niuiere daisurne here (168, 1. 33), but elsewhere ruiere de surne (172, 11. 5-6), riudere de sauerne (175, 1. 11), and even nuiere darsoune (173, 1. 8). Zoo pavilions. It was past the hour of nones, and when the Saxons saw them rushing in, they hurried to get their arms. But they could not run to them before five hundred of the tents had been brought down about their heads and more than a thousand of their men slain. Then the Saxons blew a horn at the tent of King Maragond, and he gathered together such a great number of men that they came to more than thirty thousand. And then the four kings rode out, and King Galescin came stealthily to meet them with a thousand men; then they all stood against Dorilas, King Neutres’s nephew, who was doing all he could to harm the Saxons, and he had fought very well throughout the whole day; then Mahaglant the Saxon came in. As soon as the enemies took note of each other, they rode against each other, their lances lowered, and they hit so hard that their shields flew into splinters, but their coats of mail were so strong that not one link broke. They shattered their lances as they made their passes, but they had struck so hard that they were all brought to the ground. Men on both sides ran to their rescue, and a great, wild fray broke out, the fighting was so fierce and so awesome that many were slain on both sides, but the Saxons lost more than the Christians. And King Neutres had ridden toward the pavilions on the other side, between the woods and the river, and he and his men brought down a great many pavilions and tents. The Saxons lost a great deal there, for they lacked somewhat for supplies, and there were many killed and wounded before they could get to their gear and tack. And they would have lost a good deal more, when King Falsabre attacked King Neutres with seven thousand Saxons, and they fought very hard. When King Neutres saw the huge number of Saxons who were coming against him, he rode to meet them like the good, skilled knight he was. He ran in among them and fought so well, along with all his men, that he put the seven thousand to flight in a rout. He drove them, despite their resistance, into King Pignoras’s company, [170] with eight thousand Saxons, which gave them help and comfort. And King Pignoras struck hard among King Neutres’s men, and with the sheer strength of his numbers, he threw them back more than a crossbow’s shot, beyond the tents between the woods and the river. And when King Neutres saw his men being driven back, he let out his battlecry and shouted to them, “Noble knights, where are you going? Please turn around and fight back for as long as you are alive, for you will never have a better chance! You must remember who you are, for it is better to die fighting than fleeing shamefully! We are still as good as dead, I think, wherever we might run.” And when they heard their lord’s speech, they turned about and drew together in a body so thick and tight that not another man would have fit in, and they held their ground without moving, and they bore up and withstood the attack until the others had broken their lances on them and rested beneath their shields to catch their breath. And then they bore the blows they gave them and withstood the attack until they rested for a while and stopped raining blows down on them. And when they saw that the Saxons were somewhat tired, they let their horses run against them 260 and began to fight so well that the Saxons were amazed by the wonders they saw them doing against them. Meanwhile, Dorilas was fighting Mahaglant’s men and put them to flight in a rout, and he drove them, despite their resistance, into Falsabre’s company and that of Pignoras, who was fighting very hard against King Neutres’s men. So they all ran into each other in the fray. There was wondrous fighting there and fearsome combat, and each side held out as long as the other until it was near the hour of vespers. At once King Maragond moved out, and he had more than fifteen thousand Saxons with him. He was very bitter that so few men had stood their ground against so many Saxons, for he saw clearly that there were less than half as many Christians as Saxons. Then he shouted to his men and ordered them to fall upon them so hard that not one would be left in his saddle, and they did so, for it seemed to them that they could utterly defeat them just as they were coming at them. But when King Neutres saw such a great number of Saxons coming, he drew his men in around himself thick and tight and withdrew little by little toward the woods. The Saxons rushed on him and drove hard after him, for they believed they could take them, and they hit them so hard that their lances flew into bits. King Neutres and his men struggled backward to reach the woods, which were very deep, by a narrow way where a path was. And the woods were high on both sides of the path and so thick that nothing could get in but wild beasts. And through the middle the path went deep into the woods, but it was so narrow that it would be a wonder if you could throw a stone any way down the path.!? King Neutres and Dorilas backed down the path until all their men had got into the woods. Then they put the hilts of their weapons into the ground and turned the tips upwards, they began to wait for their enemy, and they were ready to defend themselves. And the enemy came upon them full of wrath and sorrow for the harm they had done them, and they attacked. The Christians defended themselves mightily, and they kept fighting until one man could hardly see the other because of the darkness, for night had fallen. Then the Saxons withdrew. They lost there more than they won. When King Neutres saw that the Saxons were, leaving, he and his men set out, [171] and they rode until they came to Wissant. And it was plain by the look of their armor that they had not had a restful trip, for their shields were full of holes, their mail was undone and the links broken, their helmets were bashed in and the nose-plates filthy with blood and gore. And the people throughout the town looked at them in wonder, and they said to one another, “Those men have not had a lot of rest!” So they went to their lodgings, took off their armor, and took their rest, for they had toiled for a very long time. But now the story falls silent about them and begins speaking again about King Brandegorre. 121) Sommer’s text, the sentence ends abruptly with a merveille (170, 1. 36): “it would be a wonder.” The translation adapts the text from the Harley manuscript supplied by Sommer in a note. The Story of Merlin 20. Dodinel the Wildman.’ Here the story says that when King Brandegorre had left Sorhaut and come to his citadel Estrangorre, he stocked it with food and knights and men-at-arms, until there were some fifteen thousand men fully armed, and for a long tme he held the borderland fast against the Saxons, who did them hardly any harm. At length, it happened one day that the Saxons had invaded his land and the borderland of South Wales, where King Belinant was lord, the brother of King Tradelmant of Wales. That Belinant had a fair, rich land, and his wife was beautiful, wealthy, and young; her name was Eglantine, and she was the daughter of King Machen of the Lost Island. And Belinant had a son with his niece, who was of very great beauty, and he was fourteen years old. He was rightly named Dodinel the Wildman, and I will tell you why they called him that: it was because he sought to do nothing but hunt boars, deer, and bucks with bow and arrow through those great, wild forests, and it was because he liked to be there so much that they called him Dodinel the Wildman. And King Neutres was Eglantine’s brother on their mother’s side, so Dodinel the Wildman was the cousin of Galescalain, and afterwards, in the household of King Arthur, he? won great renown, and he was so skillful at feats of arms that he became one of the most highly esteemed knights of the Round Table. But here the story does not speak of him, but of King Brandegorre and the Saxons who had come into his land sorrowful and stirred up because of their friends whom they had lost between the Rock and the stronghold of Arundel. And the Saxons took to the road that led beneath the Castle of the Narrow Way. There were a great many of them, and they burned the whole countryside and plundered as they went along; they harmed the Lord of the Narrow Borderland, the castellan of Lindesores, King Belinant of South Wales, and King Brandegorre more than all the others. And when King Brandegorre found out about them, he summoned all his liegemen, and after they had gathered, fully armed, they set out to avenge the damage and hurt that were theirs. The Saxons came so numerous and so thick that the whole land was covered with them, and they set fire throughout the whole countryside. Meanwhile, King Belinant had raised a very great army, and they rode until they saw the Saxons who were bringing shame and ruin to the country; they were leading such a great slaughter that their wails and screams could be heard two leagues away, and the air was red and billowing with the dust, so that the whole sky was blackened with it, and the sun had lost its brightness and its light. When King Brandegorre saw the ruin and the slaughter, he was sorely stricken with grief, and tears streamed from his eyes. Then he entreated his liegemen to 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 171-174. 2Sommer’s text has only dodynel (171, 1. 18), but the comments explain only the surname “Wildman,” not the Christian name, which recalls dodin (“deceiving”). 3Sommer’s text has the relative qui (171, 1. 22), which appears to refer to Galescalain, but the sense of the passage seems to require continued reference to Dodinel. The Story of Merlin set their minds to fighting hard and defending Holy Christendom. And the Saxons rode [172] hard and fast, their standard raised, and they were more than fifty thousand strong, and they were led by Baramal, Caroman, Lidras, Hardiant, and Kinkenart. Those five kings were wealthy and powerful, and each one had with him ten thousand men well armed one and all; and all five of them were kinsmen of Hengist, whom Uther Pendragon killed. And King Brandegorre was waiting for them to cross a bridge over the river Severn, which was very wide and deep, and as soon as they drew near, they let their horses run against them, and they hit them so hard it was a wonder to behold. There was a great shattering of lances there, a dreadful slaughter of men and horses, a loud hammering together of cudgels and swords, and the fighting was great and mighty; men from both sides fell into the water, which swept them downstream, for it flowed swiftly, and it was not yet the hour of prime. That river flowed before the city of Estrangort, which King Caradoc held in his sway. And he was leaning out of one of the windows of his great hall, gazing at the meadows and river, and he looked into the water, which was clear but turbulent, for the river ran fast, and he saw shields and lances floating downstream in great numbers. And he looked toward where they were coming from and saw the sky red and burning with the fire the Saxons had set in the borderland of Estrangorre, and he saw coming down through the water the gear of knights and the trapping of horses that had drowned. Now it dawned on him that King Brandegorre was fighting with the Saxons. Then he quickly jumped to his feet and shouted to his men, “Now to arms, worthy men! For any knight would be valiant and bold in this time of need!” There was a highborn youth there who was valiant and bold. He brought the king his armor, and his name was Kay of Estral. King Caradoc had called him many times to become a knight, but he answered that he did not yet want to be one, and he said this because he yearned to be made a knight by the hand of King Arthur. And when the king was armed, he asked whether the other knights were ready, and he was told that they were all on their horses waiting for him before the gate. The king mounted his horse and led his men out of the city, and they rode hard and fast until they came to the battle, and it was right at the hour of nones. And as they drew nearer, they heard the uproar and the sword fight going on at the bridge crossing, which King Brandegorre was very fiercely contesting with fifteen thousand men against the Saxons. The Saxons were so many, and so thick, that by their sheer numbers they drew them away from the bridge into the open field, and King Brandegorre would have suffered great hardship, but King Caradoc came along, his banner raised, with ten thousand men, and they rushed headlong into the fray as fast as they could spur their horses. The fighting grew dreadfully more fierce, and there was a great slaughter of Saxons, for their armor was not so strong as they needed it to be; and they struck blows and kept cutting until well past the hour of nones. Then the Christians began to waver, for there was a great horde of Saxons, and the shouts and the uproar grew 261 so loud that people could hear the sound half a league away. Now look! King Belinant of South Wales came up with four thousand men who had good horses worth a great deal and good, strong lances with sharp tips, and they were well stocked with all kinds of armor. They rushed into the fray so hard that they drove everyone back. Then the fighting was fierce and awesome, [173] for King Belinant’s companions were very worthy men, for he was the lord of Lindesores and lord of the Narrow Borderland. And the lord of Glocedon was there, and the castellan of Galenice, and those of the Marshlands, Roestoc, Camugnes, and Blakestan; so too were Caradoc, lord of the Dolorous Tower, and Drian the Merry of the Perilous Forest. Each one had two hundred knights with him, the worthiest anyone could find, and they killed as many as they came to, and the slaughter was such that the great stream of blood flowing from the bodies made the river Severn, which had been clear, run red. And if night had not fallen, which, against all their wills, broke up the battle, not one of the Saxons, who had been at least fifty thousand strong, would have got away; yet the Christians did not number more than thirty thousand. But night fell, which broke up the battle, and one side drew away from the other, until morning, when they meant to start fighting again. But the five kings of Saxony took counsel and ordered the Saxons to go all night and take the straightest way they could back to Saxon Rock, but they lost a good deal of their armor, for they hurried to leave the country and did not carry with them half of their equipment. So it was until day broke the next morning. When it was light, King Caradoc, King Belinant, King Brandegorre, and all the barons of their lands got themselves ready and mounted their horses, for they were very much afraid that, for lack of prowess, they might lose their advantage and Holy Christendom would be brought down and shamed. So they gathered their battalions together, got their men into formation, and put their companies in order, and went where they thought they would find the Saxons. But when they saw that their enemies had left, they were very distraught that they had got away from them, for it was clear to them that they had gone toward the Castle of the Rock. And when they saw that there was nothing else they could do, they turned back. The barons began to make merry together, and they split up the equipment the Saxons had left behind in such a way that each one got what he wanted, for there was so much that it made every man wealthy. And when the time came to leave, each of the kings* offered his service to the others: whenever anyone needed it, he should let them all know. Then they parted company. King Caradoc went to one of his cities, and King Brandegorre went to Estrangorre, which was filled with all kinds of goods. Then word spread that King Lot’s sons had gone off and left their father, as had the sons of King Neutres and 4The word is not in Sommer’s text (173, 1. 29), but it seems reasonable, as Sommer suggests in a margin note, that the promises of mutual service should be made by the kings alone rather than all of the barons. 262 King Urien. And when Dodinel heard the news, he said he would do likewise, and he told his father that he would go to court, but he got his gear together in secret. And he sent word to Kay of Estral at the stronghold of his uncle, King Caradoc, and he entreated him to come confer with him at the Castle of the Thorn and please not to fail to come for any reason; and he should bring with him his little nephew Kehedin. And the messenger rode until he came to Estrangort,> and he spoke to Kay and told him in private what Dodinel had sent him to say, that he should come confer with him at the Castle of the Thorn and that he should come ready to travel. And Kay sent word back that he would be there within three days’ time, but he told Dodinel that he himself should make ready to leave, for he had already got his things together. [174] With that, the messenger took leave of Kay of Estral and went back to Dodinel the Wildman and told him Kay's answer. When he heard it, he knew very well what Kay had in mind, so he got himself ready and summoned his companions; and when they had gathered, there were a good seventy of them, all young squires from twenty-two to twenty-four years old. Dodinel and his companions went straight to the Castle of the Thor with rich clothing and very valuable housewares of gold and silver, and they waited there until Kay of Estral came with his companions, forty worthy young men with their first growth of beard. When the young men saw one another, they rejoiced mightily, for they had not been together for a long time. And after they had celebrated a good deal, Dodinel the Wildman spoke and said to Kay, “Dear fair friend, I sent for you and you have come, and I thank you very much; now it is only right that I should tell you why. A short time ago news came to me that King Lot’s sons, along with Galescalain and Yonet, have gone to court to be given their arms; and because they have gone there, I want to go too. And I love, and have loved, you so much that I don’t wish to do anything without your leave. I strongly desire to follow my cousins. Now tell me whether you will go with me. I would in no way go back to my father’s household, for I have gathered my belongings together and I am on my way!” “Sir,” said Kay of Estral, “that is why I have come to you, for I knew just about what you had in mind, and I too have all my gear and everything I need, and I have forty highborn youths with me, all worthy and bold, and this one is Kehedin,® my nephew. Now let us set out when you will.” “You speak very well,” said Dodinel. “We’ll move out tomorrow morning.” So the young men stayed the night there, and in the morning they took to the road and set out for Logres. But now the story falls silent about all of them and begins speaking again about King Clarion of Northumberland. 5Sommer’s text has estrangoire (173, |. 39). 6Sommer’s text has hedins (174, |. 21), but this is Kehedin the Small (cf. 178, 1. 27). The Story of Merlin 21. The Plight of the Saxons; King Clarion Opposes the Saxons.’ Here the story says that when King Clarion had left Sorhaut,” he called up as many knights and men-at-arms as he could find, and he garrisoned the city of Northumberland and stocked it with foodstuffs. Then he sent word throughout his land and ordered those who owned cattle, sheep, or any other livestock to lead them into the great forests, wild, deep, and very old, until they found safe pasture. Then he sent orders for all men who could bear arms, until there were at least fourteen thousand. And King Clarion also thought about how to protect the countryside. He lay down to sleep only in the woods,® in a tent or pavilion, or on the wayside, and he found no spy whom he did not hang or take away a prisoner. At length it happened one night that the Saxons were gathered at the tents of King Bramangue* and King Mahaglant, the wealthy king of Ireland who was first cousin to the king of Denmark and brother of King Ammaduc, the wealthy king of Hoselice; and Bramangue was lord of part of Denmark and Ireland. And he sadly mourned his losses at the Castle of the Rock and the great harm the men from the countryside were doing him every day. At the same time, he was deeply worried about the stocks of food, which grew smaller and smaller in [175] the army and had become very scarce. Then a young knight, who was very worthy and bold, sprang to his feet. He spoke loudly enough for all to hear him, and he said to Bramangue, “Dear uncle, if you will let me go plundering in a land I know of, I will bring back food enough, for the land is wealthy and full of all kinds of goods. Entrust me with as many of your men as I may choose, if Minaduc, my father, is willing for me to go, for I would not without his leave. You should know in truth that if anyone is to strive for such a deed, it should be I.” “Dear nephew,” said King Bramangue, “I have nothing but good things to say about what you mean to undertake. But tell me first, what land are you bent on going to?” “I will tell you truly,” said Oriel, “I want to go to Northumberland, following the river Severn, and then to come back by the river Humber before a castle named the Dolorous Tower, and you can know for a fact that it is the most bountiful land in the whole world. If we should ever need provisions, send to that land for them, and we will have them plentifully.” “I grant you what you ask, dear nephew,” said Bramangue. “Go pick out the men you want and take them.” “Sir,” said Oriel, “many thanks!” 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 174-178, 2From ch. 11 (Sommer, 131). 3Sommer’s text has son fores non (174, 1. 34), which may be read as s’en fores non (“except in forests”). 4 Banaigue (175, |. 8), but bonegue here (174, 1. 37), bauaigne (for banaigue) (175, 1. 3), bermagne (198, 1. 30), bramangue (175, 1. 15), brangue (175, 1. 41) bramague (176, ll. 21, 28; 340, 1. 12), branmague (395, |. 4). The form chosen is the one of the variants preferred by G.D. West (47a) The Story of Merlin Then Oriel left and chose the men he wanted, until they were a good sixty thousand strong, not counting the foot soldiers who went along after them for the booty. They took to the road and went straight to Norhaut, and they plundered and burned the whole countryside. And King Mahaglant, who had stayed with the army before Vambieres, called his nephew Soriondes forward and said to him, “Dear nephew, what are you doing that you don’t go anywhere? Take my men, as many as you want, and go to the land of King Yder. Take as much plunder as you find. If you find him fighting you for it, take care to have enough men with you to help you avenge yourself.” When he heard his uncle saying this, he sprang to his feet happy and gladdened, for he was of very great prowess, and he said to him, “Sir, many thanks!” Then he left him and chose as many men as he wanted, until he had a good forty thousand all on horseback, and they set out for Cornwall, and they plundered the countryside wherever they went, laid it waste, and burned it. But the story does not say any more about them at this time; rather we will tell you more about the Saxons’ meeting. Now the story says that Soriondes, nephew of King Mahaglant, had left the army, just as you have heard, and King Minaduc called his nephew Arrant and said to him, “Dear nephew, you must go to Loonois and Orkney, the lands of King Lot. Take as many of my men as you want. And take care to see this through in such a way that I may be thankful to you.” He sprang to his feet and said, “Many thanks, sir!” And he left and took such companions as he wished, and when they had got on their horses, there were at least forty thousand of them. So they left and rode until they came into the lands of King Lot, and they began to pillage in the worst way they could. But here the story falls silent about them for a while, and we will tell you about Bramangue and Mahaglant, for when Soriondes, Oriel, and Arrant, those three cousins, had left the main army, [176] all the kings in the army held a meeting to decide how they could take the city of Vambieres, for it was wondrously strong. And the story says that Vambieres stood on flat ground, and there was no hill or mountain within two leagues on all sides. All around the town were great moats, wide and full of very deep water, and a® great marsh stretching as far as an arrow could be shot. Beyond the water and the moats were the walls and fortified stone turrets one after the other, only four yards apart. There were only two ways into the town, and each of the gates had two portcullises; the gates were shut with two iron locks and great, stout bars held crosswise. Why should I go on laying out the town for you and telling you how strong it was? For not only was it strong, but above all it was a town of rivers, for flowing water beat against the walls on two sides. Dry land and wetlands were all around everywhere else, so that no one could mount a siege except on one side, where there were 5The form here (175, Hl. 33, 42) is hertant; elsewhere in the Merlin (340, 1. 12) occurs the form airant. 6Sommer’s text has the definite article (176, 1. 5). 263 two pairs of great moats, wide and deep, and beyond that was a great marsh wide as an arrow could be shot from a crossbow and a good four leagues long. So the kings went to see how they might go about taking the town, and they held a great meeting, and they asked each other what they could do, for they saw clearly that it could be taken only by starving the people out. There was a king there named Maragond. He came to his feet and said to King Bramangue, “Sir, I think that we must stay in this land long enough to starve the city out. And while we are before this town, we could starve out and take another, so we would have two at the same time.” “By my head,” said King Mahaglant, “you do not lie! And if you want my advice, we should send a third of our men before the city of Clarence, and any others who come from our land will go to the siege with them. For there are not so many people in this country that we can’t throw them out with a fourth of our forces.” “Dear sir,” said King Bramangue, “which ones would you agree to let go there?” “T will certainly tell you that,” said Aminaduc. “King Hargadabran will go there, and King Sinaglorre, King Sorbares, King Maragond, King Mysenes, King Pignoras, King Sapharin, King Thoas, King Satiphus, King Plantamor, King Somegrieu, and King Mathamas. And let each one have twenty thousand men at his banner, and they should besiege the city so harshly that none may go in or come out without being killed or maimed!” So they ended their meeting, and all agreed that they should go straight to the city of Clarence. They did so, and encamped all around the city and stayed there for a very long time. But now the story falls silent about the siege, and we will tell you about the Saxons who invaded the land of King Clarion of Northumberland. When King Clarion saw that the Saxons were laying waste his land, he was highly distraught, so he chose a spy and sent him out to learn whether it was a big force. When the spy had seen them, he came back to the king very frightened and told him that there were forty thousand or more of them, and they were stripping [177] the countryside. When King Clarion heard what he said, he picked a messenger to send to Duke Escant of Cambenic, and he told him to meet with him at the narrows of Margot Rock on the river Severn with as many men as he could muster, for the Saxons had invaded his land and were laying it waste. When the duke heard this news, he ordered up all his men and brought them together in a force of twelve thousand, then he rode off with them to the Rock. And when they got there, they found King Clarion with thirteen thousand armed men, and as soon as they saw one another they began to rejoice mightily. They had been there for just a short time when they saw the smoke and fire rising up throughout the land and the dust flying so thick that the air quivered with it. And when the king and the duke saw it, one need not ask whether they were sorrowful or upset about it. Then they set out toward where they saw the fire billowing up, and they met the people fleeing from it wailing and moaning over their losses and the harm that had come to them, so that the king was overcome with great pity for them. 264 So they rode until they met those they wanted to meet, they tarried no longer, but rode against them very fast. There they led a great slaughter of men and horses, and the Saxons lost very many of their men because they were spread out down the river and were bringing plunder back to the main army. There were more than fifteen thousand plunderers, and King Clarion and Duke Escant gave them a great fight; they fought from the hour of prime until midday, and the story says that they killed at least ten thousand of the foot soldiers. But when the body of knights came in, our men were very frightened, for it was a large force with many good knights, although with our men was the lord of the Dolorous Tower with a hundred worthy knights, valiant and bold. And Christopher was there, along with Sansadoine, a castellan from Norhaut, and a thousand men wearing full armor (Sansadoine held his stronghold in the deep woods of Northumberland). Brun the Ruthless of Salerno was there, and Sanebron was there with Duke Escant and three thousand knights riding good horses, and so was Mares, lord of Roestoc, who led a fair, rich company of two thousand all wearing good armor, and the lord of Camengues with three thousand companions worthy and bold. And there was the lord of the White Tower, who was very worthy and bold, with six hundred knights, and Waldin, King Arthur’s nephew, who was wearing very costly armor, with three hundred companions. And Gravadain of the Strong Castle was there with four hundred knights all riding strong, swift warhorses. When they came together, there were more than thirtyfive thousand of them all told, and they stood beside a wooded spot near the narrows made by a great rock in the river Severn. And the Saxons came upon them in such forces that they would not have withstood for long if it had not been for the narrows where they found themselves. The fray was dreadful, for those on the Saxons’ side were proud, wealthy, and powerful, among the best knights in the whole army. With this, they were so strong and they came in such great numbers that they feared nothing, and when they saw the Christians, they fell upon them very hard. But the Christians defended themselves so well that they could do nothing to throw them out of the place where they were, and they could not get at them except with weapons that could be hurled. So they threw [178] spears and sharpened pikes at them, and the men on both sides inflicted very fearful wounds on one another. The fray lasted this way for three whole days, from morning until night, and no one took off his hauberk or his helmet until nighttime, when they all ate what little there was to eat. But now the story falls silent about them, until itis time and place to tell more about them, and it begins speaking again about King Arthur and his companions, who were in the city of Carhaix in Carmelide, taking their ease and highly honored by King Leodagan. The Story of Merlin 92. King Clarion of Northumberland and Duke Escant; Sagremor’s Arrival in Britain.! In this part the story says that they celebrated and feasted in the city of Carhaix because of the victory they had won over their enemies and the booty they had taken from them.” They brought their people together from far and wide, and King Arthur was greatly honored and handsomely served by King Leodagan and his daughter, who was eager to do as her father bade her. It happened one day that Merlin took the three kings aside and said to them, “My lords, I must go to the kingdom of Logres, for there they are in dire need of help and advice, not because the country is still worried about being rescued from outlaws, which is not true, but because, as you should know, the barons are being grievously harassed by the Saxons, for there are very many of them in the land, and they have, in their great pride, burned two cities in the land, one being Vambieres and the other Clarence. They have gathered together men from more than forty kingdoms, and their numbers are growing every day.” Next he told them how the Saxons had spread throughout the land, with one part going against King Yder in Cornwall, the second against King Lot in Orkney and Loonois, and the third against King Clarion of Northumberland and the duke of Cambenic. Afterwards he told about the harassment and all the battles there had been, what had happened between the Saxons and their kings, the great meeting they had held that led them to besiege the two cities, how Wonet the Great and Yonet the Bastard had left the castle of their father King Urien, and how Dodinel, Kay of Estral, and Kehedin the Small? had left their country and gone to Logres, with Gawainet, and they would not let themselves be made knights until Arthur had girded their swords at their sides. “And you should know that they cannot succeed on their own, and this is the true reason why I am going there. Now, be careful to take your ease and get your rest, and don’t go anywhere until you see me again; it will take me only a short while, and this I say in truth.” “Ah, Merlin!” said King Ban, “don’t be gone for long! We would soon be dead or in dreadful trouble if you left us on our own! And we would say that you had forsaken us— or betrayed us.” “What?” said Merlin. “Dear lords, do you then believe that I won’t be back? Take care never to think of such a thing, or you will lose my love.” “Sir,” said King Ban, “I do not think that at all, except for your companionship, which I hold so dear.” “Then let it be,” said Merlin. “You will have me back with you in time, before there is a battle in this kingdom. And I commend you to God, [179] for I cannot tarry.” Then he left them so quickly that they did not know what had become of him. And that same evening he went straight to Blaise, his master, in Northumberland, who was very glad to see him because he loved being with him. And 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 178-180, 2From ch. 17 (Sommer, 59). 3Called Kehedin the Fair, 148, ll. 17~18, and 198, 1. 38. The Story of Merlin Merlin told him all the adventures that had happened in the kingdom of Carmelide since he had left him, and afterwards he told him everything that had happened in the kingdom of Logres, until there was nothing left to be told. He put it all in writing, word for word, and it is through him that we still know what we do know about those things. When he had written this all down, Merlin told him why he needed to leave the three kings in the kingdom of Carmelide. And on the very evening that Merlin spoke to Blaise, Oriel’s company encamped on the river Humber, for they had just invaded the land. But now the story stops talking about Merlin and Blaise and the Saxons, and we will tell about Sagremor, who had left Constantinople with three hundred companions and gone to King Arthur’s court to be newly made a knight.4 Here the story says that Sagremor made his way, after he had left the wealthy city of Constantinople, until he came to the port of Wissant. There they took to the sea and sailed with a good, light wind, until they came ashore at the port of Dover. After they had crossed over, they were very glad. Then they packed up their gear, climbed on their horses, and started out on their way to Camelot. And they wandered about because they did not know the roads, nor did they find anyone they could ask for news of King Arthur, for they found the countryside burned and laid waste, since the Saxons had wreaked destruction there, but those youths knew nothing about that. At length they came upon the great company of Saxons that Oriel had broken off from the main army, and they were a good twenty thousand strong. They were posting lookouts around Norhaut, lest someone should steal any of the plunder they had taken. As the young men drew within a league of the Saxons, they met the people running from them. The youths asked them what was wrong, and they told them that they were fleeing because of the Saxons, who were laying waste the whole countryside. And Sagremor asked them, “Where, then, is King Arthur?” And they said that he was in the kingdom of Carmelide. “And who, then, is watching out for this country?” asked Sagremor. And they answered, the sons of King Lot of Orkney, who had come to serve the king so that he would give them their arms. “And where are they?” asked Sagremor. “They are in Camelot,” they said. “But for God’s sake, young lords, don't go on, for you will all be killed or wounded.” “Now tell me,” said Sagremor, “which way to Camelot?” “In truth, dear friend,” they said, “you are on the right road, if only it weren’t for the outlaws who are coming this way. But get away from here, or you are all dead!” “And how far is it to Camelot?” said Sagremor. “Sir,” said one of them, “at least ten Scottish leagues.” When Sagremor heard that it was only ten leagues, he shouted to his companions, “Noble men, now to arms! Now we'll see who is worthy! Make sure that those heathens, who are laying waste this country, take nothing of ours that they do not pay for dearly. If we can fight our way through them, 4From ch. 11 (Sommer, 132). 265 [180] we can put ourselves between them and Camelot, then we'll be well away thanks to our horses’ strength if we must.” Then the squires dismounted and dressed in their armor. They put their hauberks on their backs, fine and bright, and they shone like polished silver. They were handsomely armed and ready for the fight, for they were worthy, bold, and stouthearted. They had good steel war hats, and they tied them on their heads over their iron coifs, and they got on their horses, which were covered with iron armor that was so strong that none better could be found in any land. Then they formed their ranks and drew tightly together like a flock of starlings, and they rode out to meet the Saxons, whom they saw coming. But now the story stops talking about them and begins speaking again about Merlin, who was in Northumberland with his master Blaise. 23. Merlin and the Young Heroes Against the Saxons.’ Here the story says that when Merlin had told Blaise all the adventures of the land, just as they had happened after he had left him, he got up in the morning and departed, and he came straight to the city of Camelot. And he took on the likeness of an old man, and he was wrapped in a tattered, old burlap cloak with its hem ripped off. Before, he had been tall and brawny; now he was short, stooped, and old, and his hair was unkempt and his beard long and stringy. He was holding a club at his neck, and he was driving a great herd of cattle. And when he was before the city, he began to moan and wail so loudly that all the people atop the walls heard him clearly, and they heard him saying, “Dear Lord God, what a great shame about such handsome young men who will be killed and hacked up so wrongfully! Ah, King Arthur, sir! What fast friends you will lose today! They would have helped you, if they could have reached the right age, in winning your lands back from your enemies. Ah, Sagremor, highborn squire, noble and courteous man who has borne the agony of death for us, may God keep your body from death and maiming! And if you have died, may He keep your soul in His holy paradise and let it not be tormented in the trials of Hell. Just as truly as He is true God and all-powerful, may he watch over you and your companions!” Merlin uttered these words, and Gawainet and his brothers heard them. They had gone up on the wall of the town, fully armed, and they were watching the red from the fires the Saxons had set round about the land, for they had come to Camelot to protect the town as soon as they knew the Saxons had invaded the country, and they had climbed up to see whether the Saxons were coming to storm Camelot. And Gawainet called to the peasant, “Farmer, come here and speak to us, Tell us what’s wrong with you and why you are wailing so. And tell us who he is whom you are mourning so deeply.” Corresponds to Sommer, 180-186. 266 And he turned a deaf ear to him, and he beat the ground with his club as if he were out of his mind and his heart heavy with sorrow. Then he leaned on his club and began to wail again very loudly, and after he had let out his sorrow, he began to drive his cattle back around, as if he meant to rush into the woods. Then he said in a loud voice, “Ah, knighthood of Logres! what has become of you? It was already being said less than [181] a week ago that the wonder of the whole world had come into this land, and our salvation! They said that King Arthur’s nephew was protecting this country, but he seems to be doing very badly indeed, since he? is allowing the wonder of the whole world to be slain!” When Gawainet heard this speech, he was most eager to find out why the peasant had said these things and why he was so sorrowful. He called to him again and again, three or four times, very forcefully: “Countryman, countryman! Speak to me, tell me what is wrong with you!” But he turned his face away and looked as if he had not heard him. He called to him once more, and the man raised his head, which was very ugly, with hair shooting out all over, and looked at him with one eye open and the other shut, and he gritted his teeth like a man looking into the sun, and answered, “What do you want?” “I want you to speak with me for a while,” said Gawainet. “Come over this way.” And he drew nearer, until he came to the edge of the moat, at the foot of the wall, outside the city. “Now you can say to me what you will,” he said. “I want you to tell me,” said Gawainet, “why you are weeping and who it is you are mourning. And why have you cast blame on the knights of this country?” And the peasant said to him, “If you were willing to strive to free him, I would tell you.” “I promise you faithfully as a squire,” said Gawainet, “that I will try as hard asI can.” When the countryman heard that Gawainet was so eager to know why he had come there, he said to him, “Dear sir, who are you?” “My name is Gawainet,” he answered, “and I am King Arthur’s nephew.” “Then I will tell you,” he said. “Indeed, I am full of sorrow because of a company of young men of high birth who are fighting against the Saxons at the borders of this land. They are fighting harder than such a small band has ever fought, for there are only three hundred of them against more than three thousand Saxons.” “Who are they,” asked Gawainet, “and what are they looking for?” “They say,” said the peasant, “that their leader is named Sagremor. He is the grandson of the emperor of Constantinople, and he has come into this country to take his arms from King Arthur. Now I have told you all I know about him. But if I told you that you should go to rescue him, I would be wasting my words, for I know very well that you do not have the heart or the boldness to go. Nevertheless, if you did go, you could rescue him, and you could brag that you won booty worth a great deal.” 2Sommer’s text has a generalized third plural (181, 1. 3). The Story of Merlin When Gawainet heard the words of the peasant who was calling him a coward, he was very deeply shamed, so he shouted, “Now to arms, noble companions! Get on your horses and follow me, for I am going there!” As soon as he had said this, he mounted his horse, followed by all his companions, and they rode out of the city. And when they were outside the city, there were at least four thousand of them. Gawainet rode out in front of them, and he came to the peasant and told him to get on a horse and lead him to where the youths were fighting; and he did what he was ordered, for he sought nothing else, and he rode out in front to where they were fighting. As they drew near the battle, they found that the youths were fighting very hard, and they had slain more than three hundred Saxons, but there were so many of them that they could not break through. And Sagremor was fighting with greater prowess than any had ever seen, for he was holding an axe in both hands and was out in front of his companions on a warhorse that was wondrously strong {182] and swift, and when he went into the fray, he struck so hard that he became lost among the Saxons, as if he had fallen into a bottomless pit and his companions along with him. And they closed in about them on all sides, for they thought they could take them prisoner. But they were so worthy and quick that none was so bold as to put his hand out to take them prisoner, for Sagremor, who had his axe, was in front of all his companions, and he was striving to break through the throng, so he landed such uncommonly hard blows left and right that he killed in one swing as many as came within his reach. All who had seen his blows fled to every side, and there was none so bold as to dare face up to him. So they began hurling sharpened swords at him, until Sagremor and his companions could hardly hold out any longer, and they were all close to being killed or taken prisoner, when Gawainet arrived with all his men. When Gawainet came into the fray, the youths were in dire straits, and he and his men rushed in so hard that they brought down more than two thousand Saxons on their first attack. And Oriel was greatly distraught by this, for never had he seen, he said, so few men hold up so well. He took a stout, sharp lance, and rode into the heat of the fray, and he said that he would like to pit himself against a man whom he would mightily upset. And Gawainet and his companions fought their way in until they found the young men, who were shaken and weary, and he saw Sagremor, who was at the very front wielding a Danish axe with both hands, with which he struck uncommonly mighty blows. He was tall and big, one of the sturdiest youths anyone could ever hope to find, and as many as came within his reach, nothing could keep them from being split open or having an arm or a leg cut off. He could only do wonders all around. And when Gawainet saw him, he asked the peasant who he was, and he told him that it was Sagremor the Unruly, grandson of the emperor of Constantinople, “but spur your horse right now, and run help him, for he needs it sorely.” Then Gawainet and all his companions broke ranks and rode headlong into the Saxons so hard that they brought down two thousand or more, dead and wounded, and there was a wondrous fight and a great hue and cry. The Story of Merlin But the young men were holding out at a very great cost, for on Gawainet's side there were only four thousand, along with the three hundred the young men had brought with them, while the Saxons were more than twenty thousand strong, not counting the ones spread up and down the countryside who were burning and plundering, who brought the number to at least forty thousand. When Oriel saw that so few men were doing them such harm, he grew very bitter, and he said and swore that they would never get away. He picked up a lance and rode toward Agravain, who had struck down his nephew and killed him, which had greatly upset him, and he let his horse run and struck Agravain on his shield so hard that he drove his weapon beneath his armpit and cut through the two layers of his hauberk, so that the tip showed through on the other side; he hit him so hard that he bore him to the ground over his horse’s backside. When Gawainet saw his brother fall, he was afraid that he had been killed. He took up a sharp axe and came toward the Saxon who had brought his brother down, and he meant to strike him through the helmet. When Oriel saw the stroke coming, he grew wary and thrust his shield out to fend it off, but the blow was so strong that the shield split in two. It was a mighty blow! Oriel kicked his horse forward, and Gawainet’s axe glanced down off his helmet so that it sliced off a [183] fourth of the helmet and cut through the mail on his back. And Gaheriet struck Solunant through the head so hard with a cudgel that he brought him down dead to the ground, and Guerrehet struck Malubre through the helmet and split him down to the teeth, and Galescalain hit Swiados so that he sent his head flying into the middle of the field. When the Saxons saw Oriel lying on the ground, they were afraid that he had been killed, so they spurred their horses to where he was to rescue him, and they came from every side and gathered all around him. He was merely dazed from the blow he had been given so that he could not get to his feet or inove any part of his body, but his face looked so ghastly and he was laid out in such an unsightly way that all who saw him thought he must be dead. And they mourned him so sorrowfully that all the fighting stopped. Meanwhile, the young men had got Agravain up, on the spot where he had been struck down, and put him back on his horse. And the peasant who had brought Gawainet had taken the shape of an armed knight, and he came to Gawainet and his companions and said to them, “For God's sake, my lords, if you were to take my advice, you would get yourselves on the road back to Camelot while the Saxons have their minds on their mourning.” When Gawainet heard his speech, he understood that his advice was right and just. So he rode straight to Sagremor and told him that he and his companions were indeed welcome, and Sagremor returned his greeting like the highbom, courteous, and noble knight he was. Then Gawainet said to him, “Sir, if you like, it might well be me now for us to go and take with us our men who are left, for we have won a great deal as long as we get back safe and sound.” Then Gawainet asked Sagremor who he was, for he had spoken to him so courteously; yet he did not know him. 267 And he told him that his name was Sagremoret,? and he was the emperor of Constantinople’s grandson. “And you, sir,” he said, “who are you who have helped me when I needed it so much?” “Sir,” he said, “my name is Gawainet, and I am the nephew of King Arthur and son of King Lot of Orkney. My brothers and I are protecting my uncle’s land until he comes back from Carmelide, and the only reason I have come here is to help you, for this very morning I was told that you and your companions were being attacked by the Saxons.” Just then the knight who had spoken to Gawainet came forward and shouted to him, “Ah, Gawainet, dear brother! What are you waiting for? Why don’t you get on the road? Don’t you see all those men riding hard toward you? They won't be willing to let you get away if you wait for them.” When Gawainet heard him giving him a lesson and trying to get back to safety, he looked around and saw the Saxons coming in such great numbers that the whole field was covered with them, and they were wearing good iron armor. They were riding headlong, hard and fast, and they were raising such an uproar that people could have heard them a league away. And when Gawainet saw them bearing down so wildly and in such numbers, he said to Sagremoret, “Sir, let us go, please! Look at all those Saxons riding this way, may God damn them!” And Sagremor answered, “Sir, very willingly!” They immediately took to the road straight to Camelot, and they rode together in such a tight formation that you could have thrown a glove onto their heads, and it would not have hit the ground before they had ridden a whole league. The Saxons turned their thoughts back to their mourning, but after a while Oriel came to his senses; he looked around and saw them all about him [184] mourning very sorrowfully, and he asked them for a shield, lance, and helmet. He was most stouthearted, a good, bold knight, and he said that if he could meet the man who had given him such a hard blow that knocked him senseless, he would reward him handsomely! Then he got on a strong, swift charger and rode to where he thought he would find the Christians, but by then they were more than a league off. Then Oriel let out his battlecry and said that they were cursed if they got away, and the Saxons spurred their horses and raised their screams and shouts in such a loud uproar that people could have heard them for more than a league. And the dust rose from the horses’ hooves so dark and thick that the air, which had been clean and clear, billowed with it. Then the Saxons came so near to them that they almost caught up with them. When the knight who had advised the Christians to ride away saw that the Saxons had come so near, he began to urge the young men to get going and ride faster, and before they came to Camelot, they were at a very great speed. But the worthy Gawainet, Gaheriet, Guerrehet, Agravain, Galescalain, and Sagremoret were riding last, and 3Sommer’s text has the diminutive form here (183, |. 24) and elsewhere (186, |. 27) that compares with Yvain/Yvonet and Gawain/Gawainet (see ch. 5 n. 19 and ch. 19 n. 4). 268 the six of them were driving their men and equipment just like the old man who drove his cattle to market from behind; they allowed the Saxons to break their lances on them, and when they saw their companions overwhelmed with blows, they did all they could to allow them to break free, for they could withstand a great deal. And they fought so fiercely that no Saxon was bold enough to face up to them. Then Oriel rode out before the others brandishing the great standard, and he had his sharp, well-honed sword; he saw the one who had struck him down and recognized him, and he swore to his god that he would avenge himself. Then he struck his horse with his spurs, and the young man saw him coming, but he did not look worried. When he got near enough to strike, Gawainet avoided the blow and let him go by, for Oriel could not hold his horse back. And Gawainet, who was very valiant and nimble, brought his horse around, ran upon him, and hit him right on top of the helmet, but it was with the flat of his sword, for he had been in such a hurry to strike that he could not take aim. Nevertheless, it was such a mighty blow that sparks flew into the sky, and it stunned Oriel and sent him sprawling to the ground. Sagremor struck another one and sliced off his arm at the shoulder, and Galescalain struck Placides and sent his head flying. Agravain, Gaheriet, and Guerrehet had each taken a sharp, stout spear; the first struck Guinebal, the second Taurus, and the third Favel, and each one knocked his man dead to the ground; on the same pass, they brought down three others. Gawainet, Galescalain, and Sagremor had stopped near Oriel, and they were doing their best to take him prisoner, but the Saxons would not let them; they bunched together and ran upon the three companions. These three killed so many of them that their arms and legs and the heads and manes of their horses were dripping with blood and gore, and they fought so well that none was brave enough to face them. But so many Saxons had swarmed in around them that they had to leave Oriel. Then they trampled him under the feet of their [185] horses until they had utterly crushed him; after trampling and beating him, they still had not killed him, so they rode off down the road after their companions, who they thought would already be near Camelot, for after the three had stayed behind, the others were not pursued, but rode away freely. When the three companions saw that their army had made its way into the city, they were very happy and joyful, so they took to the road at a slow gait. The Saxons stayed where they were for the sake of their lord, whom they found badly beaten and broken, and they were woefully sorry for him. And when he came to his senses, he was so upset that the three had got away that he nearly went crazy; and he swore that if he could get his hands on one of them, he would have him skinned alive or ripped apart by horses. “Sir,” said his men, “the one who brought you down twice today is a wicked coward.” “That is true,” said Oriel, “but if I can get hold of him, no one can keep him from being maimed!” Thus did Oriel threaten Gawainet, who rode along with his companions until they reached Camelot, where they stopped. When those who had ridden ahead did not The Story of Merlin see the three companions, they wondered what had become of them, and no one knew what to say. When Guerrehet, Agravain, and Gaheriet heard that their three young lords had got lost, they said they would not stop looking for them until they had found them. Then they set out at a fast gallop the same way they had come. They had not gone far when they met the peasant, sitting on the warhorse Gawainet had given him; he was the very one who had told the news about Sagremor. And when he saw the three brothers, he asked them where they were going, and they said they were looking for their brother Gawainet, their cousin Galescalain, and the emperor’s grandson, for they did not know what had become of them. “Then you have not been looking hard enough,” said the peasant. “Those worthies are in plain sight right where they are. Look, here they come! And they don’t have you to thank for their lives, for you left them behind like cowards, and they stayed for your sake and for the sake of the others who are safe and sound. Then they did many a beautiful deed of knighthood and struck many a handsome blow, for which everyone should hold them in high esteem—and take you for what you are! And you showed clearly that you would forsake any companion of yours, as if he meant nothing to you, when you left your brother in a time of need; yet he would not forsake you even if he were risking his life! And so all worthy men who hear stories about you should rightly and justly blame you and forevermore mistrust you in times of need, and you can be sure that you will be most rudely taken to task for it.” With that, the peasant left, for he was unwilling to say anything more to them, and they went on their way, shamed and upset by the harsh words the peasant had spoken to them. And they had not ridden far when they met the three companions, who, by the look of their armor, seemed to have come from a most evil place. When they had met, rejoiced, and were gladdened, the companions asked the whereabouts of their other friends, and the three brothers told them that they had left them outside Camelot, where they were waiting for them. With that, the six young noblemen rode away together, rejoicing in their new companions, [186] who had come to help them, and happy that they had rescued them safe and sound. They had not gone far before they met the peasant’s horse, very frightened, which came running toward them, and they saw that his saddle was covered with blood. When the companions whom the peasant had upbraided saw him, they looked at one another and began to smile. Galescalain caught sight of this and asked them why they were smiling, but they were loath to speak. He entreated them a second time, and Gaheriet told them everything the countryman had said to them. When they heard this, they were amazed and wondered who he could be. Then Gawainet rode over to the horse, took hold of him, and saw that the saddle was covered with blood, and thought that the peasant had been killed. Then he asked Agravain if they had met with any Saxons after they left Camelot, and they all said that they had not seen anyone, man or woman, “except the peasant, who was sitting on that horse.” “You can see,” said Gawainet, “that he is dead or very badly wounded. Let’s go look for him and not stop until we have found him. If he is alive, we will take him to Camelot, The Story of Merlin for it would be a great shame for him to die comfortless out in the open.” With that, they got down from their horses and began looking for him up and down, in fields and woods, but they would have looked for a long time before they found him, for he had already come into their army in the likeness of a foot soldier, carrying the stump of a lance. And when the young men saw that they could not find him, they went back to Camelot, where they found their companions still waiting for them at the head of the bridge, and they were very gladdened to see them coming safe and sound. Then they all went into the city. After the bridges were raised and the gates shut, they climbed high on the walls to see whether or not the Saxons were coming to storm the city, but the Saxons did not have the will, and they were not eager to tarry there. Then the young men took off their armor, went to their lodgings, and delighted in everything befitting a man. And they rejoiced in Sagremoret and merrily sang his praises when they knew who he was and he had told them why he had come from Constantinople to King Arthur to be given his arms, and they held him in high esteem. In the two days’ time they rested there, no news came to them from anywhere, except that the Saxons had gone on to Northumberland and the duke of Cambenic’s land, and they had been left in peace. So the story now stops talking about the young men who were in the city of Camelot, and it begins speaking again about King Clarion of Northumberland and Duke Escant of Cambenic, who were still fighting Oriel’s men very fiercely at the narrows of Margot Rock on the river Severn. 24. The Victory of King Clarion and Duke Escant; Bylas Attacks Urien’s Sons. Here the story says that King Clarion’s and Duke Escant’s armies suffered great harm when Oriel came into the fray. He tried to hurt them as badly as he could, for he was quite distraught over the treatment Gawainet had given him in the meadows beneath Camelot, and he would very gladly wreak his vengeance, if he could, on those he had found. He called his men together and swore that not one would get away. Then the fighting grew hard [187] and awesome. Spears were hurled and arrows shot, and many were wounded and maimed, but never could the Saxons, try as they might, drive the Christians from the crossing at the narrows; and when they saw that they could not break through, they withdrew and dug in by the river Severn, saying that they would post guards near the crossing and keep them from getting out to forage in the countryside. “By God,” said Oriel, “if we can keep them hemmed in, they won’t hold out against us.” Then the Saxons’ foragers spread throughout the countryside, set fire to everything, took a great deal of livestock and other plunder, for the land was very wealthy and the people thereabout had only just begun to lock up 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 187-191. 269 their livestock for safe keeping; many were taken unawares before they could put anything away, and the Saxons came down on them, took everything they had, killed or put to flight as many as they found, and set fire to the whole countryside, so that King Clarion and Duke Escant clearly saw the fire from where they were at the narrows. And Duke Escant said to King Clarion, “Sir, I don’t think we will win a great victory if we stay here, for the Saxons are laying waste all the land hereabouts. To give you faithful counsel, I would advise that we go out to them and fight them and hurt them as much as we can.” King Clarion answered, “And what if we lost this crossing? From here they would get through to the whole land and lay all of it waste!” “T will tell you what we’ll do,” said the duke. “We will leave some of our men at the crossing to protect it. You and I will go over to Breckham Forest, and we will hide there in the woods until we see that the men we mean to fall upon have gone by, then we will fight with them. And the lord of Palerne, who knows the narrows very well, will take the booty we’ll have won to a safe place and then come back to help us with the fighting, so we will do as much damage to them as we can.” “God's mercy!” said King Clarion. “Why do you say that we should go fight them? There are so many of them that we wouldn’t even have enough men to give them communion!” “Don’t you see, then,” said the duke, “that they are spread throughout the whole land? They are in disorder, and they lack supplies. Their greatest strength lies right here in front of us by the river, and they have come here only to guard the crossing. They all wander safely throughout the land and are not afraid to go anywhere.” “I did not say that for anything having to do with me,” said King Clarion, “but only for the sake of the good men who are with us, for I would not want to lead them madly anywhere they might be harmed.” When those worthy men heard King Clarion’s speech, they held him in great esteem, for they knew he had said that only for the sake of the common folk, for he would very much have liked to keep them safe. So they said to him, “Noble king, have no fears for that. But let’s go take vengeance for our shame and our suffering, for we can see what they are doing to us before our very eyes! Furthermore, we would by rights be in far worse straits if what has befallen us happens to you, for, but for your crown and your sovereignty, we are what you have at stake in this.” When King Clarion heard what his men said, he began to weep with feeling beneath his helmet, and his men saw this and said to him, [188] “Ah, sir! do not weep, but let’s go fight them! For it would be a great deal better for you to die honorably than to live bereft of what belongs to you.” “Let us go, then, in the name of God!” he said. “I am ready to go right now, but first we must choose the ones we want to leave here.” And they chose the lord of Norhaut, the lord of the Dolorous Tower, and Brun the Ruthless, and they had with them many fully armed men. These would protect the crossing, and the others left that night after midnight and rode toward Breckham Forest. And when they had come 270 there, they found a very beautiful heath. It was a beautiful, lovely-smelling morning, such that no one would have wished to leave because of the sweetness of the birds’ songs. They tarried there until after the hour of tierce. Then they saw cattle, swine, and sheep coming, and horses heavyladen with salt meat, wheat, and every kind of food, and the herd lasted for a whole league and more. After King Clarion and Duke Escant saw that the herd had gone by, they set out to storm the ones who were leading it away, and they and their men numbered at least five thousand; they all wore armor and were riding horses. And after the lord of Palerne saw that the livestock had gone by, he left where he had been waiting with seven thousand knights; they also fell upon the men leading the drove. King Clarion, Duke Escant, the lord of Palerne, and their companions? killed all of them, and not one got away. The lord of Palerne rounded up the wagons and livestock and took everything to Cambenic, which was two leagues away, and after he had put them in a safe place, he rode back with his companions. When the Saxons saw that the drove had been snatched away from them, they were upset and angry, and they rode out to attack the enemy, and they struck their shields very hard with their lances. So a fierce and wondrous fight began, and there was a frightful slaughter of men and horses. The fray lasted from the hour of tierce until the hour of nones. Then the Saxons wavered and turned tail in flight toward their main army. There the Christians killed more than seven thousand, and they pursued the fleeing men, but they very nearly lost everything, for they had not the least inkling that they were riding into the huge mounted guard that Oriel had left at the crossing of Margot Rock. The Saxons flew headlong into the cavalry. When Oriel saw them he asked them why they were running so hard, and they told him about the great harm the Christians had done them. When he heard that they were so near, he ordered the Saxons to ride after them, and no sooner had he uttered his command than they struck out very wildly after them. The Christians had withdrawn toward the woods, but they needed to ride hard and fast before they could get there. In a very short while the Saxons had caught up with them and attacked them with their lances, which they broke on them. The Christians withstood the onslaught and then went on toward the woods, where they would be protected. They had drawn together so tightly that the Saxons could not break through them, and when they saw that they had got near the forest, they turned their horses around and attacked the Saxons with their sharp spears, and they left many dead and mortally wounded. The fighting was ruthless and deadly, and there was a great slaughter on both sides. Our men would have lost more than they did if 2 According to the letter of Sommer’s text, the two sorties— the one led by King Clarion and Duke Escant, the other led by the lord of Palerne—are entirely separate actions; the lord of Palerne alone is credited with the attack in which the Saxons are killed and the drove liberated. Not only do the other two leaders figure in the plan for the attack, however, but King Clarion, Duke Escant, and their men are also included in the victorious contingent that later spends the night at Cambenic. The Story of Merlin they had not been backed up against the Forest of Breckham, but the Saxons could not boast of [189] winning anything there, for more than ten thousand of them died there. Our men were also in dreadful trouble, for they had been forced to fall back into the forest when King Oriel came, and he bore down on them so hard that they would all have been killed or cut to bits if nightfall and the woods had not separated the two armies. When King Oriel saw that the Christians had got away, and that they had done him so much damage, he was most angry and upset; nevertheless, he drew back a little way from the forest. And the Christians rode much of the night and did not want to take off their armor, and they came very late to Cambenic Castle and lay there for the night. The next day King Clarion left, and the lord of Cambenic promised to send him his share of the booty as soon as the Saxons had gone away. So they parted company, and no more harm came to them at that time. The next morning, as soon as it was light, the Saxons got on their horses and went looking throughout the countryside to see where the Christians had gone. The messengers came straight back to Oriel and told him that the Christians had gone to the castle of Cambenic, and when he heard this, he was very sorry. He had his horns blown and his timbrels and drums beaten, and set out for Cambenic. The Saxons had sent out before them three thousand plunderers to set fires throughout the countryside, to burn and lay waste the whole land. In the vanguard, there were many wagons in the train and a great many cattle, with ten thousand Saxons to drive them. So they rode until they came to Cambenic, and the plundering men-at-arms were setting fire everywhere. When Duke Escant saw the destruction of his land, he was filled with sorrow. He ordered his men to put on their armor; they did so straightway and got on their horses lined up in formation, and they were a good two thousand strong. They came upon the plundering men-at-arms who were setting fires, and they followed them into a dell, where they ruthlessly rode down on them. When they saw them coming, they turned in flight, but they had taken them unawares very close at hand, because their horses were strong and fresh; they put them to the slaughter and killed so many that of the three thousand there had been at first, not even forty got away with their lives. These fled into the vanguard and screamed, “Filthy sons of whores! What are you waiting for? Can’t you see we have been slaughtered? Shame on Oriel if he does not hang you like any other thieves, for you have brought shame to him! Have all these men maimed or killed!” “Be still,” said Nabin. “You are talking rashly. I would rather you were brought to this than that all of us had gone into such a place to be beaten so badly that we could not get away, try as we might. But all that aside, where are the ones who have done this to you?” “By God,” said the plunderers, “they've already gone.” And they were telling the truth, for as soon as they had routed them, they went back to Cambenic without lingering. And the Saxons went on by and left that place, and they never again did them harm. And they rode until they came to the city of Clarence, which Hargodabran had laid The Story of Merlin siege to, along with twenty other kings. And when Oriel came into the army, Hargodabran bade him welcome, and they all greeted him joyfully, for Oriel resupplied the army with foodstuffs he had brought in, and for this he was held in great esteem. ‘ Meanwhile, as soon as Duke Escant saw that the Saxons had gone by, he sent King Clarion, by the lord of Palerne, his share of the booty [190] they had won from the Saxons before Breckham Forest. But now the story falls silent about them and says no more about them, but begins speaking again about Yonet the Great and his brother Yonet the Bastard, the two sons of King Urien who had left Sorhaut. Now the story says that when the two brothers had left Sorhaut, they rode through woods and across open lands until they came to Arundel. And they heard it said that Soriondes, son of Maglahant,® was encamped in the meadows of Bredigan and was resting there with his army, for he was tired and weary from burning King Yder’s lands. And the young men heard the news that they would have to go into the midst of the Saxons’ host, but it was not an easy thing to do, so they withdrew into Arundel. The Saxons ran hard straight through the land of Bredigan, and came very near to Carduel. And Gawainet and his companions heard the news that the Saxons were encamped in the fields below Bredigan and were laying waste the land all about. Then Gawainet sent out messengers and summoned men and supplies from everywhere throughout the kingdom, and he gathered together thirty thousand men, for they all loved Gawainet’s companionship. And they rode until they came to Carduel, where they stayed two whole days. And the youths were most distressed that they had not come in time, for otherwise they would have fought the Saxons who had gone through. After two days they left Carduel and rode until they came to Bredigan, where they were welcomed joyfully. The Saxons had spread out throughout King Yder’s land and burned and plundered it, and they came back along the river and through the woods and meadows below the stronghold of Arundel, and they numbered, so the story says, more than forty thousand, all on horseback, and there were more than ten thousand men-at-arms plundering and setting fire everywhere they went, for they meant to do as much harm to the land as they could. When King Yder saw the harm they were doing to him, he was greatly upset, so he mounted with as many men as he had, and there were a good fourteen thousand, all on horseback, and he began to pursue the hordes until he reached them going across a causeway. King Yder fought with them very hard, for he was a good knight, skilled and bold, and that day he did many a wondrous feat, for he had many other good knights with him who helped him; and they fought all day with the end of the army, where there were a good twenty thousand men. And the others, in the main body, rode all day until they came to within a half-league of Arundel, and they were at least forty thousand strong, while a good ten thousand 3Not to be confused with King Mahaglant of Ireland, whose nephew Soriondes is (175, ll. 20-21). Maglahant is reintroduced below (197, Il. 15-16), where, however, he does not seem to address Soriondes as a father might his son. 271 made up the vanguard, for the Saxons had heard that a great many fighting men had come to the castle of Bredigan, and they were afraid of being taken unawares. When those within the castle found out that the Saxons had gone into the land of King Yder of Cornwall, they did not think that any would be left between the castle of Arundel and Bredigan. And when the two sons of King Urien heard it said that the Saxons had all gone through, they did not believe they had anything to worry about, so they fully armed themselves and left the castle of Arundel, at least four hundred [191] of them by count, all on good horses. They rode until they came to the bridge that was four leagues away from Bredigan. After they had crossed over, Bylas took them unawares and stormed them with fourteen thousand armed men, and this was Soriondes’s vanguard that was keeping watch at the crossing so that no one might come out of Bredigan to harm the rearguard when they went to plunder. When the young men saw them coming, they were very frightened. Nevertheless, they made a stand at the head of the bridge and fought hard to defend themselves. Meanwhile, King Yder also attacked them, and he succeeded in putting twenty thousand of them to rout. None would have got away, but Soriondes came back around with his huge army, and if he had not happened to fall back upon King Yder, King Urien’s sons and their companions would have held the day, and no Saxon would have got away from them. But now the story stops talking about all of them, so we will tell you about Merlin, who had gone to Camelot in the likeness of a foot soldier when Sagremoret was rescued. 25. Merlin as Messenger Boy; King Yder and the Exploits of Arthur’s Nephews. Here the story says that when Merlin saw that Gawainet and his companions had gone to Bredigan, he was very glad, for he was well aware that the two brothers Yvonet the Bastard? and Yonet the Great had left the castle of Arundel, and he knew that they were in grave danger of being killed or taken prisoner. Then he took on the likeness of a young man who was running,® and he bore sealed letters in a shield painted with the arms of King Urien. He kept running until he got to Bredigan, and he was weary from Corresponds to Sommer, 191-195. 2Sommer’s text does not have the epithet (191, 1. 17). 3Here Sommer’s text reads garchon a pie courant (191, 1. 19). Previously, Merlin had appeared in the army near Camelot as a garchon a piet (186, |. 18), properly understood as a common foot soldier, all the more so since he was carrying a broken weapon. The reference just above to Merlin en guise de garchon (191, 1. 13) seems to be meant to recall that earlier transformation. The same pejorative expression recurs here; yet the long description that follows is hardly that of an ordinary infantryman; however, the term garchon recurs later in the same context (192, 1. 13). The following note marks an apparent truncation in Sommer’s text where a second transformation may have occurred in an original. 2i2 the race. He had4 a garland of flowers on his head and held a long staff in his hand. He wore low buckled shoes and black silk® hose and was dressed in a cotton robe,® black with gold threads and gold bindings that were on the hood and sleeves, too, and at his waist was a white belt worked with iron and brass. He was tall and swarthy and had no beard, and between his shoulders a felt hat was hanging from his neck. He went straight to the great hall and climbed the steps that went up to it. And when he had gone up, he asked for Gawainet, and they showed Gawainet to him. He went straight to him, fell to his knees, and greeted him on behalf of his cousin, the son of King Urien. Gawainet raised him up, and the youth gave him a letter and told him that his cousin Yvonet had sent it. As soon as Gawainet heard him speak of his cousin, he sprang up and read the letter; it was not hard for him to do this, for he had learned to read when he was a child, so he found what the letter said: “I, Yonet, son of King Urien, send greetings to Sir Gawainet, my cousin, and to my other friends. Next, I want you to know that I am gone from Sorhaut without my father’s leave, but my brother Yvonet the Bastard and I did take leave of my mother, and we have made our own way. We have just left Arundel and come to the bridge over Lake Diana, where we have found ten thousand Saxons who are now fighting us above the bridge, and there are only three hundred of us. At the same time, King Yder is also fighting them, but he has only fourteen thousand men, while the Saxons on the road below Arundel] are at least forty thousand strong. As soon as King Yder [192] leaves the fight, those Saxons will fall upon us, and they will take us, if God and you do not find a way to help us. If we are slaughtered or taken prisoner, the shame will be yours, though we will be the ones who are hurt; all the days of your life you will be called to task for it, for everyone who hears about it will say, ‘Look, there goes Gawainet, who through his cravenness lost his cousin, although it was in his power to rescue him!’ For God’s sake, turn your mind to mercy, nobility, and courtesy!” When Gawainet had grasped what the letter said, he shouted in a loud voice, “My lords! Now to arms faster than ever before! Never will he be praised who is not worthy!” When the squires heard Gawainet, they ran to get their armor, happy and gladdened, for they wanted very dearly to be in a place where they could strike a mighty blow, for which they would be praised, in order to win higher esteem. As soon as they had their armor on and were on their horses, they rode out of the town; they were led by the same youth who had brought the letter, and they were a good twenty thousand strong. They split their men into six companies. Agravain led the first, and he had three thousand men; Guerrehet led the second, and he too had three thousand men; Gaheriet led the third, and he also had three thousand men well fitted out, and they rode after 4Sommer’s text lacks the verb and reads fu en cors escorcies .j. chapelet (191, |. 21): “he was tired from the race a crown.” The text seems to be truncated (see n. 3). 5The word in Sommer’s text is sinbrun (?) (191, 1. 23). 6The word in Sommer’s text, fustane (191, ]. 23), names only the cloth from which the garment is made: a cotton fabric that could have metal threads. The Story of Merlin the others at a slow gait, all drawn tightly together—and each leader carried a banner around which his men would rally when they fought the Saxons. Sagremor led the fourth, and he too had three thousand men;! Galescalain, Gawainet’s cousin,® led the fifth, and Gawainet strongly urged him to fight well and to go carefully, and there were also three thousand with him following after the others; and Gawainet himself led the sixth company, and he knew well how to put things in order. He carried a blue standard of fine silk, with a diagonal band bearing a silver lion, and he had five thousand men with him all wearing armor, and he rode after the others at a slow gait with his men tightly drawn together. But now the story falls silent about the Saxons who were riding toward the Diana bridge and begins speaking again about King Yder, who was fighting very hard. In this part the story says that King Yder fought the twenty thousand Saxons so hard that he put all of them to flight. There was a fearsome rout with dreadful bloodshed; men and horses fell to the ground dead or wounded. And when Soriondes saw fleeing Saxons, he asked them what was wrong with them, and they told him that King Yder had done them great harm in the rearguard, “for he has routed us all.” Then Soriondes turned back angry and upset, and he rode with his army until he caught up with his enemies on the road to the bridge. There they were still fighting the followers of Margalant, a most awesome and wicked Saxon who sorely hated the Christians, and he was feared so much that no one dared come a step closer to him or get onto the road, but they hurled well-honed spears that hailed down on him. Soriondes came up with his great army and put himself on the other side of the roadway; then they ran upon them as hard as their horses would go. There they waged a fearsome, deadly fight, and King Yder’s men had a very hard time of it; they lost a great deal in this onslaught, but the Saxons paid dearly for each one of them. You do not [193] have to ask whether King Yder was sorry and upset. He cursed the hour and the day that he ever grew angry with King Arthur, “for through the sin we have on us because of that,” he said, “all these mishaps have befallen us. But things have gone on for so long that it is too late for us to repent.” So King Yder withdrew, for he had lost too much. And Soriondes went back to fetch his booty, which lay in abundance on the roadway; then the Saxons went on freely and made their way until they came to the Diana bridge. He put sixteen thousand men in his vanguard and twenty thousand in the main body to take his booty, and he was in the rearguard with fifteen thousand men. And they rode on until those in the vanguard saw the young men at the bridge fighting against ten thousand Saxons who had been guarding the crossing. And as soon as they had seen them, 7Sommer’s text does not mention the fourth division, but skips from the third (192, Il. 17~19) to the fifth (II. 19-21). Later Sagremor leads a company into battle following Gaheriet (195, 1. 32). 8sommer’s text has son cousin (“his cousin”) (192, 1. 20), which appropriately follows Gaheriet, but not the inserted reference to Sagremor; however, the subsequent elaboration suggests Gawain might more properly entreat him to fight well. The Story of Merlin they did their utmost to ride as fast as they could, for they were very eager to take them. And when the youths saw them coming, they were sorely frightened. But then Wonet looked toward Bredigan and saw Agravain coming to bring him help, and he went to his companions and told them to take heart, for he had seen Christians riding their way. And his companions answered, “Sir, how can we take heart? Look here! Saxons are coming at us front and back, and there is no way for us to get away without being killed or taken prisoner!” “I'll tell you what we’ll do,” said Yvonet the Bastard. “We will all draw tightly together; we will look as if we wanted to take them on in a fight, but then we will spur our horses down along the river, and the Christians will still be coming. If we wait for them to come to us here, the Saxons will have killed us or taken us before help has got to us.” All the companions agreed to the trick that Wonet the Bastard had set forth, so they squeezed together; but before they could line up in formation, the Saxons had come so near that you could have shot an arrow from one side to the other. The Christians spurred their horses and set out across the bridge straight through the ten thousand Saxons, and they brought down more than two hundred as they came. But when the Saxons thought they could hem them in, they veered to the side down along the river where they saw Agravain coming. And King Soriondes’s vanguard flew after them because they were getting away; they were more than fifteen thousand strong, and they spurred across the bridge, then drew so tightly together that they came close to knocking one another to the ground or into the water. And the ten thousand who had been guarding the crossing rode after the youths until they caught up with them in a meadow between two rivers. Such harm would have been done there, and such woe come to the kingdom of Logres, that things could never have been put aright, had not Agravain come riding hard; he had seen the pursuit begin as soon as they had got off the bridge. And Agravain led his men against them as fast as their horses would go, and they ran headlong into the midst of the Saxons so hard that the whole river and the woods all about resounded with the blows. After they had broken their lances, they drew their swords from their scabbards, and the fierce and deadly slaughter began. Never have so few men gained the upper hand so fast. They drew the Saxons to themselves, and at length they drove them back farther than an arrow shot. The youths sorely needed this, for Yvonet the Great and his brother Yvonet [194] had been brought to the ground most dreadfully. They were fighting hard on foot, and more than a hundred of their companions had also been struck down and were very gravely wounded.® But the two brothers were soon back on their horses, and they struck out at the Saxons most fiercely. And the company of fifteen thousand Saxons came to help the ten thousand as soon as they had crossed the bridge, and they spread out down along the river and rushed into the fray. Our men could not have held out for long, and they would all have been killed, if Guerrehet had 9This sentence is not in Sommer’s text and is supplied from an extensive variant (194, n. 1). 273 not come to rescue them with three thousand men in armor. And they ran into the fight so hard that they sent all the ranks reeling, for not a single one in Guerrehet’s company failed to bring his man to the ground when they met. Then all the Saxons staggered back toward the bridge, and the Christians did not stop until they had driven them back into the king’s vanguard, which was by the river at the head of the bridge. And when Wonet the Great and Wonet the Bastard saw the Saxons falling back, each one said to the other, “Good Lord God! who can they be that have come to help us? I would very much like to know them.” — A young nobleman was there whose name was Aces of Beaumont. He came to them and said to them, “Dear lords, did you come into this land to look at tournaments and skillful blows traded by knights? If you want to know who they are, ride over to them and fight so well that they ask you who you are! For it is by their valiant feats of arms that people know who the worthies are. Here, you are whiling away all your time in foolishness. But ride over there and help them put these heathens to flight, for whoever they are, they are worthy men (and I am amazed at where so many Saxons can have come from!). Now the best warriors will show who they are, and I entreat you to fight against your enemies who have so badly hurt your friends and your forebears. If we die in this effort, we cannot die more honorably than in raising up the love of Jesus Christ and upholding His religion.” When the young men heard Aces speaking as he did, they were greatly ashamed and said that no one would ever take them for cowards. And Aces spurred to the front and said, “Now the best warrior will show who he is!” And they broke ranks all together and rushed in headlong among the Saxons. They began to strike them down, and they fought so boldly that word of their praiseworthy deeds reached Agravain and Guerrehet, who were fighting very fiercely. And when these heard the news, they knew very well that those were King Urien’s sons. And they drew to the side and did such wonders and caused such a slaughter that it was a wonder to behold, and they had to fight hard, for the fifteen thousand had come to help out the ten thousand. Agravain asked [195] Aces who those youths were, and he told him that they were King Urien’s sons, “who have come to this land to serve King Arthur so that he will make them knights, and here you see all their household.” “Which ones are they?” asked Agravain. “Sir,” said Aces, “there they are with those shields half white and half red. And who are you who want to know such things about them?” “Indeed,” said Agravain, “we are King Arthur’s nephews, the sons of King Lot of Orkney and Loonois. My name is Agravain, and that other young man over there is my brother; his name is Guerrehet. God be praised that we have found each other safe and sound!” Then they greeted each other with great gladness. But they had not been thus for long when they saw Gaheriet coming with three thousand companions; they then fell upon the Saxons, and the slaughter was so great that they brought down more than four thousand of them as they 274 came in. They killed and wounded so many that!® they held them at a standstill for a very long time, but at length the Saxons gained ground over them. So the story falls silent for a while about them and will talk about Soriondes. 26. Ascendancy of the Young Heroes; Growth of the Heroic Circle.’ Now the story says that they fought at the head of the bridge for so long that the wagon train with the booty and supplies got there, and those who drove it were a good twenty thousand strong or more. And the chief leaders were Margalant and Pignoras. And when they reached the bridge, they said that they would not cross until they knew what the outcome of the battle would be, “for on this side we needn’t worry that a great force of men will fall upon us, and if any come against us from the other side, we can make our stand at the head of the bridge and defend ourselves so well that they won’t have anything of ours.” So they pitched their tents, set up their pavilions, and camped there. And Soriondes rode until he came to the bridge, and he asked them why they were encamped there, and they said that they were safer there than on the other side of the river, “for we don’t know who is over there.” “Now take care,” said Soriondes, “to be fully at the ready, so that you can help our men if need be.” And they said that they would. And Gaheriet was fighting with nine thousand three hundred men against the Saxons, who numbered twenty thousand and more; both sides lost a great many, and the Saxons more than the Christians. But our men could not hold out for long, because the youths were very young and untried, so they had to fall back. And they were about to lose a great deal, when Sagremoret came spurring with three thousand armed men who were most eager to come into the battle. They rushed in so hard that they stopped the pursuit by their sheer strength. Then the fray grew more fearsome, and there was a great shattering of lances and a hard beating of swords against helmets and hauberks, and Sagremoret and his men fought so fiercely that many Saxons were struck down there. But for all the great deeds Sagremoret and his [196] men did there, it could not last, for the Saxons had so invaded the roadway that his and the others’ feats of arms availed them little. Then came Galescalain with three thousand fully armed men, and they rode upon the Saxons so hard that none stood before their lances. They shouted “Clarence!” very loudly—that was King Arthur’s battlecry— and they met the Saxons? so fiercely that they made them all stagger backwards, and the shouting and the uproar rose loud above them. With their blows they drove them back without stopping to the Diana bridge, and there was such a 10The adjective phrase and conjunction are not in Sommer’s text (195, 1. 12). Corresponds to Sommer, 195-202. 2Sommer’s text has i sesne les encontrerent (196, 1. 3): “the Saxons met them.” The Story of Merlin great slaughter of men and horses that of the twenty thousand Saxons they had numbered, our men killed more than seven thousand before they could reach the bridge, and if help had not been so nearby, not one of them would have got away alive. But Margalant and Pignoras came to rescue them with twenty thousand men in armor, and as soon as they had ridden across the bridge, they ran headlong into the fray, letting their reins loose, and struck down many as they came. There they fought wondrously, and the Christians were indeed in dire straits, and they lost a great deal, for the Saxons still numbered thirty thousand or more and the Christians only fifteen thousand, all told. So they were forced to fall back as far as a crossbow could shoot, and Galescalain, Guerrehet, Gaheriet, Agravain, Sagremor, Wonet the Great, his brother Yvonet the Bastard, Aces of Quimper-Corentin,? and their companions underwent great trials, and they performed great feats of prowess against the whole horde, but in the end they could not long hold out. Then, behold Gawainet who came to help them with five thousand men in armor! Great was the fighting there when they rode hard into the fray, for as soon as Gawainet got there, he began to fight so well that he made all the Saxons fall back and yield ground. He struck down and slaughtered men and horses with blows from his lance and from his sword, then he brought out a very well-made axe and put his sword back into its scabbard, which hung from his saddle, grasped the axe with both hands, and began striking and wounding all who came within his reach, and no iron or wood or armor of any kind could save them. By himself he kept the battle going, for the Saxons were fleeing from him on every side, and none dared stand up to him, and he bore down upon them so hard that, by the time it was just after the hour of nones, his strength had doubled three times. It was not wise to stand up against them one by one, for they were too bloodthirsty, so he kept bearing so hard against them that in the end he threw them back across the Diana bridge, where they crowded so thickly against one another that more than a thousand fell into the water and could not get out, and so they drowned and went floating downstream. When Soriondes saw the frightful harm they were doing him, he was so distraught that he almost went mad. He wanted very much to get across the bridge, if he could, to fight, but the crowds were so thick on the bridge and down the river than no one could get through. Even if the bridge had been open, it would not have been easy to go across, for he was very much afraid of Gawainet, Galescalain, [197] Sagremoret, Agravain, Guerrehet, Gaheriet, Yvonet the Great, Yvonet the Bastard, and their companions, who were standing against them on the other side and keeping them away, for none was so bold that he dared go across. They were slaughtering so many Saxons that great heaps of them built up, so that one could not get to the other. The fighting lasted all that day until nightfall, when both sides withdrew. And Gawainet and his men went off to Bredigan, happy about the young men they had rescued 3Called Aces of Beaumont, 194, 1. 14. The Story of Merlin when they were in trouble. They celebrated all that evening and enjoyed everything befitting a man. Afterwards they went to bed and rested, for they were tired, and they slept until daybreak. And at nightfall, as soon as they had left the bridge where the fighting had been, Soriondes sent for the highest-ranking men in all his army to seek their advice as to what he could do. When he saw that the barons had gathered together, he asked them how he could go on, for he had found the Christians to be very bloodthirsty and wicked, and he was very much afraid of them, for they had done him dreadful harm. And then Maglahant rose to his feet, a great, wicked giant who had a very keen mind indeed, and he spoke loudly enough for everyone to hear him. “King Soriondes,” he said, “if you accepted my advice, the wagon train would set out right now, and it wouldn’t stop until it had met our main army. Our knights should ride out first, and Pignoras should lead the vanguard with ten thousand men, and we should be in the rear with as many men as we can put together. And even if the Christians did pursue us, they could not prevent the wagons from getting through. This is the best advice I know how to give.” Then all who were there shouted that his advice was good. And Soriondes ordered all their equipment to be loaded into the wagons at once, and he had the vanguard cross the bridge with ten thousand Saxons or more. And when the train had crossed over, he himself followed it with thirty thousand Saxons riding at a slow gait in the rearguard. They rode day and night, and nothing bothered them, until they came to the valley ef Vambieres, where the siege was very harsh. They were welcomed with great gladness; they had been eagerly awaited for their food, for the besiegers were in dire want. They had brought enough to supply the whole army again. But the story stops talking about them here and starts speaking again about the youths who were in the city of Bredigan celebrating and resting. Now the story says that the youths were happy and gladdened when King Urien’s sons came, and they celebrated and feasted until they went to take their rest. And when it was light the next morning, Gawainet sent out a spy to find out how the Saxons were behaving whom they had left at the Diana bridge. When he got there, he found that they had left the night before, so he went back and told Gawainet what he had seen, and Gawainet was most unhappy that they had got away. But [198] since he could not do otherwise, he let it go, and they all rested there and waited for news to come to them from somewhere. One day, before time to eat, the youths happened to be in pavilions by the river. And Gawainet came to Yonet the Great and said to him, “Dear cousin, how did you find out that we were gathered here? Who advised you to send me a letter the other nighte” “What letter?” asked Yonet. “Indeed, I have never sent you a letter in my life, nor did I have any news at all about you before God Our Lord sent you to me in the state you saw me in, for we would all have been killed or taken and held prisoner if you had not come as soon as you did.” 27 “What, dear cousin?” said Gawainet. “Are you indeed telling me that you never sent me a letter?” “Sir,” he answered, “I am telling you the truth, and not a word of it is a lie.” When Gawainet understood that Wonet had never sent him a letter or any other message, he was struck with amazement, and all those who heard it wondered where the letter could have come from. Then they sent people out to find the boy who had brought the letter and see if he was still in the city, but they could not find him or anyone who knew anything about him, and they wondered what might have become of him. So they stayed in the city for a full week, until news came to them, and it was said that the young men who were in the garrison at Arundel were having a very hard time of it, for the Saxons were fiercely storming the stronghold every day, and they knew that sooner or later they would be taken. And when Gawainet had heard the need that those in the stronghold of Arundel were in, he was most distraught. Then he called his companions and told them that they would do well to go into the borderland of Scotland to the castle of Arundel to rescue the young men, who needed help, “and all the sooner we will hear news about my father King Lot and how he is faring.” And they said that they would do as he wished. Then the young men busied themselves getting ready, and they set out on the road. There were ten thousand of them, without all the best-equipped men in the land, for they did not want to strip the countryside of men. So they rode through the most out-of-the-way places until they came within a half-league of Arundel. There they heard a great uproar, for Haram, the son of Bramangue, had invaded the land of Loonois and laid waste everything as he came in. He was attacking the stronghold of Arundel very fiercely, and he had burned down the whole town outside. And then a troop of highborn young men happened to come nearby from the land of Estrangorre, and there could have been a good seven thousand of them; but they had taken no heed of King Haram, who had spent all day storming the stronghold of Arundel. But those within had defended themselves so well that they lost nothing but the town the Saxons had set fire to. Then the Saxons pulled back in disorder, and as they withdrew, they met the seven thousand squires, whom Kay of Estral and Kehedin the Fair? were leading together. And as soon as the Saxons saw them coming, they let out their yell and overran them from this way and that, for they recognized at once that they were Christians; and the Christians defended themselves so well that never have so few men done better. And when those within the castle of Arundel saw the fight begin in the meadows by the river, they recognized at once that they were Christians, and they watched them [199] for a long time. But there were so few of them that they barely stood out among the Saxons, though they fought very hard. They could not last for long, however, for they had too many men against them. And those who had been in the stronghold rode out, and there were still four hundred who 4Called Kehedin the Small, 178, 1. 27. 276 were very worthy and bold, for they had taken pity on the youths because they were Christians. And they ran headlong into the fray and rode so hard that they broke through the Saxons as far as the place where they were squeezed together so thickly that they could not go beyond. And when the Christians came together, they recognized one another or found out who the other was. Then the fighting grew stronger and became very bitter; many a blow was given and taken, which made the Saxons distraught and upset, and this showed plainly when they began to blow their horns and trumpets and beat their drums, which meant they needed help. So the Saxons began to come together from all sides, for they had spread out up and down the river Arun,> and those from Saxon Rock® were going toward the city of Clarence with a great wagon train with supplies that had been sent to them from Saxony, and the ones who had brought them over were driving the train, and there were a great many of them, all fully armed. And the story says that they were more than forty thousand strong, not counting those who had spread out through the countryside to plunder; and these had so laid waste the land in four days’ time that you would not have found a cottage or a house where a man could shelter himself or his horse, nor could you have found enough to eat to feed anyone one meal. But now we will leave them and tell you about the young men in the meadow below Arundel who were in great distress and fearsome danger, for there were only seven score of them along with the four hundred who had come out of the castle of Arundel. They were all worthies, for out of the stronghold had ndden Yonet of the White Hands, Yvonet of Lionel, Yvonet the Shining, and Gaswain of Estrangort, and they had stayed there to await King Arthur, for they were not willing to be dubbed knights by any but the hand of King Arthur. They were all men of high birth and very powerful, for they were the sons of kings, earls, and dukes, and they were close kinsmen of King Lot of Orkney and King Brandegorre, and they had all left their homelands as stealthily as they knew how. They had come in groups of twenty, and they had all stopped there as hirelings to win booty, for they had brought very little wealth from their homelands, and they had many times been quite successful in taking their winnings from the Saxons. When the youths came into the battle, the uproar and the shouts grew stronger, for they were four hundred worthy, very bold young men who had ridden out of the stronghold, and when they came up to the seven score, Yonet of the White Hands, who was the most eloquent, asked who they were. And Kay of Estral told them that they were squires who were going to ask King Arthur for their arms, and they were close kinsmen of the two kings of Estrangort. When the youths heard that they were squires, 5Sommer’s text has niuiere darsone (199, I. 12). 6Sommer’s text has ail du chastel misme qui estotent issu hors (199, Il. 12-13): “those from the castle itself who had come out”; however, it cannot be a question either of the Christians from the stronghold who have just left to come to the aid of their friends, to be sure, nor of the Saxons who have left the siege and are already engaged in battle. The convoy is later mentioned as originating at the Rock, 200, I. 2. The Story of Merlin they told them that if they wanted to come with them, they would always be faithful to them, and they would all wait for King Arthur until he came: “then we will all go together to ask for our arms, for we have also come to be given our arms by him.” And they answered that they were very glad about that. [200] While they were talking together, the wagon train from the Rock drew near; there were twenty thousand men out in front who were leading the train and twenty thousand in the rear. And as they came closer to Arundel, they saw the battle between the youths and the Saxons. When they found out that it was King Haram’s vanguard, they rushed in at breakneck speed, surrounded the young men, and gave them a very tough fight. The young men struggled hard to turn back toward the stronghold, but the Saxons swarmed so thick that they could not break through. It would not have taken long for them all to be killed or taken prisoner, and for the castle to have been taken along with them, when Gawainet and his companions got there with ten thousand men in armor, and as soon as they got to the fray, they ran in headlong. There the fighting was fierce, wondrous, and hard, and many a hauberk was cut through or broken apart, so that the fields were covered with the dead and wounded. There the Saxons suffered very great losses, about which they were sorely distraught, for they killed so many that they hurled them back toward the wagon train they had been leading. And when Gawainet saw the youths, he asked them who they were. Yvonet of the White Hands told him that they were King Arthur’s men, “and we had come out of the stronghold to rescue those young men,” and he showed them the ones the Saxons had fallen upon. “And who are you, dear friend, who ask about them and were so helpful to us in our need?” Wonet gave him his name and said that he had come there with his companions to help him out. And when Gawain heard that, he was happier than anyone could be, and praised God and thanked Him for the help that had come to them. Then they all spurred their horses together and called out King Arthur’s battlecry; they overran the Saxons and wounded and slaughtered so many that the fields were strewn with them, for they tried to harm them as much as they could. There Gawainet did wondrous fighting, as did his three brothers, and Galescalain, Sagremor, and Yonet the Great and his brother, and King Urien’s two sons. They worked wonders, and over here, Dodinel the Wildman, Yonet of the White Hands, Wonet of Lionel, Gaswain of Estrangort, Kay of Estral, and Kehedin the Small fought very well too. These fourteen’ were out in front of everyone, and they wreaked such havoc that no one dared stand up to them, and all the other companions fought so well that they put them all to rout, and they threw them back onto the twenty thousand who were driving the supplies in the wagon train. Then an old man came riding a horse, unarmed, and he called Gawainet, who wanted to storm the Saxons again, and said to him, “Gawainet, Gawainet, if you will take my advice, you ought to turn about. Take your companions 7Sommer’s text has .xvif. (200, 1. 28). The Story of Merlin back to Arundel. Look at the Saxons riding here. You will not hold out for long, there are too many of them.” When Gawainet heard the worthy man’s words, he looked at him. He looked so old and so feeble that Gawainet was amazed that he could keep himself on the horse. He saw that his beard was so long that it came down to the knot of his girdle, and it was all white. He had a garland of flowers on his head and wore a black robe. He grasped the saddlebow with his hand and said to Gawainet, “Dear friend, you would be wise to believe me, for your companions do not all have your strength and skill. You should love their welfare [201] and their lives as much as your own. You would commit a deadly sin if they were brought to ruin by your foolishness, for they can yet come into their full strength and do great good, and they will be of very great help to your uncle King Arthur in his need, when he has come back from Carmelide.” When the worthy old man had had his say, he took to the road for Loonois in Orkney as fast as his horse could carry him. And Gawainet stopped and called his companions around him and held them back, for he readily believed the advice the worthy had given him. So they left the pursuit and rode back toward Arundel at a slow gait. When they came to the stronghold, they went inside and climbed up to the top of the walls. They watched the Saxons gather in formation and ride toward Arundel, but they were going after King Haram, who had laid waste all of King Lot’s land. They were a great horde, and nothing could hold them back. King Lot fought against them many times, and he lost many of his men. He was most distraught over this, and in the end he had to take his wife to the castle of Glocedon because it was strong. When the king saw that the Saxons had laid waste his land and utterly ruined it, and had killed and wounded so many of his liegemen that he could no longer stand up to them, he was sorely distressed and worried. And he cursed the hour and the day he had run afoul of King Arthur, “for because of him,” he said, “I have lost all my people and my children, and my city is so weakened that those within are doomed to be taken!” For the walls had been broken down in many places, and King Haram was encamped all around, and King Lot did not have enough men with him to hold out for very long. King Haram meant to rest awhile before he attacked. He could have starved them out quite soon, but he did not wish to; instead, he waited for his men, who were burning and laying waste the land. When King Lot saw himself in such a state, he sought advice from such counselors as he had. And this is what was decided: late that night, he would ride out, along with his wife and little son Mordred, who was not yet two years old, and take them to Glocedon, and bring along five hundred knights all in armor, while the others, still six thousand worthy, bold men, stayed behind; and they promised him faithfully that they would defend the city, for it would not be lost as long as they were alive. That night, the king and his knights mounted their horses at midnight, along with his little son Mordred, whom King Arthur had begotten, just as the story has recounted it (a squire took him in a cradle which he carried in front of him); and the lady mounted a palfrey, very strong and easy- 77 going. And they all rode out through a little gate hidden by the garden, took to the trail, and rode all night and the next day until after the hour of nones. Nothing had bothered them until then, but right at that time King Lot became very frightened because he met King Taurus with three thousand men. He was coming back from Arundel and was bringing plunder to King Haram. As soon as he and his men had seen King Lot, they ran over to fight him, but the match was not even. There the fighting was hard and fierce, and King Lot and the five hundred knights who were with him fought very well. But skillful fighting did them little good, for they were put to flight and routed from their encampment, and King Lot’s wife [202] was taken and held prisoner. And one of the knights flew toward Arundel as fast as his horse could carry him. But now the story stops speaking about King Lot and goes back to Gawainet, who was happy and joyful in the stronghold of Arundel. 27. Help from a Mysterious Knight. Here the story says that the youths were very happy that night in Arundel when they had got to know one another. And as they were celebrating so heartily, a knight in wellmade armor came riding a great dappled warhorse that was soaked in sweat. His shield was dented and full of holes, and his hauberk was broken through and the links had come undone in many places. He came galloping up before the castle, brandishing his lance, and when he got to the gate, he stopped and saw the youths high up on the walls having such a very good time together. When he caught sight of them, he began to shout: was there any squire there so bold as to follow him wherever he went and to swear that he would give heed to no man but him? And when Gawainet heard him, he asked him where he would take him. “And you,” asked the knight, “who are you who have spoken to me?” “I am,” he answered, “Gawainet, son of King Lot.” “Then I'll tell you,” he said, “for the adventure has to do with you more than any of the others. In this forest there happens to be such an adventure! It is one of the most honored adventures in the whole world! And you will be better thought of if you can achieve it. But you don’t have the heart; you aren’t bold enough to dare go through with it. And you can know for a fact that if you don’t go there, I will.” When Gawainet heard him call him a coward, he was very upset, and he said that even if he should die, he would go with him. And the knight, who knew Gawainet’s heart and mind so well, turned to go, but Gawainet called him back and said to him, “Sir knight, wait for me! Look here, I’m all ready to go with you. But you ought to swear to me that you don’t mean to lead me into any danger and that you'll do all you can to help me against all who might wish to hurt me.” 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 202-206. 278 When the knight heard this, he stopped and a sneer began to spread on his lips, and he said that nothing could keep him from swearing such an oath. And Gawainet asked for his armor and put it on forthwith, and the knight waited for him, but tried to hurry him. And his companions came to Gawainet and asked him, “What is this? Where do you mean to go? Don’t go with that knight unless we go too, for you don’t know whether it’s for good or ill.” And Gawainet answered that he was willing for them to go along, if it suited the knight. “We will ask him,” said Galescalain. Then Sagremor came straight to the knight and said to him, “Sir knight, there are men in there who would very gladly go with you, if you are willing, as long as you don’t think you'll lose anything by their company. They entreat you to let them be your companions.” And he said that he would be glad for all to go who wanted to, “for the adventure is such that no one who undertakes it will fail.” When Sagremor heard this, he was very happy. So all who were there made much ado about putting on their armor. There were at least eight thousand, for they did not want to take more; but they were all the most noteworthy, and they had the best horses. And when they rode out of the castle, [203] Gawainet took the knight’s oath that he had not come seeking him to do him any harm and that they had no one else to fear, and he swore it. Then they left and rode all one day and the next night until daybreak. All at once they heard at the edge of a heath very loud shouting and a great uproar, and it seemed to them that a great many people were there. Then they saw a squire riding away at breakneck speed on a big, strong horse, and he was carrying in front of him a child in a cradle. Gawainet asked him why he was fleeing and where he had come from. He looked at them and saw that they were Christians, so he said that he served King Lot, whom the Saxons had routed at the edge of that heath by the woods as he was going to Glocedon. He was taking his wife with him, but they snatched her away from him and drove him from the field, “and I fled just as you see, and I won’t stop until I have brought this child safely out of the Saxons’ reach, for he is the youngest of the five sons King Lot had with his wife. For God’s sake, my lords, don’t go on, for you will find there such a great horde that you can’t hold out!” “T'll tell you what to do,” said Gawainet. “Go hide in those woods until you see how we have fared in this battle. Afterwards, come away with us, and we will take you to a place where you and the little boy need not be afraid.” And the man agreed to do so, since Gawainet had asked him to. With that, the squire went his way. And the knight begged Gawainet to hurry and follow him without tarrying. He went first, and Gawainet and his companions rode until they had gone through the forest. They saw that the pursuit of King Lot had already begun; he was flying toward Glocedon with as many people as were left after the battle. Elsewhere, Gawainet saw in the meadows a most comely lady; she would have been of very great beauty were it not for the great sadness that had overcome her. Her hair was undone and all unruly; indeed, two Saxons on horseback The Story of Merlin were holding her by the hair and dragging her behind them, and the long dress she had on kept making her stumble, so that she could not stand upright. And she wept and wailed and cried aloud, “Holy Mary, Our Lady, Mother of God, help me!” Every time she called on Our Lady, Taurus slapped her full in the face with his hand gloved in iron. At length, he knocked her senseless to the ground, and when he saw her lying there, he picked her up and put her in front of him on his horse. But she fell to the ground again, and she howled and wailed like a woman under torture. She said that she would rather they had killed her; never, for as long as she lived, would she swear faith to Taurus, however strong he might be. When he saw that he could not hold sway over her, he took her by her locks and led her alongside his horse, beating her and dragging her along until the blood flowed down all over her. And he had beaten her and jerked her about so much that she could not help but howl, and she was so badly hurt that she could not keep herself on her feet. When the knight saw the lady being so maltreated, he said to Gawainet, “Do you know this lady? If you ever loved her at any time, set your mind to avenging her.” And as soon as Gawainet had seen her, he recognized her at once, and he was so [204] filled with anguish that he nearly lost his mind. He did not think he could catch up with her in time, but he spurred his horse and took a stout and sturdy spear with a sharp tip. It was after midday, and the sun was high; the iron on the spear sparkled in the sunlight and shone very brightly indeed. And Gawainet shouted, “You son of a Saxon whore, you thieving heathen, let go of that lady! You will rue the beatings you have given her, and you can be sure that you’ll never have paid so dearly for any foolishness you have done before!” When Taurus saw him coming at him so fast, yelling at him so harshly and threatening him, he dropped the lady in the middle of the field, fitted himself out with armor, and took a stout and sturdy lance with a sharp, well-honed up. He let his horse run toward Gawainet and rode upon him so hard that he was screaming like an eagle. When they came together, the shock was so great that their weapons flew into bits, but Gawainet’s aim had been so good that he put his iron tip into Taurus’s chest and right out the back, and he brought him to the ground so hard that he broke his neck clear through. Agravain, Guerrehet, and Gaheriet got off their horses: one cut off Taurus’s head,” the second ran his body through with his sword, and the third sliced off both his arms, for what Gawainet had done to him was not yet enough for them, so they cut him into small bits. Then Gawainet and his companions ran headlong into the Saxons and brought about such a slaughter that they killed more than ten thousand of them before they left them alone. Gawainet killed so many that he was befouled with blood. When the Saxons saw the great havoc that had been wreaked against them, those who could get away took to their heels and fled through woods and across open land. And Gawainet rode back to where he had seen his mother 2Sommer’s text has the plural (204, 1. 14), but the subsequent construction seems to demand this introduction. The Story of Merlin lying. He got down from his horse, took her in his arms, and began to weep most tenderly; then he wailed and wrung his hands, and he was so deeply sorrowful that his companions gathered about him, and they felt so sorry for him that there was not one of them who did not weep hot tears for him. And when Gawainet’s brothers got there, the wailing began all over again, more deeply felt than anyone could say or describe. At length the lady heard the youths weeping and wailing all about her, and she opened her eyes and saw Gawainet, who was holding her in his arms, and she recognized him at once. She raised her hands to Heaven and thanked Our Lord for the help He had sent her. Then she began to speak as best she could and said, “Dear son Gawainet, do not weep, for I have no wounds I’! die of, though I am very badly hurt.” Then she asked him where his brothers were, and they came before her, wailing so sorrowfully that it was a great pity to see, and they said to her, “Lady, here we are.” And when she saw them, she thanked Our Lord. But after a while she said, “Alas, I have lost my son Mordred and my husband, your father, who tried so hard to rescue me today. After he had lost all his men, I saw him fighting five hundred Saxons, and he held out longer than it would take someone to walk half a league, but I am sorely afraid that he is wounded and will die, for I saw knives and javelins being thrown at him as thick as rain. He would not leave my side until I myself entreated him, for the sake of the thing he loved most in the world, to get away, and he was yet as sorrowful as any man could be.” “Lady,” said Gawainet, “I can tell you what has happened to my brother Mordred. You can be sure that he has not been hurt in any way, [205] for the squire who was carrying him has taken care of him like the keen and worthy man he is;> he is waiting for us in the forest over there. But we know nothing whatsoever about the king our father.” When the lady heard what he had said, she heaved a sigh from her heart, then she fainted in Gawainet’s arms. He kissed her over and over again and wept bitterly. And when she came to her senses, she heaved a sigh, then the coloring came back into her face. Gawainet asked for water so that he could wash her face, which was filthy with blood, and they brought it to him in great plenty, so he washed her face as gently as he could. Afterwards, they made a litter tied to two palfreys and put on it a great deal of fresh grass, then they laid her there as gently as they could. After that, they gathered up their booty and took to the road for Arundel drawn up in tight formation. They had ridden but a little way when the squire came to meet them with the little boy. When Gawainet saw him, he was most glad indeed. They rode until they came to Armndel, where they rested for a whole week, until the lady had been restored to health. Then they left there and headed for Logres, King Arthur’s chief city. They* had left two hundred men-at-arms 3Sommer’s text has the redundant comme sages & sages (205, |. 1): “like a wise and wise {man].” Sommer provides the Harley variant in n. I, as translated: comme saige et preux. 4sommer’s text has the conjunction mes que (205, |. 15): “except that,” “although,” etc. I) at Arundel to safeguard the town and had taken the lady and her little son Mordred along with them. And the four brothers swore that King Lot would never have his wife back before he had made peace with King Arthur. What the young men said made the lady very happy. And when they got to Logres, they were very warmly welcomed by one and all. Then Gawainet sent people everywhere to see if anyone knew the knight who had taken them to rescue their mother, but they found no one who could say anything about him. The news spread near and far, and Doon of Carduel, who was a most worthy and clever man, heard all about it, and he thought deeply about who that knight might be. At once he went straight to Gawainet and said to him, “Dear friend, did you ever find out who the man was who first brought you news about Sagremoret?” And he said he had not. “And did you ever know,” he said, “who brought to you in Bredigan the letter from your cousin Yvonet?” “I never found out who he was,” said Gawainet. “Did you ever learn who the man was who told you about your mother?” “No,” said Gawainet. Then Doon began to think about who it could have been, and he started to smile. And when Gawainet saw him, he wondered why he had asked him, and he begged him, in the name of his lord the king, to tell him why he had smiled and why he had asked him those things. And Doon said to him, “Gawainet, Gawainet, you have asked me repeatedly, I must tell you. But be careful to tell no one else what I am about to say to you.” And Gawainet said that he would sooner have his tongue cut out. “Now you can know,” said Doon, “that the man who brought you the news is called Merlin, and he is the best seer? there ever was or ever will be.” [206] “What, Sir Doon?” said Gawainet. “Are you talking about that Merlin who was such a good friend of King Uther Pendragon? who was conceived in a woman by a devil?” “He is the very one without a doubt,” said Doon. “By God’s mercy,” said Gawainet, “how can it be that I have seen him look so many ways? For I have seen him in three likenesses!” “You can be sure,” answered Doon, “that however you may have seen him, it is he. For he knows so much about the arts that he can change into whatever likenesses he wants.” Then Gawainet crossed himself in great wonder, and he said that he would very much like to be his friend, if he could. “For now I am sure,” he said, “that he indeed loves us, since he is willingly drawn into our doings.” “You can be sure,” said Doon, “that if he wishes it, you will be friends, for we can say or do nothing that he doesn’t know about.” So they stayed in Logres, happy that Our Lord had brought them together, and they kept such a close watch over the countryside round about that the Saxons lost more than they won. 5The word is not in Sommer’s text (205, 1. 39). 280 But now the story falls silent about them, and it will say no more about them at this time; rather, it begins to speak again about the knight who brought Gawainet to rescue his mother. 28. Merlin Warns Leonce of Palerne, Then Meets Viviane and Teaches Her His Magic. In this part the story says that after Gawainet and his companions had taken on Taurus in battle, and Merlin saw that Gawainet had rescued his mother, Merlin left so fast that they did not know what had happened to him. He went into Northumberland, to Blaise his master, and he told him all the adventures that had happened in the kingdom of Logres, and Blaise wrote it all down; and thanks to his book, we still know it. And when he had stayed there as long as he wanted, he said that he wished to go off to the kingdom of Benoic, for the two kings might have trouble there, “King Ban and King Bors, who are in Carmelide, and it would be a deadly sin, for they are both very worthy men. For King Claudas of the Land Laid Waste* has sworn faith to the king of Gaul and has given his land over to him. And King Claudas has provided for himself in other ways as well, for he has gone to Rome, and both he and the king of Gaul have sworn faith to the Emperor and become his vassals. The emperor Julius Caesar has sworn to send them help, for he wishes to seize the two kingdoms of Gaunes and Benoic. So they have got together and sent for men far and wide, and the Romans have already moved out in a great army. The leader is Pontius Anthony, a senator? of Rome who is very wealthy and powerful. For love of them, Frollo, emperor of Germany, is coming back there. He is a man of very high standing, powerful in lands, holdings, and friends, and he is Pontius Anthony’s first cousin. He is leading twenty thousand men under his banner. And the people of the kingdom of Benoic know nothing about this. They would be utterly destroyed before they knew it, and it would be a very bad thing if they did not find out, for great harm would come from it.” When Blaise heard him, he began to weep, and he told him for God’s sake to keep Christendom from shame and destruction. And Merlin said that as long as he lived he would put his whole mind to it as best he could. “But this is the country,” said Merlin, “that I should hate the most, for the wolf? has already come into the land who is to bind the hon with rings that are not of iron or wood or silver or gold or lead, [207] and the lion will be bound so tightly that he cannot move.” “For the love of God,” said Blaise, “what are you saying? Is not a lion stronger than a wolf and more to be feared?” “You speak the truth,” answered Merlin. 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 207-212. 2Sommer’s text omits terre (206, Il. 24-25) “land.” 3 Conseilliers de romme (206, Il. 30-31, cf. 208, 1. 4). 4The word is omitted in Sommer’s text, which implies “the one” (206, |. 40). The context suggests that a female wolf is intended (cf. 207, |. 3). The Story of Merlin “Now tell me, then,” said Blaise, “how can a wolf overpower a lion?” “You will learn no more right now,” answered Merlin, “but I'll tell you this much: this prophecy befalls me, and I know very well that I cannot keep myself from it.” Blaise crossed himself because of the wonder he felt, and he started to say to Merlin,® “Now tell me this much: if you go to Gaul, what will become of this land, which the Saxons are so bent on laying waste?” “Don’t worry about that,” answered Merlin. “King Arthur will not yet have come to the head of his nobles before the Saxons are soundly beaten, and you can be sure that very soon they will be driven out. I would not go away were it not for the love of the wondrous leopard that will come out of the kingdom of Benoic so great, so strong, and so fearsome that he will overcome all the beasts in his land—and out of Great Britain will come a great lion to whom all the other beasts will bow down and at whose glance the heavens will open. But it would be a sin for me to avoid what Our Lord has given me such wisdom and such insight for—to help in fulfilling the adventures of the Holy Grail, which must be accomplished and brought to an end in the time of King Arthur. But don’t bother asking me any more, for you will yet know how that can come to pass; you will see it yourself with your own eyes before you die, and that’s the truth.” After Merlin had spoken, thus hiding his meaning, and Blaise had heard what he had to say, he thought long and hard about his words; anyway, he wrote them down just as Merlin had spoken them. Then Merlin left and went to the kingdom of Benoic. He came straight to Leonce of Payerne, drew him aside, and told him enough about himself that he knew who he was, for he had seen him before. Leonce was very glad, for he was a very worthy man, a cousin of King Ban and King Bors. And Merlin spoke to him in the likeness in which Leonce had seen him the other times with the three kings, but it was so stealthily that no one knew a word that was being said, and Leonce believed everything he told him. After they had recognized each other, Leonce said to Merlin,® “I am greatly bothered by something I want to ask you about, but don’t get upset.” “I know what you are thinking,” Merlin answered, “and I don’t mind at all. But say to me whatever you wish.” “Tell me yourself,” said Leonce, “since you know it already.” And Merlin very gladly said to him, “All for your sake whom I love so much. You want to ask me why I left the three kings and why I have come here.” “Yes indeed,” said Leonce, “you are speaking the truth! And I would truly like to know, if you will.” “Of course,” said Merlin. “I'll be glad to tell you everything right now, for you can be sure that I have no reason to tarry here. Leonce, it is the truth, and prophecy says so, that the serpent will drive out of the old Wild Forest the leopard who once was so strong, so fierce, and so awesome that all the beasts round about bowed down to 5 According to Sommer’s text, merkins is the subject (207, 1. 7). ®According to Sommer’s text, it is Merlin who speaks to Leonce: si i dist merlins (207, ll. 29-30). The Story of Merlin him and lowered their heads to the ground. You have a most evil neighbor, named Claudas of the Land Laid Waste, who has sworn faith to the king of Gaul and given his lands over to him, in return for the king’s oath [208] to keep up his lands and uphold him in warfare. They have sworn an alliance together, and now they both hold their kingdoms from the Emperor of Rome. And Claudas himself has gone to Rome and arranged for Pontius Anthony, one of the senators of Rome, to lay waste this countryside. He is coming to this land with Frollo, his first cousin, a leader from Germany, who is very wealthy and powerful and outstanding in battle; and they mean to lay waste this countryside; but it will not be as they think. For I have come here to this land to tell you to call together, from far and wide, friends, kinsmen, and foot soldiers; send for as many as you can. Stock your castles and towns and bring together all the game you have and all the grain and put them where no one can get at them. Get ready so that when they overrun the land—and they will run over you very harshly— they will find nothing to take; and if they fall upon castles or towns, defend yourself so stoutly that you cannot be blamed. But as you love yourself and the honor of the two kings, hold yourself back from going out to do battle with them, or the loss will be great. You should know that you will have all the help you need on the Wednesday before St. John’s Day, when there will be a battle before the castle of Trebe, between the Loire and the Arsonne, before daylight, two leagues from where the Romans, the Gauls, and the Germans will be encamped. You will withdraw to that side with as much armor as you can carry, and you will hide in the forest near Darnantes. Watch out where you go, and be careful to move so stealthily that none of your companions will know it, however much they may be your friends, but for Gratian and Farien: tell these two in private, for they are very worthy, noble men. And have the roadways so well watched by your knights that no spy may take to them to go tell those on the other side anything about your doings, for you would soon come to harm.” And he said that, when it came time to leave, he would do that so well that Merlin would praise him for it. “I don’t know what else to tell you,” said Merlin, “but I'm leaving, for I’ve much to do elsewhere.” “Where will you be going?” asked Leonce. And Merlin said to him, “When I leave this country I will go to Carhaix in Carmelide, where the three kings are. And I'll tell them how the giants and the Saxons will be hiding outside the country, and the battle on the Thursday after Whitsunday will be so great and so wondrous that none such has ever been seen in the land of Carmelide.” “Sir,” said Leonce, “greet my uncles and my cousin King Arthur on my behalf.” “I will do so very gladly,” said Merlin. “Now set your mind on doing good, and I commend you to God.” And he answered, “God bless you and bring you salvation.”” And as soon as Merlin had left Leonce, he went straight to a maiden of very great beauty who lived in a very beautiful and rich castle that sat beneath a round mountain 7In indirect discourse in Sommer’s text: & si li dist que diex le condute et maint a saluete (208, 1. 36). 281 at the edge of the Forest of Briosque, which was most delightful, good for hunting, and full of all kinds of deer. The maiden I am telling you about was the daughter of a vavasor of very high birth named Dyonas. When he was young,® quite often Diana, goddess of the wood, came to talk with him and spent many a day with him, for he was her godson. Once,” as she [209] left, she gave him a gift that proved to be of great worth to him. And she said to him, “Dyonas, I trust you. And may the God of the moon and stars grant that, after my death, when Vortigern of Great Britain begins to reign, your first girl-child be sought after by the wisest, most learned man on earth, that he may show her the greatest part of his learning, and that he may teach her everything she asks—all through the power of necromancy, so that he might be so much under her sway from the moment he sees her that he lacks the power to do anything against her will.” Thus Diana gave her gift to Dyonas, and as soon as she had given it, it was granted. And when Dyonas was grown up, he became a very good knight, handsome and full of all manly traits. He was large and strong and for a long time served a duke of Burgundy who gave him one of his nieces as his wife, a fair and well-bred maiden. Dyonas had loved the delights of wood and river in the time of his youth, and the duke of Burgundy owned a share of the Forest of Briosque, so that one half of it belonged to him outright and the other to King Ban. So when the duke wed his niece, he granted to Dyonas his share of the forest and a great deal of land he owned round about. When Dyonas went to see it, he was so greatly pleased and taken with everything about it that he had one of his dwellings built there, which was quite beautiful and rich, beside a pond that was also quite rich and beautiful. And when it was built, he came to live there for the hunting and fishing in the woods and on the river that were nearby. He stayed there a long time and often went to the court of King Ban. He served him many times, as was his duty as a knight,!° and he helped him in many a time of need against King Claudas, to whom he did great harm. At last King Ban and King Bors welcomed him with great love because they knew him to be a worthy man and a faithful and brave knight. King Ban granted his own part of the forest to him and his heirs forevermore, and he gave him lands and endowments in great plenty in exchange for the knightly faithfulness he found in him. And Dyonas was so likable that all who came around him treated him as a friend. Thus Dyonas dwelt in that land for a very long time, and at last he fathered with his wife a daughter, who was most lovely. She was baptized Viviane, a name in Welsh that sounds in French as if she said, “I will do nothing”, and hardship befell Merlin, as the story will tell later. That 8Not in Sommer’s text, but required for clarity, cf. Et quant Dyonas fu grans, “And when Dyonas was grown up” (209, Il. 8-9). 9Not in Sommer’s text, but the switch from the iterative (si vint maintes fois a lui parler [208, |. 42]) to the definite (si i douna ,. doun [209, 1. 1]) implies such an emphasis. 10sgmmer’s text has lui (?) disime de cheualiers (“the knight’s ‘tithe’”) (209, 1. 21), which suggests service owed as to an overlord. 282 maiden grew in body and mind until she reached the age of twelve. When Merlin left Leonce of Payerne, he made his way until he came to the Forest of Briosque. He took on the shape of a most handsome youth and drew near a spring that fed a pond, very beautiful and very clear, with sand that shone so brightly that it seemed to be of fine silver. Viviane often came to this spring to play and enjoy herself, and she was there on the very day that Merlin came. And when Merlin saw her, he looked at her for a long time before he said a word. And he said to himself!! that he would be most unwise to fall asleep in sin and lose his mind and his knowledge just to know the delights of a young lady, to shame her and to lose God. [210] After Merlin had long been deep in thought, he went forward and greeted her nevertheless. And when she saw him, she answered, like the well-bred girl she was, “May the Lord who knows all thoughts bestow on you the will and the heart to treat me well, and may He bestow on me as well the worth and honor that are my due. m2 When Merlin heard the maiden speak, he sat down at the edge of the spring and asked her who she was. She told him that she had been born in that country, the daughter of a vavasor there, “a noble man,” she said, “who lives in this manor. And who are you, fair, dear friend?” asked the maiden. “Lady,” he said, “I am a wandering apprentice, seeking my master; he used to teach me my trade, which is most praiseworthy.” “And what trade is that?” she asked. “In truth, lady,”!8 he said, “he has taught me so well that I could raise a castle right here and have a great many people take refuge inside and others fall upon it from without. And I could do something else just as well: I could walk across that pond without getting my feet wet. And I could make a river flow over there where no water has ever run before.” “Indeed,” said the maiden, “this is a worthy trade! I would give a great deal to learn to do such fine tricks.” “To be sure, lady” he answered, “I know many others that are even better than these are and more delightful for entertaining highborn men. For no one could suggest any kind of trick that I couldn’t do or continue doing as long as I like.” “In truth,” said the young lady, “if you don’t mind, I'd like to find out about your tricks, and I would swear to be your lady love and your friend forever, without any wrongdoing or baseness, for as long as I live.” “Indeed, lady,” he said, “you seem to me so gentle and of such noble bearing that for your love I would show you a few of my tricks, on your oath that your love will be mine, for I ask you for nothing else.” She granted his wish without seeing or understanding his cunning. And Merlin went off and drew with a staff a ring in the middle of a heath; then he came back to the 1Not in Sommer’s text (209, 1. 39). 121 indirect discourse in Sommer’s text (210, Il. 2-4). 13The word here is dame (“married lady”) (210, 1. 10), not the usual (and expected) damotsele (cf. 210, |. 8). Dame occurs elsewhere in 9, 12, 17, etc. The Story of Merlin maiden and sat down again at the spring. But it was not long before the maiden looked and saw ladies, knights, maidens, and squires in great number coming out of the Forest of Briosque. They were holding hands and came singing and making merry as no one had ever seen, and tumblers, dancers, and musicians passed before the maiden and gathered all around the ring that Merlin had drawn. And after they had gone inside, there began such wonderful singing and dancing that no one could tell a fourth of the merriment there. And Merlin raised up a castle fair and strong, and beneath it an orchard with all the good smells in the world; the blossoms and fruit gave off such a sweet smell that it is wonderful to tell about. The maiden, who heard and saw all of this, was so astounded by the wonder she beheld and so happy looking at it that she was speechless; and she was so bewildered that she did not know what song they were singing unless they sang it again. !4 Truly, love begins in happiness and ends in grief! Their merrymaking went on thus from the ninth hour until vespers; people heard the noise far away, and it was [211] loud and clear and delightful to listen to. There seemed to be a great many people, so all who were in Dyonas’s manor came out, men and women in very great numbers, and they looked and saw what they thought was the beautiful orchard, the castle, the ladies, and the dancing outside that was so mirthful that they had never seen fairer merrymaking, and they looked in wonder at the castle and orchard they saw there, which were more beautiful than any they had ever seen. Moreover, they wondered where so many ladies and maidens, so finely arrayed in dresses and jewels, had come from. After the dancing had gone on for a long while, the ladies and maidens sat down on the cool green grass. The squires set up a target dummy! in the middle of the orchard, where the young knights began jousting, while elsewhere noble young men went jousting against the squires; they did not stop tilting until vespers. Then Merlin went to the maiden, took her by the hand, and said to her, “Lady, what to you think of this?” “Dear friend,” answered the maiden, “you have done enough to make me yours!” “Lady,” he said, “keep the promise you have made me.” “Of course I will, gladly,” she said, “but you haven’t yet taught me anything.” “So I'll tell you about my tricks,” said Merlin, “and you'll write it all down, for you know your letters well enough, and I will teach you more wonders than any woman has ever known.” “What?” said the maiden. “How do you know that I can read and write?” “Lady,” he answered, “I know it for a fact, for my master has taught me so well that I know everything that everyone does.” “In truth,” said the maiden, “this is by far the fairest learning I’ve heard about, and the most useful anywhere, Msommer’s text reads fors que tant quil dient au refrait de lor chant (210, 1. 41): “except until they told [it] in the repetition of their song.” IE n quintaine (211, 1. 10), a dummy used for target practice with the lance. The Story of Merlin and I would know it most gladly. And things that are yet to come,” the maiden went on, “do you know anything about that?” “Yes, of course, my fair friend,” he said, “a great deal.” “For God’s sake,” said the maiden, “what do you go on looking for? In truth, you would put up with a great deal if you got some pleasure out of it!” While the maiden and Merlin were talking together, the ladies and maidens gathered together and went off dancing toward the wood, along with the knights and squires. And when they got to the edge, they rushed in so fast that they did not know what might become of them. Indeed, the castle and everything had all faded into nothing, but the orchard stayed some time afterwards because of the maiden, who sweetly entreated Merlin. And the orchard was called “The Haven for Joy and Happiness.” And when Merlin and the maiden had been together for a long time, Merlin said to her, “Fair maiden, I am going away, for I have much to do elsewhere.” “What?” said the maiden. “Fair dear friend, won't you teach me anything about your tricks?” “Lady,” said Merlin, “now don’t get into a hurry, for you will know everything soon enough, and you will need a great deal of time and a long stay in the same place. Meanwhile, you have not yet given me any pledge of your love.” “Sir,” she said, “what pledge would you have me give you? Tell me and I will do it.” “I want you to swear,” he said, “that your love will be mine, and you along with it, to do whatever I wish whenever I will.” And the maiden thought awhile and then said, “Sir, I will do this if, afterwards, you swear to teach me everything I ask you, so that I will know how to do it.” He [212] told her that that suited him. And the maiden pledged that she would keep her oath just as she had sworn, and he took her pledge. Then he taught her a trick that she worked many times afterwards, for!® he taught her how to make a river appear wherever she wished, and it stayed there as long as she wanted, and many other tricks the words of which she wrote down on parchment just as he told them, and she knew how to bring about many things. And after he had stayed until vespers, he commended her to God, and she him. But first, the maiden asked him when he would come back, and he told her the eve of St. John’s Day. Then they parted company. Merlin went to Carmelide, where the three kings made him feel very welcome when they saw him. But here the story stops talking about him and goes back to the King of the Hundred Knights, who had sent his messenger to speak with the princes on the advice of King Tradelmant of North Wales. 16sommer’s text has ear for car (212, |. 3). 283 29. Arthur Betrothed to Guenevere; Battle Against Rion.’ Now the story says that the messengers of the King of the Hundred Knights rode fast until they had given to all the kings the summons entrusted to them. The kings answered that they would talk together on Whitsunday at Lancaster,” where they would gather as secretly as they could, and there they would take counsel as to what they should do; and so they would inform one to another. Time and the seasons went by until Whitsuntide came, when the barons came together at Lancaster, each with only three companions. Everyone was most glad to see the others, and they told one another about their anger, their troubles, and the harm the Saxons had done them. They found out that King Aguisant had lost more than all the others, and King Lot mourned his wife and children whom he had lost, and said that he would rather die than live. Then spoke the King of the Hundred Knights, on whose advice they were gathered together, and he said to them, “Dear lords, would we not all do better to go forth and gladly die for Our Lord, to avenge our deaths and those of our friends and kindred, than to go on living wretchedly and cravenly and in such grief as we are every day? For the Saxons are pressing us so hard that we cannot find food unless it is what they bring in from their own country and their own lands. And when we have bought it we have paid dearly for it, for we are losing a great deal, our kin and our friends, and every day we weaken and become fewer while our enemies only grow in numbers and strength. Thus they will strike us down and drive us little by little from our land, and we will do very little indeed to hurt them. But now let us go out and fight them all together, and let us do to them the worst harm we can, so that forevermore people will talk about it after our deaths!” When the barons heard the king, they held him in high esteem and praised what he had said, for they knew that he spoke only out of the great prowess there was in him, and they talked about it among themselves and said that they heartily agreed to [213] what he had told them. Among themselves they then set a day for gathering together with as many men as they could muster: a week before the Feast of Mary Magdalene® in the meadows by Suret, a castle belonging to the duke of Cambenic which had bountiful goods and was very rich. With that they parted and went straight back to their lands. They called for and brought together all the men they could gather, friends and kinsmen close and distant, some convoked by entreaty and others by force, and they made their way until they came to the meadows by Suret. They set up their tents and pavilions between two branches of a very great river that sprang from the sea and flowed back into the sea, and the story calls it the Severn, beside a forest called Breckham, which is very bounteous and rich with every Corresponds to Sommer, 212-222. 2In Sommer’s text, lincestre (212, ll. 16, 19). Earlier, the King of the Hundred Knights summons the council at Lindesores in Broceliande (163, |. 21). 3yJuly 22, so the assembly is set for the 15th. 284 kind of game. There they awaited one another, working on their armor and getting it ready; so they had their hauberks reworked with mail, their helmets and swords cleaned, and their lances fitted with sharp tips. But the story falls silent about them and says no more about them right here; rather it goes back to talking about Merlin and how he left Viviane. Here the story says that when Merlin had left the maiden who had granted him her love, he came in the evening to Carhaix in Carmelide, where the three kings were very glad when they saw him, for they had wished for him a great deal. And King Leodagan had bestirred himself until all his men had come, and they could hardly wait for the armies to gather and make their way to drive King Rion from where he was at the siege of Aneblayse. Then the three kings drew Merlin aside to talk, and they said to Merlin, “What shall we do, for the armies will move out very soon?” “T will tell you what you will do,” said Merlin. “Go tell King Leodagan to get his men ready for battle and to group them into echelons. Be on your way the day after Whitsunday, one echelon after the other. Be so wise as to have ten knights all on horseback always going before the main body, and they will scout the countryside as they go along. They should take all the spies from thereabouts, of whom there will be many throughout the countryside, in order to learn how the people are faring, and they should kill them straightway or take them prisoner, so that they might say nothing to the people of the country. Always ride at night through the most out-of-the-way places you know. And I myself will lead you to the front lines, for you and your companions, along with the knights of the Round Table, will be in one echelon with no other men. After they had talked thus for a long time, King Arthur asked Merlin for news from his lands and how his men had fared since he had last heard.* He told® all the adventures that had happened in the kingdom of Logres after he had left it, how King Lot’s sons had rescued their mother and how they had sworn that never would King Lot count them® among his companions, and never would he be their friend, “until he has made peace with you.” When King Arthur heard these words, he was so happy that he smiled from joy, and he thanked him heartily for his service. Afterwards Merlin went straight to King Ban and King Bors, and he said to them, “Dear lords, how shall we do what we have to do?’ For you are faced with a growing threat from which you will have much grief and hardship.” [214] Then he told them everything that Claudas of the Land Laid Waste had done and how Frollo and Pontius Anthony were coming with an army they had called together to take the kings’ lands and strip them bare. “I have since spoken,” he went on, “with the earl of Payerne, 4Sommer’s text reads &© comment si homme laucient puts fait (213, |. 35): “and how him men had done since.” 5Not in Sommer’s text (213, |. 35). ®Sommer’s text bears the singular: ne laura (213, |. 38). 7Sommer’s text has quel le ferons nos (213, ll. 41-42), “what will we do?” but the Harley manuscript reads comment le ferons nous (213, n. 2): “how will we do it?” The Story of Merlin your cousin, who sends you greetings by me, and I have told him what those who are heading toward the kings’ lands have done.” When the two kings heard Merlin speak, they were so astounded and so bewildered that they did not know what to do or say. When King Arthur saw them so stricken, tears began to fall from his eyes and he said to Merlin, “Dear friend, take pity on them and their lands. Talk with them and tell them what you know they need to do. For I am convinced that if you fail them, they have lost everything, and I would never know happiness as long as I live.” “In truth,” said Merlin, “they need not worry about being defeated or driven from their lands as long as I have my powers. But you may well know that hardship is growing every day for you and for them. For the great dragon, thus says the prophecy, will come to drive the great crowned lion out of Great Britain utterly, with help from twenty-nine serpents who are wonderfully big and strong, unless the great leopard, so big and strong, stops him in part by the love he has for the crowned serpent ® to whom all the beasts of Great Britain and the kingdom of Carmelide will bow down, and in part by his great fierceness and prowess. But the great leopard is not yet born by whom that great lion will be so upheld that the great dragon will not have the power to drive him out of his habitat.” When the three kings heard Merlin speaking this way, they were greatly astounded, for they had never heard him use such shadowy language, so they asked him what it meant. He told them that they would not know any more about it at that time, “But King Arthur should know now that the great undertaking rests on his shoulders.” And so they dropped the subject. Then King Ban asked Merlin what advice he would give him to save his land. And he answered that as soon as they had helped drive the invaders? out of the countryside, “you must set out with as many men as you can muster out of this kingdom. We will go past the great city of Logres and the castle of Bredigan, and we will take the great treasure that lies in the forest, where there are twelve of the best swords in the whole world. And King Arthur will knight his nephews who, to serve him, have left their fathers, their mothers, their kinsmen and their friends, and we will lead them into the kingdom of Benoic, for the men from there will make a wondrously great horde. And when the battle is over, and during our stay in the land, the great leopard will be fathered who will be so fierce and full of pride, and for fear of whom the Great Dragon from the Distant Isles will draw back from the Great Crowned Lion of Great Britain so that he cannot harm him, although he will have the strength to do so; but in the end the leopard will overcome him and make him kneel before the lion to beg his mercy.” “Sir,” said King Ban, “do you know the outcome of the thing we have come here to do?” “Have no fear,” answered Merlin, “for before you leave, the whole kingdom will be in King Arthur’s hands, God willing.” 8In the feminine: la serpente coronee (214, |. 16). °Sommer’s text has only cels (214, 1. 26): “them.” The Story of Merlin “Sir,” said King Ban, “will you tell us anything about those murky words which, as you remind us, we cannot understand?” “No,” answered Merlin, “but King Arthur should know that all of this will happen in his [215] lifetime.” With that a messenger came in and asked the host where the men-at-arms were and whether! the meeting had ended, and he came straight in. He was very well-bred, worthy, a fine speaker, and a great knight; he was a cousin of King Leodagan, his name was Guiomar, and he was twenty-six years old. He was the one on whose behalf the knights of the Round Table went through such hardship for the harm Queen Guenevere did him because of the great love Morgan, King Arthur’s sister, had for him; she loved him so much that Guenevere cast much blame on her, just as the story will tell you later. But now we will stop talking about that until another time, when the story takes us there, and we will tell you how Guiomar came into the room where the three kings and Merlin were. Here the story says that Guiomar went straight to the three kings and greeted them on behalf of King Leodagan, and he said to them, “My lord asks that you come meet with him.” And they answered that they would very willingly do so. Then they called for their horses, mounted, and rode straight to court. And as soon as they had got there and climbed down the steps of the great hall, King Leodagan came forward to meet them and took their hands, so that they went into the hall hand in hand. They went into a room to take counsel together. Then King Leodagan spoke like the wise and learned man he was, and there were just the five of them. And he said to them, “Dear lords, I hold you to be most worthy men and most faithful, and you should know that I love you with greater love than you think; indeed I should, for you have saved my lands, my honor, and my life. But I do not know who you are, and this bothers me; there is nothing in the world that I long so much to know, yet Pll know it only when you want me to and when the time is right. Now I would like to ask you what we will do. You know that King Rion has come into my lands and has besieged one of my best cities with the strength of twenty crowned kings, each one of whom has twenty thousand!! men in his company. My men have gathered on the other side, but there are so few of them that they cannot take them on. So I ask you, for the sake of God, to advise me as to what we can do, for in everything I seek to work with you and your counsel.” Then Merlin spoke forcefully and said to the king, “Sir, don’t be dismayed. For by the faith I owe you, before King Rion gets away from you, he would rather be in his own country utterly naked, even had he lost the best city he has! You are not yet in such dire need that you do not have forty thousand men-at-arms and more, and I'll tell you what to do. You will send ten of the best knights you have to scour the countryside!* so that there is no spy left or scout who is not laid hold of, brought before you, and put into prison; 10gommer’s text has ou (215, |. 2): “where.” 11gommer’s text has .xx. hommes (215, |. 26). 12gommer’s text has la contre (215, |. 35) for la contree. 285 this way, those on the other side cannot find out what you are up to. And then you will divide your men into echelons, and you will make ten of them, no more, and put eight thousand men into each one. Monday morning we will march two leagues before daybreak, one echelon after the other, without disorder, so that we can be there on Wednesday, a little before light. And you may know for a fact that we’ll find them all asleep, for their army has got a great deal of grain, meat, and other [216] goods, and they are drinking and eating so much each evening that they forget themselves and do not post guards around the army. But they have succeeded in raising up a defensive wall toward the flatlands with wagons and carts, so that little harm can be done to them on that side. And toward the woods, they have set up walls of sharpened stakes from trees they have cut down, so that no one could do them any harm from that side. So we must make our way very craftily, for I know a spot that they do not worry about, and that is where they will be found all asleep, and, if God wills, we can do with them what we want. And we will put them to rout so soundly that they will never have the heart to take this land or the strength to lay it waste.” When King Leodagan heard Merlin say this, he was deeply puzzled at to who he could be, and he looked at him so fixedly that his eyes never left him. And then he looked at his companions, who were so still that they said not a word, for they were watching the man who had spoken. After looking at them for a while, he heaved a great sigh, and he thought that they were men of even higher and nobler stock than he had believed. And then his heart was struck with such tenderness that his whole face was flooded with tears that welled up from his heart to his eyes, and his heart was so full of feeling that he could not utter a word. He fell down at their feet as though he were dead, and he cried out to them to have mercy and, for God's sake, to take pity on him and his land, “for I know for a fact,” he said, “and my heart tells me, that I’ll lose everything unless God and you stand behind me.” When King Arthur saw him down on his knees before him, he was moved to great pity, as were the other two kings, so they took him into their arms, lifted him up, and soothed him as best they could. Then all five of them went over to a couch and sat down together like the good and faithful companions they were. Then Merlin began his speech and said to King Leodagan, “Sir, you would very gladly know who we are and our kindred.” And he said that there was nothing he would rather know. “I will first tell you,” said Merlin, “what we have come looking for. See here one of our young lords, a young man, and a very good knight, as you know. And you may know for a fact that he is a man of higher birth than you and higher in any other way, although you are crowned a king. But he does not have a wife betrothed to him, so we go about through the countryside seeking adventures until we find a highborn man who would give him his daughter as a wife.” “Oh, God have mercy!” said King Leodagan. “Why go on looking? I have the most beautiful daughter in this land, the most nobly behaved and the best taught anywhere! She could lack nothing in breeding or good lands. If it is to 286 your liking, and his, I would give her to you. Take her as your mate and wife. I have no other heirs to bequeath my lands to but her.” And Merlin said that he would not turn him down, God willing, and the four companions thanked him heartily. Then the king himself went to find his daughter, and he had her dressed and adorned the most beautifully and the most richly he could, and he led her by the hand into the room where the four companions were waiting for her. A great crowd of knights [217] followed him in. All the knights of the Round Table were there, and the forty about whom the story has told you earlier, and other highborn men who had come to the army to help King Leodagan. And when the king and his daughter came into the hall, which was large and beautiful, the four companions came to meet him. Then King Leodagan spoke so loudly that he was heard and understood by all, and he said, “Noble young lord, I do not know what name to call you by. Come forward and take my daughter as your betrothed, who is so lovely, wise, and courtly, and all the honor that she brings with her after my death, for I could not give her to one more worthy, as all the nobles here well know.” He stepped forward and gave Leodagan his thanks, and the king gave her to him with his right hand, and each pledged his assent to the other with very noble bearing. And the bishop of Carhaix, who had been sent for, blessed them with his right hand. Then the joy and merrymaking were as great as they could be. Then Merlin came forward and spoke, and he said to the king, within hearing of all who were there, “Sir, wouldn't you very much like to know who we are and to whom you have given your daughter?” And the king, who longed so much to know that he never thought he would find out very soon, answered that he would very much like to know. “Now, may all who will hear it,” said Merlin, “know that you have given your daughter to King Arthur of Britain, the son of Uther Pendragon, and you must swear faith to him, and all those of this kingdom who wish to do him honor must do so as well without delay. And then we will go all the more gladly and all the more confidently to fight the bearded king}? who means to take and hold this land, but it will go otherwise than he thinks. And you should know that these two worthy men here are brothers, and both have been crowned king. One is named King Ban of Benoic and the other King Bors of Gaunes, and they were born of the highest stock anyone knows. And the other companions are sons of kings and queens or earls or castellans.” When King Leodagan and the other barons heard that he was King Arthur, they were happier than they ever had been. The companions of the Round Table were the first to come before him, and they swore faith to him, for they had long wished to do so, and afterwards came King Leodagan and then all his companions all together. Then the betrothal was celebrated, so grand that none had seen 13The Harley manuscript has le Roy Rion (217, n. 1; cf. 1. 21): “King Rion.” The Story of Merlin better, and more than anyone else, Guenevere was happy with her betrothed. And that evening Merlin made himself known to the companions of the Round Table, but no others. When King Leodagan saw who he was, he said that God had granted him good fortune in this world to have given him the love and friendship of such a worthy man. “And above all else, dear Lord God,” he said, “it does not bother me that you have made me your agent, since my daughter and my land are bound over to the worthiest man in the world.” Thus spoke King Leodagan, and they all went to sleep and rest. And in the morning the king sent ten knights to the places Merlin told him about where King Rion’s men were to gather. They then made up their echelons, so that there were ten of them, just as Merlin had ordered. [218] King Arthur, King Ban, and King Bors led the first echelon, !4 where the dragon banner!5 was, with!® the fortytwo companions, the knights of the Round Table, and enough others to bring the count to eight thousand. In the second echelon was Guiomar, nephew of King Leodagan, who knew well how to lead a company with eight thousand well-armed men. Elinadas, a young lord and nephew of the wise Lady of the Forest of No Return, led the third echelon; he had eight thousand men with him. Blias, lord of Bleodas, a wonderful castle, led the fourth echelon, and there were eight thousand armed men on horseback. Audolus, a knight of great renown, led the fifth echelon, and there were also eight thousand in it. Beleis the Blond, who was very wealthy and powerful, led the sixth echelon, and there were seven thousand men on good horses. Yder of the Land of the Northmen led the seventh echelon; in King Arthur’s court he had the wonderful adventure of the five rings which he took from the finger of the dead knight who asked to be avenged, for no knight in King Arthur's court could pull them off,!7 just as the story will tell you later. And I tell you truly that there were seven thousand men with him. Landreas, nephew of the seneschal of Carmelide, led the eighth echelon; he was a wondrously good, stout-hearted knight, and he had with him the seven thousand men he had brought there. Sir Pearmuzzle!® led the ninth; he was a good knight, but his nose was no bigger than a cat’s; he had seven thousand men, and he could trust them. King Leodagan and Cleodalis his seneschal led Msommer’s text has bataille (218, 1. 1; cf. 228, 1. 8), which could mean “battle” or “battalion, muster.” Elsewhere in this passage the word esc(h)iele (“echelon”) is used (cf. 218, ll. 4, 5, etc.). I5Not in Sommer’s text (218,11). 16Not in Sommer’s text (218, 1. 3), which, unlike the parallel descriptions, makes no distinction between the leaders and the men constituting the echelon. Msommer’s text has nel pot tratre ne auoir (218, 1. 15): “could not pull it off or get possession of it.” 18sommer’s text has groing poire mele (218, |. 19), and he notes a variant in the Harley manuscript, groin potre molle (218, n. 5). Both groin (“snout”) and pore (“pear”) occur in Modern French as slang or familiar terms for face; poire mele (for poire melee [“honeyed pear”]?) and potre molle (’soft pear”) may be varieties of pears (cf. poire de mollart and molard in Cotgrave). In any case, as the text continues by noting the abnormally small size of this knight’s nose, the term “pear” may denote an unusually rounded or featureless face; the humor in the name is of course stressed by the Opposite trait suggested by the term “snout.” The Story of Merlin the tenth, which they knew how to put to good use; and there were a good ten thousand men, each as worthy and as stout-hearted as the other, and they would not fail him for loss of life or limb. When the ten echelons had broken off each from the others, each one was lined up off by itself, and the leaders!9 talked about when they would move out. They agreed in the end that they would set out early in the night on the Monday after Whitsunday, so they rested all that day and the next. On Whitsunday King Leodagan held court for the sake of the barons who had gathered there. The three kings and Merlin sat all together at the head of the high table. In front of them sat the two Gueneveres, each of whom looked very much like the other, except that King Arthur’s betrothed was a little taller and darker than the other Guenevere; she was better-spoken, for of all the ladies in the world, she was the best trained in eloquence and speech, and her hair grew much thicker, but in every other way they were so much alike that people could hardly tell one from the other, unless it was a lucky guess. Next were seated the knights the king had brought along with the knights of the Round Table; he did this out of friendship and love, for Merlin and Guinebal the clerk wished it. And when they had eaten, they went to bed to rest, but they slept only a short while, for they had to get up early in the night and put on their armor. King Arthur’s armor was brought in, and Guenevere was very deft at helping him put it on, for she knew very well how to go about it, and she herself girded on his sword at his side. And when the king was armed except [219] for his helmet, she herself brought his spurs and, kneeling, fastened them on his feet. And Merlin, who was watching this, began to smile, and he showed the two kings how she endeavored to serve the king. The two kings held her in high esteem, and in the end she had a rich reward, when she lost the king through her mishap because of the traitor Bretelai, just as the story will tell you later. While Merlin was looking at the young lady serving her betrothed, he began to smile. He said to the king laughing, as he wanted to poke fun at him, “Sir, you have never been so fit a knight as you are now, but you need just one thing to make you a new knight again, and you will have a right to say that the daughter of a king and queen has made you a new knight!” “Sir,” said the king, “now tell me what is the thing I need, and I will have her do it, unless it is so unseemly that she would be ashamed to do it.” “In truth,” the well-bred, well-taught young lady said to Merlin, “I could never find shame or dishonor in anything I might do for you, for I know that you are so worthy and so courtly that, for the best castle you might have, you would not ask me to do anything that might turn out to be disgraceful or blameworthy and make people rebuke me in my lifetime or in yours.” “Lady,” said Merlin, “you speak wisely, and you will never be ashamed because of anything I have said, nor will anyone cast blame on you that you might find shameful.” “And what is it, sir,” said Arthur, “that I need? Tell me, if you will.” 19Not in Sommer’s text (218, I. 25). 287 “It is, sir,” answered Merlin, “a kiss, if the lady wishes it and would like it.” “Indeed,” said the king, “I’ll never let that keep me from becoming a new knight!” “In God’s name,” said the maiden, “then, God willing, it will not be long before you are mine and I yours. Why should I make you beg me? It pleases me as much as you.” When the king heard what the maiden said to him, he ran to her and took her in his arms, and she put her arms around him too, and they embraced and kissed each other sweetly, holding each other tightly, for they were youthful and very much in love. And after they had kissed for some time, the horses were made ready and the men? mounted. The maiden gave her betrothed a very wonderful helmet and put it on his head; then they parted and each commended the other to God. Then the echelons set out on the road one after the other, their banners folded and their lances lowered. They were riding at a slow gait, just as Merlin led them; he rode out ahead because he knew all the ways and byways. And the ten knights who had ridden out before had taken forty outlaws who were all King Rion’s spies; they had been tied up and taken prisoner. And the way was so well guarded that no one in King Rion’s army ever had any news about what they were doing. Why should I go on telling about it? Merlin, who was leading the first echelon, made his way until, early Wednesday night, they came upon King Rion’s army. The night was still and quiet, and the moon shone somewhat weakly, so the men in the army went to sleep very sure of themselves, because it was so still, and it had been quite hot during the day and they had eaten and drunk well. Merlin went between the wood and the river and ordered that no one should ride into the army before hearing a horn blow. And just as the echelons came by one after the other, each one lined up off by itself far from the others; [220] and Merlin waited for them all to come and then linked them all up. Then Merlin rode out with the banner and blew a horn so loudly that the whole forest resounded, and the horn’s blast was heard very far away. Then Merlin shouted, “Holy Mary! Lady, entreat your dear Son to help us! Spur your horses, noble knights!” he went on. “Now we'll see who the knights are! It is the truth that you are all in this for life or death, and there is not a man alive here who will not have to defend his head!” When they heard the horn blowing, they gave their horses free rein and struck them with their spurs, and they went flying in as fast as they could make their horses run. There you would have seen tents and pavilions overturned and falling to the ground. And Merlin raised such a great whirlwind that not a tent was left standing, but every one fell on the heads of the men lying inside. And they stormed into the army from every side and killed or maimed as many as they came to. There was a very great slaughter before the men in the army knew who was overrunning them, but at last they heard the dreadful screams and wailing when men were being killed or wounded. Then the 20Not specified in Sommer’s text, where the subject could still be Arthur and Guenevere (219, |. 27). 288 highborn men ordered their squires to round up the army’s horses, which they did; then the knights ran to their arms and hurried to put on their armor as fast as they could. As soon as they were armed, they gathered at King Rion’s tent, and they blew horns and sounded trumpets very loudly. But the others had stormed in so many times, striking up and down, that more than twenty thousand of the enemy would never be able to go back to their homeland, and they drove the survivors to King Rion’s tent, where they stood their ground. There they gave battle, for the men were very strong and powerful, and those who were not already armed had time to get their armor on. Then daylight came fair and bright, and the other echelons drew up and one and all were made ready. Then Merlin raised up his ensign again and rode into the giants so hard that he left them shaking. And the sun, which had risen, beat down on the helmets and made them shine, so that one league away people could have seen them sparkling like stars. When King Rion saw the harm that they had done to him, he was very angry, and he almost went mad from the sorrow he felt. He was seated on a wonderfully strong and fast horse, and he held in his hand a heavy bludgeon that was so big that a peasant would have been loaded down with it, and he went about telling which men would ride before him and which after him. Then he called Solinas, a most worthy and bold knight who was his nephew, and he said to him, “Solinas, come forward! You will lead the first echelon with a hundred thousand men of your choice, and we will avenge the shame and harm done to us.” And he said that he would do it in such a way that he should not be blamed for anything. Then Solinas, who was so worthy and sturdy, rode away. And as soon as Merlin saw him coming, he rode against him with the dragon in his hand, and he changed shape so that no one but the three kings could see who was bearing the dragon. When Merlin saw?! him drawing nearer, he said to King Arthur, “Arthur, now we'll see what you can do here today. See to it that the kiss that your lady gave you is dearly paid for, so that it will be talked about all the days of your life.” ‘ He answered that he would be quick to do so, and then said no more to him. Then the two echelons [221] drew so close to one another that everyone could recognize everyone else. Then they all broke ranks, holding their lances straight, and when they came together, they struck one another so hard, with the sharp tips splitting through their shields, that men everywhere were wounded and borne to the ground. There King Arthur did a feat that many a one witnessed. For when he saw the giants getting close to his echelon,** he struck his horse with his spurs and met Jonap, a wondrously large and strong giant. When Jonap saw him coming, he feared him very little because he looked like a child to him. And they rode hard and fast toward each other. And King Jonap struck King Arthur so hard on his shield that his lance, 21sommer’s text has vint (“came”) for vit (“saw”) (220, 1. 39). 22sommer’s text has si pres les uns des autres (221, |. 6): “so close to each other.” The Story of Merlin which was stout, went through an arm’s length. And King Arthur struck him so hard that he drove the sharp tip of his lance through his shield and hauberk and into his shoulder and out the other side. But he was a Saxon of great pride and of such great strength that he never showed that he had anything wrong with him. Rather, their horses and they themselves clashed so hard that they brought their horses down on top of themselves, and they lay there for a long time so stunned that they neither saw nor heard each other. Then knights from both sides rode to their rescue; there was a great shattering of lances and a great rain of blows on helmets and shields, and there the giants lost more than the Christians. Nevertheless, they struggled so hard on both sides that the two kings got back up, and the battle started over again mighty and fearsome. There the knights of the Round Table and the fortytwo companions did wonders. No company of men could bear up against them, so close did they stand together; in fact, they drove them back into the town that was their stronghold,” and Solinas’s household was so utterly frightened that they thought only of fleeing. And those who were on their heels struck so hard in their midst that they made all the streets shake. Then the fighting began to be so fierce that deadlier has never been seen or heard of. There the companions of the Round Table and King Arthur’s companions fought very well indeed. But above all others stood out a young lord about whom the story must in truth speak, for he should not be skipped over, but it must indeed be brought to mind where he came from and what his name was. For as long as he was able to follow knighthood, he was one of the best knights there were in the time of King Uther Pendragon or in King Arthur’s time. The stories taken from the histories** say that he was the first cousin of Perceval the Welshman, on his mother’s side, about whom the story will speak later, for now is not the place. For he was the son of Havingues, sister of Joseph, and she was the wife of Bron, who had seventeen sons with whom the land of Britain shone. He was a close kinsman of Celidoine, son of Duke Nascien of Betica, who first saw the great wonder of the Grail, and he was a kinsman of King Pelles of Listenois and his brothers; his name was Nascien. This Nascien later had Lancelot of the Lake, son of King Ban of Benoic, in his service—the story will tell you their histories one after the other just as they happened from day to day. This Nascien about whom I am telling you was named after Duke Nascien, who was such a worthy man, and he lived such a good life that, after he had forsworn knighthood, he became a hermit. And Our Lord endowed him with such grace that he later became a priest who could sing Mass. [222] And he was a virgin and was chaste for as long as he lived. Then the Holy Ghost took this Nascien and brought him away to the Third Heaven, where he openly beheld the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Afterwards he was entrusted with the Holy Story, and 23The Old French word is estandart (221, 1. 22), a wooden fortification that serves as a rallying point. His estandart is so large, however, that it has streets (1. 24). 24The text has li conte des estoires (221, Il. 31-32); conte (“account,” “story”) is the term used to describe the Merkin text; explicitly, here, the (Latin?) estoires (“histories”) are texts from which contes are made. See also 230, 1. 33 (below, ch. 30 n. 23). The Story of Merlin he wrote it down at the behest of the Holy Master. And he wrote until he fit it to the book of Blaise, who did what he did for Merlin’s sake. He later gave fruitful advice to King Arthur when he was in danger of losing his lands at the time when Galehaut, lord of the Distant Isles, was waging war against him with the strength of thirty kings, all of whom he had defeated. But now the story stops telling about these things and goes back to telling word for word what happened in the battle against King Rion. 30. Victory of Leodagan and Arthur over Rion.' The story says here that the battle was heated, and, on the Thursday after Whitsunday, the fighting between the army of King Rion of Ireland and the army of King Leodagan of Carmelide was rough. The knights of the Round Table performed great feats of arms, but above all the others Nascien and Adragain the Dark shone. They did wonders, and they tore their swordbelts apart from the strain,? and King Arthur was there with them. These three fought so hard that they left all their companions behind; wherever they went King Arthur’s ensign showed them the way. Their companions tried hard to follow the banner, but they fell so far behind, and the fighting was so thick, that they could not break their way through and they had to give up, like it or not. And the three companions tried as hard as they could to get to the stronghold where King Rion’s banner, borne by four elephants, waved in the wind. Meantime, King Ban and King Bors saw that they had lost King Arthur and that the giants had closed them out, so they spurred their horses, left their companions behind, and flew into the press with their swords drawn, and they killed and cut down as many as they reached, nor did they stop driving through before they came to Merlin, who was holding the dragon before King Arthur. And when the five companions came together, they had their standard-bearer who showed them the way, and the fighting began so fierce and so fearsome, and it was a wonder to behold. And King Rion happened to come to that side with his bludgeon in his hand, and he was the largest and brawniest man in the world, as far as anyone knew. As it happened, he met first King Bors, who was pursuing King Falsaron, holding his sword drawn. This was following a wonderful blow to the shield he had dealt him with his lance, so that he had nearly brought him down, for he had bent him over his saddlebow and would doubtless have unhorsed him if his lance had not broken; and when his lance broke, King Bors stood upright and fixed himself in his stirrups so fiercely that the iron bent. He wielded his naked sword and held his shield tight against his chest, and he rode hard after the giant had dealt him the wonderful blow. When the giant saw him coming, he turned in flight, for he did not dare stand against him. And King Bors rode after him burning to avenge the blow he had dealt him. But it was very unwise for him to do, for he had left his companions an arrow-shot 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 222-236. 2Implicit in Sommer’s text (222, |. 14). 289 behind him, and they* could not reach him. It was then that he happened to meet King Rion, who was wondrously riding fast with the strength of eighteen crowned kings, and he urged his men to do [223] their utmost. King Rion went straight out ahead of his army as far as a small stone can be thrown; he was gripping his great bludgeon, made of heavy copper, and was astride a strong, swift warhorse; and he met King Bors, who had been hard on the heels of King Falsaron and was putting so much pressure on him. He struck him such a hard blow on the helmet that he sent him crashing forward over his saddlebow. He wanted to carry through with the other blow to cut off his head, and when the horse he was riding had taken the bit in its teeth, it took him farther along on this pass than he wanted to go, but King Bors had already begun the stroke and could not hold it back, and it fell where he did not mean to strike, for it cut off the head of King Falsaron’s horse even with the ears, and it stumbled to the ground in a heap. Then he rode right on top of him, and he would have liked very much to get down from his horse if he could have, but King Rion, who was riding an arrow-shot ahead of his men, shouted to him, “Sir knight, you have gone so far afield that it is too late for you to change your mind. For this man belongs to me, and I have come to challenge you for him, and you will soon know whether there is any love between him and me.” Then he spurred his horse so hard that blood spurted out from both its flanks in great gushes, and he ran upon him so unbelievably fast that the whole field, which was strewn with tiny stones, resounded from it, and sparks flew so thickly from the rocks that the horses’ shoes were being chipped away. King Bors looked, and it seemed as if a devil were riding his way. He had got so close to him that he could not get away from him, and he saw such a great number of men coming behind him that the whole field was clothed with them, and he saw clearly that if he stood his ground against him, he would put himself in great danger of being killed. Nevertheless, he said, “Dear Lord God, if I leave here, I will never have honor in my lifetime, for I would always be rebuked and called a coward. I would much rather die with honor than live in shame. Now may the Lord God do with me as He will, for I will take a stand against him.” Then he made the sign of the True Cross and grasped his sword, which was of very great worth, and stood against the one who was riding toward him with his bludgeon* held ready. And when King Rion got to King Bors, he dealt him a blow that was so grievous and so remarkable that he very nearly killed him, but he took the blow on his shield, which flew into splinters, so hard did Rion hit it; and King Bors struck him a blow on his helmet, as he was going by, that was so hard that it sent him forward over his saddlebow. When the giant saw that he had missed him, he grew deeply angry, and he turned around with his bludgeon raised high. And King Bors, who saw the great throng of men coming, thought to himself that he would be most unwise to take a stand against them, so he stood up again in his stirrups and flew back into the press. And he saw that King Aroans of Betinia was holding Hervi of Rivel down 31n Sommer’s text the verb is in the singular (222, I. 41). 4sommer’s text has here hache (223, I. 29): “battle-axe.” 290 with his foot on his helmet, and that he and his men had beaten Hervi so badly that blood was pouring out of his mouth and nose. And he would have cut off his head a long time before had it not been for Adragain the Dark, who was shielding him against more than forty knights who were craving only to cut off his head (that would have been a great shame); and they were about to kill him when King Bors rede up. And when he saw Hervi in such dire straits, he was deeply grieved, so he spurred his horse [224] toward Aroans and hit him so hard on the helmet with his sword that he struck him from his horse to the ground so dazed that he could not hear or see. And when Hervi saw that he was thus freed, he took the king’s horse and readily jumped on, and he let it run into the fray, which was growing ever rougher, for all of King Leodagan’s echelons had thrown themselves against King Rion’s stronghold. And King Rion® rode after King Bors until he caught up with him where he had brought down King Aroans, and as soon as he saw him he ran upon him with his bludgeon’ in his hand. He meant to strike him on the head, but when he saw the blow coming—and he did not have a shield—he spurred his horse, and King Rion missed him and hit the horse so hard between the back saddlebow and its rump that he broke its spine and brought the king and his horse to the ground all in a heap. When King Bors saw that his horse had fallen, he sprang back to his feet, for he was very strong and tough and brawny, and daring above all knights. And the press was so great all around him that he could hardly turn around, for so many men were following King Rion that no one could have told the number. And the ones rushed in so hard that they drove the others back into the middle of the field as far as an arrow could be shot. There King Bors was very badly wounded, for King Rion was doing all he could to kill him. And when Hervi of Rivel saw the worthy man in such straits, for he had seen him fall to his hands and knees four times and get back up, he spurred over to help him out. And he took a strong, straight lance which he had taken out of a giant’s hands, and he struck King Rion right on the shield so hard that he broke through it and cut through his hauberk on the left side, but not as far as his flesh, nor by any blow that he dealt him did the king come to harm in any way, but he kept wielding the bludgeon with which he had killed many a Christian. He was bent on smashing Hervi on the head, but he threw up his shield against the blow, and it landed so hard that it knocked a fourth of the shield to the ground. The king was about to strike again, for he was a man of great strength, but Hervi had drawn his sword and meant to hit him right on the head. The king threw up his shield against the blow, but Hervi landed such a great blow that it split his shield 5Sommer’s text has al estandart que i rois rions conduisoit (224, Il. 5-6): “against the estandart that King Rion was leading.” The sense of the word estandart may have shifted from that of fortification (above, ch. 29 n. 23; see also 222, I]. 20-21, where it is a place where a banner waves) to that of a group of men, in whose midst the standard is borne, whom the king leads (cf. also 227, I. 25). 6Sommer’s text has il (224, 1. 6): “he.” 7Sommer’s text has hache (224, Il. 7-8): “battle-axe” (see above, n. 45). The Story of Merlin down to the boss. And the king raised his bludgeon again and was bent on striking him on his helmet. And Hervi drew on his reins in order to fall back, for he was very much afraid of the blow, and the giant missed him, but struck his horse on the breast and broke its neck crosswise, and the horse stumbled to the ground and took the knight with him. When Adragain saw his companion down, no one had to ask whether he was sorrowful. He rode over gripping his sword, and he struck King Rion with it so hard on his helmet that he sent him spilling over his horse’s neck, and if he had not grasped it, he would have fallen sprawling to the ground. And if Adragain had had time to strike again, he would have taken his vengeance without stopping. When the giants saw King Rion in such danger, they grew very angry, and there was a most proud king who was King Rion’s cousin; his name was Celinas, and he was quite saddened in his heart when he saw King Rion being so badly mishandled. He was holding a lance in his hand, and he struck his horse with his spurs and hit Adragain so hard between his shoulders that he bore him down sprawling to the ground, but Adragain sprang back to his feet night away. When the three companions saw that they were being dealt with so roughly, [225] they drew closer together and began defending themselves so hard that no one dared get néar them to take them, but their foes threw spears and feathered halberds at them, and they wounded them in many places, but they were men of such great heart that they cared nothing for what the others did, but killed and brought down as many as they got to. But King Rion bore in on them so close that they would have been hemmed in there and taken prisoner, but Nascien came in holding a bloody spear in his hand. When Nascien saw King Bors in such dire straits, along with the two companions he loved so much, and King Rion so eager to do them harm, he spurred his horse over to them so fast that he sent everyone he met sprawling to the ground, and he wielded his sword and struck King Rion so hard right on his hauberk, close to his right side, that he threw him to the ground head over heels and so dazed that he did not know where he was, and Nascien rode back and forth past him two or three times. When King Rion’s men saw him they spurred to his rescue. Knights were fighting thickly crowded together, and there was a great clanging of swords, Nascien’s horse was killed under him, and the four knights were hard-pressed. Very soon there might have such woeful harm that it could never be undone, but Merlin, who knew all these things, called King Arthur, King Ban, and all the other companions of the Round Table, and said to them, “Now follow me, for King Bors is fighting along with three companions of the Round Table, and they are in very great danger. For King Rion is bearing down on them so hard that they could be killed at any moment.” When King Ban heard Merlin’s speech, his heart trembled with fear, and he said to Merlin, “Oh, sir! Tell me where this is, for if my brother dies there I will never be happy for as long as I live.” “Follow me, then,” said Merlin, “for we cannot be slow.” Then Merlin cast a most wonderful spell. He raised up a great dust storm with winds so strong that all the dust The Story of Merlin rained over the giants in such a way that they could hardly tell themselves one from the other, and the hue and cry rose so loud that you could not have heard God thundering. Then Merlin turned about, waving the dragon, which was breathing fire out of its mouth, so that the air glowed red, for never had it thrown so much fire. And the fire fell onto the giants’ banners, which caught fire and burned brightly. All who saw this dreadful wonder were stricken with fright. While Merlin worked to break up the press and get through, King Rion’s companions rode up, and there was such a big crowd of them that no one could tell how many there were; but from the other side King Leodagan’s echelons came back around, and they ran headlong into one another. There the fighting was wondrous and rough, and very many of the Christians would have come to a bad end, and they could not have held out for long, had it not been for Merlin’s knowledge, which is all that saved them. For every man King Leodagan had there were three belonging to King Rion; even so, the Christians were more worthy, better armed, and more orderly, and they fought and struck down as many as they found before them to fight against. [226] The uproar was very loud, and the fighting was deadly before the city of Aneblayse 8 for all on one side were doing their utmost to bring harm to those on the other. There the companions of the Round Table made great efforts to follow Merlin’s banner wherever they saw it go, even though the crowd of men was so great that they could hardly get through. There King Ban did wonders all by himself, for he was deeply afraid for his brother. And wherever Merlin went, King Arthur, the forty companions, and the companions of the Round Table were always there also. There no body of men could hold them back before they found King Bors on his feet, and his companions were in such bad shape that their helmets were split open or cut into pieces or falling down over their eyes so that they were blinded, and their hauberks were broken and torn, but as yet none had been wounded so badly that it hurt them to bear their arms. And they wielded their swords with both hands and defended themselves wonderfully, for they had killed many men and horses, and the heaps were so high all about them that the giants could reach them only with their lances.? And King Rion did his very best to take them and hold them prisoner, for he thought, judging from their great skill at defending themselves, that they were highborn and powerful men. Then he thrust at them, so that they could well have been lost if help had not come to them. When King Ban saw his brother in such a plight, he well understood, that unless he and the companions with him came in fast, he could not come out of it hale and hardy. Then he gave free rein to his horse and struck King Minap!® through the head so hard that he split him down to the chest, and King Arthur hit a Saxon so that he sent his 8Sommer’s text reads la cite de danebloise (226, 1. 1); cf. la cite de daneblaise (226, |. 32; 300, 1. 16). 9Sommer’s text reads com ne pot mais a aus auenir sen lanchant non (226, Il. 14-15): “that no one could ever get to them except by using a lance [or throwing something].” 10sommer, 226, I. 22; for Jonap (above)? 291 head flying right before King Rion; the other companions rushed in headlong among them so hard that each one bore his man to the ground dead. And when King Bors saw the help they were getting, the men who were with him put their feet together and jumped over the heaps of dead men and horses they had slaughtered. All of them took horses, put their helmets back on as fast as they could, and outfitted themselves with shields, and when they were ready, they struck out into the fray again with their swords drawn. There the fighting grew fiercer, and the echelons!! were broken apart and split into pieces everywhere. The men on one side took after those on the other, hitting them, killing them, and cutting them down, and the fighting lasted all day until the hour of low vespers. Then the Christians pulled back toward the city of Aneblayse,!? and the weeping and wailing grew so loud that the people in the city climbed up to the battlements and saw that the Christians had had by far the worst of it. Then Sadoine the Castellan saw his uncle in such a plight, for he and his men would have been driven from the battlefield had it not been for King Arthur and his companions, who numbered almost three hundred; these men were upholding the whole battle, for they always won wherever they went in the battle. And when Sadoine saw the danger that had befallen his uncle and his companions, he shouted out, “Noble knights, now run quickly to arms! For this has to be done, I see it very well, for today we must lose everything or win everything back. So let us defend our lives and our birthright against the enemies of Jesus Christ. And those who will die defending holy Christendom will be safe and sound. We will never need greater honor than we must find [227] right now. Look over there at King Arthur, our rightful earthly lord, with that dragon! He is the best knight in the world, and in order to help us he has put himself in danger of being killed. And when he puts himself at risk for our sakes, we should risk ourselves for him. We should feel great pity for him and his men, for they are suffering a great deal and have undergone much; we should be frightened that they have been driven back so. And we who are so many do nothing to help them! For there are more than ten thousand of us in here, and we see plainly that there are only three hundred of them who are holding out so strongly that they will not be driven back farther! or yield their ground, but all day long they have suffered and endured fighting and beating that have not let up. For God’s sake, noble knights, let us strike out to help them, and you can be sure that if the Saxons!‘ are hit hard in the first onslaught, then we can send them on their way. Whatever happens, it is better for us to die with honor than to be shamed and stripped of our lands through cowardice. Furthermore, we should be greatly cheered because we are 1gommer’s text has batailles (226, |. 30): “battalions.” 12gommer’s text has la cite de daneblaise (226, |. 32); see above, n. 8, 13Not in Sommer’s text (227, Il. 8-9), but implicit in that Sadoine has just pointed out (Il. 5-6) that they have been pushed back. Mgommer’s text has sil sont bien encontre (227, 1. 11): “if they are well met.” The idiom recurs 227, Il. 41-42. aoe defending our birthright and holy Christendom, which our Lord God has newly founded among us!” Then the men in the castle readied themselves and mounted their horses and rode out of the city. And when King Leodagan saw them, he shouted very loudly, “Now to them, highborn knights! Here comes the help that my nephew Sadoine brings us. In the name of God, spur your horses and uphold your honor and ours!” “Sir,” said Guiomar, “why do you preach to us when every one of us is ready to defend our lives? For we have gone so far that we will all die or we will win the victory, and each one of us is as good as a king in fighting for his life. But let us ride all together against our enemies,}5 and let them be struck so hard that they will be utterly overwhelmed!” Then they drew tightly together and rode toward the stronghold!® where King Arthur, King Ban, King Bors, and the companions of the Round Table were doing such wonders that never had greater been seen. And when King Leodagan and his men drew nearer the stronghold, they ran into the crowd so hard that they were all rocked and shaken. There the fighting was so wondrous and so deadly that the giants lost many of their men, and King Leodagan’s men were so greatly heartened that they made the giants yield their ground and drove them back to where their army was encamped, and there they gave them a very rough and most wondrous fight. Merlin had withdrawn from the fray, and he gathered the companions of the Round Table about him and made them saddle and harness their horses anew and give out shields and helmets to those who needed new ones, and he put back together as many as he could of those who had been in the echelon, and there were more than six thousand of them; each one took a strong, sturdy lance with a sharp tip. And after they had taken the fresh air, and had been there for a while, they saw their friends being dreadfully driven back, for the Saxons had recovered as soon as the companions of the Round Table had withdrawn from the fighting. And when Merlin saw the Saxons rallying, he shouted, “Noble knights! Now at them! We'll see who can fight the best! For if you hit the enemy?” hard, we will send,them on their way!” Then he said to King Arthur that he must have forgotten the kiss his ladylove had given him, for he had done poorly in the first [228] fighting. And when Arthur heard this, he blushed all over from shame, and he hung his helmeted head and said not a word; but he stood so hard on his stirrups that the iron bent. And King Ban began to smile within his helmet and pointed him out to King Bors, his brother; then all the knights of the Round Table looked at him, and they found him very worthy and held him in high esteem because they saw his look of noble pride. Indeed they said that if he lived long, never would 15gommer’s text has a els (227, 1. 23): “to/against them.” 16sommer’s text has lestandart (227, 1. 25; also 1. 28); see above, n. 5. 17gommer’s text has se vous bien les encontres (227, ll. 41-42): “if you meet them well”, for another version of the idiom (227, 1. 11), see above, n. 14. The Story of Merlin there be such a king, and with great feeling they entreated God to keep him from danger. When Merlin drew near the echelon,}8 he shouted to the men, “Now at them!” And he drove so hard into their midst with the dragon banner that he struck to the ground everyone he ran after, so that nothing was left standing before him. And King Arthur, who held a wonderful lance,!? struck King Clariel so hard that it went right through his side, and he knocked him from his horse to the ground so hard that he had no need of a doctor. Then he caught sight of King Rion, whose clothing and armor”? were decorated with sheaves of grain and crowns, and he drew his sword and rode toward him as fast as his horse could go, and he drove straight through the press with his good horse, so that nothing held him back, but he knocked to the ground as many as he came to. And when he got to King Rion, he struck him hard with his sword, which went through his shield and hauberk, and if it had not been for the snake skin shirt he was wearing beneath his hauberk, he would have killed him; the snake skin was so hard that he could not break it or cut through it, but he still kept hitting him so forcefully that he sent him spilling head over heels to the ground. When the giants and Saxons saw their lord fall, every one of them began to quake, because they were afraid that he would be killed, so they ran King Arthur down and fell upon him and struck him from all sides, so that they bore him and his horse to the ground in a heap. When Merlin saw King Arthur fall, he had the six thousand fly to his rescue. There they fought fiercely, the ones striving to rescue King Arthur, and the others, to avenge King Rion, whom he had struck down so dreadfully. King Ban began working wonders, for with main force he got King Arthur back up in the midst of his enemies, and he slaughtered so many giants that none dared take a stand against him. Meanwhile, the six thousand fought as well as they did thanks to the endeavors of those of the Round Table, for there were few of them who did not bring their adversaries down to the ground dead, and they made them yield their ground despite themselves. There King Rion was much kicked about and trodden under foot before he could get back on horseback, but when he saw that he was being beaten and that, like it or not, he should take flight, he said that it would be better to die than not to avenge his shame in part or to soothe his heart a little for the hurt he had suffered. Then he sprang to his feet, grasped his bludgeon with both hands, and began striking blows right and left that were so rough and unduly strong that he struck down as many as he came to, and those who saw him work those wonders fled to every side, for they did not dare stand their ground against him. Meanwhile, King Arthur, King Ban, King Bors, Nascien, Hervi, Ulfin, Kay the Seneschal, and all the other companions kept fighting until they came to King Rion and his banner, which the elephants bore. There the fighting 18sommer’s text has bataille (228, 1. 8): “battle” or “battalion, muster.” 19The word here is espiel (228, 1. 11). 20S ommer’s text has le roy rion qui estoit couers de couertures (228, ll. 13-14): “King Rion who was covered with coverings.” The Story of Merlin was most dreadful, and the slaughter and death were so great that the [229] blood ran in streams through the field and into the Thames River, which ran on the far side. There King Rion’s stronghold was brought down and the ensign overthrown. Then the din grew so loud over the giants that they all turned in flight, for they understood that they had been put to rout. They brought King Rion his horse and made him get on quickly, like it or not, for they were greatly frightened for him; and he was full of such sorrow that he nearly went mad. And before he left, he wreaked great damage on King Leodagan, for of his men he left twenty dead ones for him before he left the field. But when he saw that his own men were giving up, he did not dare stay behind any longer, but took to the road as full of wrath as anyone could be, and he went away, fleeing through a wood all alone with none of the barons who belonged to him. When King Leodagan saw that King Rion and the giants were in flight, he ran after them with Sinados, Cleodalis, and Guiomar, and they brought many of them to the ground. Meanwhile, the knights of the Round Table slaughtered so many of them that heaps of them lay all along the low side of the fields like sheep throttled by wolves. For the palisade hindered them dreadfully, so that they could not get away quickly, and the Christians ran them down so hard that they could find no way to defend themselves, and they slaughtered so many of them that the whole field and the stronghold were strewn with the dead and wounded; and the chase lasted all day until nightfall. When King Rion left the battle so full of sorrow and wrath, as you have heard, he was seen by no one who knew who he was except King Arthur. Arthur said to himself that he would rather die than have him get away, so he spurred his horse and left his companions behind, so that none knew where he had gone. Meanwhile, King Ban was in hot pursuit of Gloriant, Minados, and Calufer, those three kings so full of pride, and he rode after them all alone through the wood; and the other companions had ridden away, twenty here, ten there, thirty elsewhere, and the chase lasted until they felt they would have to give it up or postpone it until daylight. And they had killed and wounded so many of them that of the two hundred thousand there had been at the beginning, not twenty thousand got away. But right here the story now falls silent and does not speak of them at this time; rather it goes back to telling about King Arthur, who was riding after King Rion. Right here the story says that King Arthur rode after King Rion of Ireland until he caught up with him in a great, deep valley between a little wood and a meadow; he was crossing a stream which flowed from two springs on a nearby mountainside; the sun was sinking so low that all its brightness was blocked by the mountains and woods that hid it, and there King Arthur caught up with King Rion. And when he had got close to him, he shouted, “Lowborn giant, turn about or you are dead! You can see that there is no man here but you and me.” When the giant saw the young man who was thus threatening him, he grew very scornful, for he looked so small to him that, beside him, he seemed to be a little child. Then he turned about to face him with his great bludgeon 293 in his hand, and he held out in front of himself his shield that was of elephant bone. [230] King Arthur gripped his strong, stout lance*! with a sharp tip of steel, and they rode straight for one another full of wrath and ill will, the one eager to win honor and renown and the other craving to avenge his shame and hurt. And King Arthur rode in fast, for he had come from far away, while the other one waited for him holding his bludgeon; and King Arthur struck him so hard that the sharp tip of his lance went right through his shield and hauberk and broke apart the two panels of his hauberk on his left side, so that his blood spurted everywhere. But for all the battering Arthur did, he did not budge him from his saddle one bit, and his lance flew into splinters. And when King Rion felt that he was wounded, he gritted his teeth and rolled his eyes in his anger, and he raised his bludgeon to strike. He was large and wondrously strong, more than any man anyone knew about. The story says that he was fourteen feet tall, in the feet they counted then, and there was more than a span’s length between his two eyes; he was thin and sinewy, and powerfully built all over, so that he was fearsome to behold. When King Arthur saw the giant raise his bludgeon, he feared him mightily. He urged his horse with his spurs, and man and horse flew against him so hard and fast that they were all hurled to the ground, the horses atop the men, but soon they had sprung back to their feet. But before King Arthur had picked up his arms, King Rion was back up and ready, for he was much quicker and more nimble; King Arthur was still only twenty-eight years old, but King Rion was at least forty-two and was bigger and stronger than he by a third. As soon as they had got up again, they ran at each other; King Arthur drew Excalibur out of its scabbard, his good sword that he had pulled out of the stone and with which he had that day dealt many a fine blow. And as soon as he had drawn it from its scabbard, it cast a very bright light, as if it were a blaze of fire, and he covered himself with his shield and struck a blow on the giant, before he could shield himself, right on the head. And when he saw the blow coming, he threw his shield up against it, for he mightily feared a blow from the sword he had seen glowing and throwing off fire; he well knew that it was of very great worth. He raised his bludgeon against it, and King Arthur hit it so hard with both hands that it flew into pieces, although it was bound in iron. The blow was strong and powerfully struck, and it fell on his shield and split it as far as the boss,2* and thrusting the sword back away from himself he sent King Rion staggering; he was upset for having lost his bludgeon. Then he grasped his sword, which was one of the good ones in the world, for it was, so says the story drawn from the histories,2> the sword of Hercules, who led Jason to the island of Colchis to search for the 2lThe word here (230, 1. 1) and elsewhere (cf. 230, 1. 9) is espiel. 22The word here is blouque (230, |. 31); elsewhere (224, |. 29), boucle (“boss”) occurs in the formula. 23The text has li contes des estotres, unlike the occurrence in 221, ll. 31-32, however, it may not here be a question specifically of the supposed Merkn source, but generally of ancient authoritative texts that transmit the story of Jason, such as Valerius Flaccus’s Argonautica, the Theban material, such as Statius’s Thebats, etc. Zoe Golden Fleece. And with this sword Hercules killed many a giant in the land where Jason brought Medea, who loved him so much, but afterwards Jason failed him at the very time that Hercules helped him, in his great nobility of spirit, because he had taken pity on him. And the story says that Vulcan forged the sword; he reigned in the time of Adrastus, king of Greece, who kept it in his treasure house for many a day. Tydeus, son of the king of Calcydon, had this sword the day he brought his message to King Eteocles of Thebes, who afterwards had much strife because of Polynices, his stepbrother. And then the sword went from hand to hand, and from heir to heir, until it now belonged to King Rion, who was of the bloodline of Hercules, who was so worthy and bold. [231] When King Rion saw that his bludgeon had been cut to bits, he drew his sword, which was of such great goodness. And as soon as he had brought it out of its scabbard, it gave off such a great brightness that it seemed as if the whole countryside had been lit up; and its name was Marmiadoise. And when King Arthur saw the sword blazing with light, he deemed it most worthy, and he drew up a little to look at it, and he began to yearn for it a great deal, and he said that anyone would be lucky if he could win it. And when King Rion saw him keeping so still, he stopped and spoke to him as you can hear. “Sir knight,” said King Rion, “I do not know who you are, but you are very bold to dare follow me and run after me all alone. But because I see that you are so worthy, I will grant you such a boon as I would give to no man. Hand that sword and those arms over to me, then tell me your name, and then you will be free to go, for I have taken pity on you because you look so young to me.” When King Arthur heard King Rion’s speech, he held him in great scorn and answered him very harshly: “How else, then, do you think you might have me so close, unless I surrendered to you like a coward because you are so big and strong? Rather, put your sword and your arms away and throw yourself on my mercy to do with you what I will. You can be sure that all I can warrant you is death.” The giant laughed aloud at this, turned his head aside, and asked him who he was and what his name was, and he entreated him on his faith to tell the truth. And King Arthur said to him that he would tell the truth and swore to tell him who he was, and he agreed. “Now you should know,” he went on, “that I am the son of King Uther Pendragon and my name is Arthur, and I have come to challenge you for this kingdom, which is mine free and clear, for King Leodagan has betrothed his daughter to me. And all the barons of the kingdom have already sworn fealty to me, as has King Leodagan himself. Now tell me who you are and what your name is, for I have told you the truth about myself.” “What?” answered the giant. “Are you telling me as a truth that you are King Arthur and that you were the son of Uther Pendragon, the one who killed Algis the Saxon before Saxon Rock?” “I am talking about that very man,” said the youth. “I swore to you,” said King Rion, “that I would tell you my name. You may know for a fact that my name is Rion and I am king of Ireland. I hold all lands as far as the Land of the Grazing-Grounds, and the land beyond would be The Story of Merlin mine as well if people could get in there, but no one will go in until its ugly appearance is taken away; this is a blessing that Judas bestowed, and it betokened that he had won all the land up to there. And the ancients say that just as soon as that appearance is taken away, the adventures of the kingdom of Logres will begin to draw to an end. Now I have told you who I am and what my name is. But I will never eat again as long as I know that you are alive. For I was defeated by you and driven from the field, and I will avenge my sorrow on you if I can.” “God help me,” said the young man, “you'll be fasting for a long time, then, for I will never die by your hand. And this my sword defies you to the death! And if you are so bold, you may take vengeance upon the man who threatens to chop off your head!” When the giant heard the youth speaking thus, he became most frightfully angry. He put his shield on his arm and ran upon him [232] holding his sword high, and he meant to strike Arthur on the head, but Arthur thrust his shield against the blow and jumped aside toward the middle of the field, and King Rion hit his shield so hard that a piece of it flew to the ground. Arthur sprang forward and gave him such a blow beside his right eye that he wounded him deeply, and if his sword had not shipped in his hand, he would have put an end to him forever. When the giant felt his blood flowing from his left cheek, he grew so angry that he nearly went mad. He ran against Arthur, for he meant to take him and crush him in his arms, but Arthur avoided him because he did not dare take such a stand against him, and, as he withdrew, he struck many hard blows that hurt him dreadfully. Even so, the giant ran against him waving his sword in his hand, but he could not hold the giant back. And while they were behaving in this way, Nascien, Adragain, and Hervi de Rivel happened to come upon them while fiercely pursuing six Saxons, and all six were kings; one was named Kahanin,2‘ the second Misshapen,2° the third Frenicas, the fourth Coward, the fifth Baufumes,2° and the sixth was the strong King Minadap.2’ Those six kings were riding out very hard just down from the great rock, and they were running their horses, which were strong and fast, at breakneck speed. When the two kings who were fighting each other heard the uproar made by those who were charging so hard in their direction, they looked and saw the six who were fleeing and the three running after them, and King Rion was filled with dread, because he knew that they were most worthy and bold, and he was sure that if he stayed any longer where he was, he could not get away without being killed or put in great danger. Then he went straight for his horse and swiftly mounted, but as he was doing so, King Arthur struck him so hard that he cut off better than a fourth of his helmet, so 24Here kahamus (232, L. 13), a misreading of kahanin(s) found elsewhere (e.g., 232, Il. 37, 41; 409, 1. 27), or cahanin(s) (e.g., 232, 1. 42, 233, 1. 3). 25sommer’s text reads maltaillies (232, 1. 13). 26sommer’s text reads baitrames here (232, 1. 14), but baufumes elsewhere (234, 1. 27, 235, 1. 1). 27Sommer’s text reads maidrap here (232, |. 14), but minadap elsewhere (234, 1. 27, 235, 1. 2). The Story of Merlin that the links in the mail beneath shone through all white, and he dazed him so much that he bent forward over his saddlebow; and if he could have recovered to wield another blow, he would have sent him sprawling from his horse to the ground. But the horse, which was of very great strength, was frightened by the stroke it heard falling, and it ran away with the king up toward the great rock. When King Arthur saw him thus on horseback, he jumped on his horse quickly and began to run him down, spurring his horse to run as fast as it could. And after King Rion had straightened up in the saddle, he looked behind him and saw King Arthur coming up fast and riding him down, and Arthur was unwilling to let him get away. With that he picked up speed to race toward the forest. And the six kings whom the three companions were pursuing were flying so swiftly that they caught up with King Arthur, who kept fast on the giant’s heels and with his sword dealt him, from time to time, heavy blows that fell on the shield he held over his head to take the blows from the good sword he felt to be one of the best in the world. And while the giant was setting his mind to fleeing and King Arthur his to riding him down, Kahanin shouted to Arthur, “Serf, you are making a mistake to run after him, for V’ll fight you for him. You’ll be sorry you left your companions.” When King Arthur heard him thundering at him so loudly, his sword slipped in his hand, and King Rion got away and flew off into the forest. And King Arthur went straight for Kahanin, his sword in his hand, and Kahanin, who was not afraid of him, rode toward him, and they began trading blows on their helmets. And King Kahanin struck King Arthur so hard that he sent him down onto the neck of his horse, [233] and King Arthur hit him back so hard that he cut off a great chunk of his helmet, this mighty blow fell between his shoulder and his shield, and it cut off his left arm where the shield’s straps were held on. And when Kahanin saw that he had been wounded in this way, he ran upon him to grab him and bear him down over his horse’s neck, for he was of very great strength. But King Arthur saw him coming and struck him with his sword between the wrist and the elbow, so that he sent his fist flying still grasping his sword. And when he saw what had become of him, be began to yell and roar like a bull, and his horse bore him away where it wanted. And when the five others saw what had happened to Kahanin, they were filled with great sorrow, so they rode King Arthur down with their swords drawn; he covered himself with his shield, for it would have been unworthy of him to run away from them. They hit him high and low, wherever they thought they could do him the most harm. They cut up his shield in many places, but they did not wound his flesh; but one of them*$ did hit him so roundly on the shield that he cut him in the thigh, and he sent him falling head over heels from his horse. Now behold the three companions spurring to rescue him: Nascien, Adragain, and Hervi of Rivel. And when the other kings saw them coming, they turned in flight, galloping at full speed after King Rion, where they saw him 28sommer’s text shifts to the singular: 2! fer[t] [sic], qual colpe la cutsse st le porte (233, 1. 12). ee) going, and the three companions rode after them because they did not want to let them get away. But now the story falls silent about King Arthur and his companions and goes back to speaking about King Ban and how he was running after the three kings. Now the story says that King Ban rode after the three kings until he came upon them in a great heath in the midst of a forest where they took their stand, for they had caught up with ten of their knights; and they rode against King Ban as soon as they saw him. He hit the first one he came to”? so hard that he split his head into two halves, then he struck the second on the shoulder and sliced his arm off, and he struck the third and sent his head flying. They all began to hit him on the helmet and shield, but they did not wound him in the flesh, for the hauberk he was wearing was of great worth. And while he was fighting them, the four kings whom King Bors was pursuing came up and saw that King Ban was bearing in so close to the ten knights that they did not have room to turn about. And the four kings rushed into the battle to help those whom King Ban was fighting. When they came into the battle, they turned their horses’ heads against the one who had followed them,*9 and King Bors rode headlong into their midst and hit so hard and with such speed that he sent Margot and his horse down to the ground in a heap; then he struck King Gaidou so hard that he sank his sword into his brains. Then King Bors took stock and saw his brother, who was fighting with ten knights, and he spurred his horse and flew into the fray so hard that he bore a Saxon to the ground with his horse falling on top of him, and then he struck another so hard that he hurled him to the ground dead. And the kings he had been following rode toward him and [234] caught up with him in the crowd. They hit him so hard on the helmet that they sent him down onto his horse’s neck, but he was not slow to get back up, and he turned his horse’s head against them and stood facing them, grasping his sword. And the two brothers began striking such mighty blows against those who had attacked them that they did them much harm with their weapons. But they had not been at it for long there before King Rion happened along; he was holding his sword, but was dreadfully wounded and woefully frightened, and he was bleeding quite heavily from two wounds he had, one in the side and the other on the head. And when he saw the fight of the thirteen against the two brothers, he turned to face their way, holding his sword in his hand, for he was most willing to take vengeance for his pain and suffering. When King Rion came to the battle, he rushed in so hard that he sent them scattering, like it or not, and in the onslaught he bore King Bors to the ground with his horse on top of him. Then he raised his sword high to strike King Ban through the head, but Ban threw his shield and struck his horse with his spurs to ward off the blow, which still cut and sliced through as much of him as it reached. And King 2°The text is ambiguous (233, |. 22): quil ataint for qu'il ataint (“whom he comes to”) or qui l’ataint (“who got to him”). 30Not in Sommer’s text, but supplied from the variant in manuscript 105 (233, n. 3). 296 Ban dealt him a great blow with his sword Wrathful;?! he threw his shield out against it, but the blow struck there so hard that it cut through down to the strap by which it hung from his neck, and he sent the shield flying to the ground in two halves. Meanwhile, as soon as the giants saw King Bors thrown onto the ground, they ran against him and hit him very hard and wounded him in many places, and his horse, which was tall and thick, lay on his left thigh and held him fast to the ground so that he could not get back up. And the king entreated God to keep him from being killed or wounded. Then King Ban spurred to that side and struck King Margoras so hard that he sent his head flying, and then he struck again and hit another, whom he sliced in two crosswise right through the backbone, and he stopped beside his brother, who was trying to get back up. And while he was fighting, King Baufumes, King Misshapen, and King Minadap®* happened to come there, for King Arthur and his three companions were riding very hard after them; one of the companions was Nascien, the second Adragain, and the third Hervi de Rivel. And as soon as the three kings saw King Rion fighting, one of ten who were against one knight alone, they turned to that side and ran headlong into the press, and they tried to help King Ban and his brother as best they could. And King Bors pulled and jerked, for he was a man of very great strength, untl he could get up with some distress, and he saw his brother in great danger and defending himself. And as soon as he had got back up, he struck Misshapen, who had come in just before, so hard that he sliced his arm off at the shoulder and cut so deeply that his liver and lungs showed, and he fell to the ground. Then King Bors took his horse and put himself into the saddle, for he was very strong and bold, and when he was mounted, he flew into the press and struck King Rion so hard through his helmet that he cut it into two halves. And King Rion paid him back with such a mighty blow that he cut off half of his shield. Thus began the fighting there that was wild and fierce, and the four others who had just come to the rescue rode into the fighting so fast and each one hit his man so hard that they all bore them dead to the ground. [235] There were slain Minadap, Baufumes, Glorians, and Madolas, for whom King Rion was most sorrowful, for they were his near kinsmen. When King Rion saw such dreadful ill luck turning against him, he was so filled with wrath that he nearly went out of his head. He grabbed his naked sword and ran down King Arthur, and he meant to strike him on the head, but King Arthur turned aside, for he greatly feared the giant’s blow, which fell on his shield so hard that it was split in two down to the boss. King Rion started to pull his sword back out, but King Arthur hit him across the arm so hard that he wounded him dreadfully, and King Rion left his sword in his shield. And when he felt that he was so badly wounded, 3lsommer’s text has couroucese (234, Il. 16-1 7). 32These kings are named, along with two others, 232, Il. 1314. Here the first is called baufumes and the third minadap (234, 1. 27); for Misshapen, see above, n. 25. The Story of Merlin he grew as angry as any could be. And King Arthur®? cast aside his shield with the sword, for it did nothing but hinder him. And when the giant saw that he had lost his sword, he became so angry that he almost lost his mind. He ran King Arthur down on horseback and grabbed him by the shoulders; he meant to take him down by raw strength, and he would have done so if he could have, for he was very strong. When King Arthur felt the giant on him, he threw his sword to the ground, because he was afraid that he might take it away from him by force. Then he put both arms around his horse’s neck, while the giant jerked and pulled, but he could not take him out of the saddle. And King Ban looked around and saw the bout between King Arthur and King Rion, so he spurred to that side because he was very much afraid for King Arthur. The giant looked and saw him coming, and he greatly dreaded King Ban, so he ran at him with his fists, which were big and thick. But King Ban struck him so hard with his sword Wrathful that he broke his hauberk open, cut through him beneath the shoulder, and wounded him very deeply. And when King Rion felt himself so dreadfully wounded and saw his companions lying dead on the ground, he was taken by a mighty fear, for he did not know what to defend himself with, so he turned his horse, which was of very great worth, and fled away as fast as he could go. The companions let him go, for night had fallen, and he went away so full of wrath that he nearly went mad, and he cursed his religion and his beliefs, and swore that he would never in his life give up until he had taken his revenge, and, as soon as he came into his country, he would call together such a great force of men that no land could stand against it, and he said that he would destroy all Britain, bring all of King Arthur’s vassals to harm, and skin alive the king and all his helpers. Thus King Rion went away filled with wrath, and he made his way for days upon end until he came to his country. And King Ban came to King Arthur and asked him whether he was hurt, and King Arthur told him that he was . hale and hardy. “And your sword,” said King Ban, “where is it?” He answered that he had thrown it to the ground as the giant came running to take hold of him with his bare hands, “and I tell you that I have won the richest prize today, one that I love better than the best city there is in the world.” “And what is that?” asked King Ban. “You will see it very soon,” said King Arthur, “if you wish.” Then he dismounted and first went straight to his sword Excalibur, and he wiped it clean of the blood that befouled it, then put it back into its scabbard. Then he went to his shield, drew King Rion’s sword out of it, hung the shield around his neck, and got on his horse. He showed the sword to King Ban, and it cast such a great light that it was a wonder to behold. King Ban held it in high esteem, and they entreated Our Lord soon to grant that 333ommer corrects his manuscript, which bears artus, to read rion (235, 1. 9 and n. 1); he appears to have lost track of the direction the combat is taking. The Story of Merlin they might find some adventure [236] where they might try it out and see whether it was as worthy as it was fair. They were much nearer Aneblayse than they thought, but before they could get there, there befell them an adventure such that the worthiest and bravest would have been hard pressed to come to terms with it. But right now the story falls silent about all of them and goes back to speaking about King Leodagan of Carmelide. 31. Arthur Fights the Saxons.’ Here the story says that when King Leodagan saw that the giants had been put to rout, he rode very hard after them unti] dark night had closed in, and he and his men had slain many. Then it happened that King Leodagan and Cleodalis his seneschal were cut off from their men because of the forest, which was quite dark, and no one belonging to them knew what had become of them. And when King Leodagan’s army saw that night had fallen, they began to turn back, but the companions of the Round Table did not turn about, nor did King Arthur’s companions; rather they kept on riding the Saxons down with all their might and killed many of them. And the story says that King Leodagan and Cleodalis ran after Zidras and Caulas the Chieftain,” Collocaulus,? and Dorilas until they had fled far from their men in the forest, and when they had gone a long way, they fell in behind a good two hundred eighty other men of theirs who were sorrowing and angry about their losses. When the four who were in flight were safe, they shouted to their men, and when these took stock, they saw that there were only two who were riding after the four, so they ran upon them with all their might. King Leodagan and Cleodalis withdrew under an oak tree which was most fair and leafy, and their backs were to it. There King Leodagan was struck down and his horse beneath him. And when Cleodalis saw him, he got down from his horse and put him on his own horse, and he told him to ride away and he would stay behind there. When King Leodagan saw his seneschal’s faithfulness, he sighed deeply inside his helmet and sorrowed in his heart that he had wronged him so much, and he said in his heart that he wished to repay him for this good deed and reward him for it, if he should live so long. Meanwhile, he was defending himself very hard, for their enemies had fallen on them fiercely, and the oak that was at their backs was a great help to them. So the story stops speaking about them and goes back to Guiomar and Sinados, who were first cousins, and they had fought very well in the battle. Now the story says that Guiomar and Sinados had ridden so hard after the Saxons in the forest that they left their men far behind and never heard or saw them, and they were hot on the heels of twelve giants. And when the twelve had been long in flight, they caught up with a good 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 236-243. 2The word is laumacour (236, 1. 16), for l’almagor (from the Arabic). 3Hfere Sommer’s text reads caulus (236, 1. 16). Later he is called Collocaulus (241, 1. 13, 242, 1. 14). 2o7 fifty of their companions who had fled in fear. Guiomar and Sinados knew not a word about this until they had, just the two of them,’ rushed headlong into their midst; and each one struck his man down dead. And when the Saxons saw that there were only two of them, they drew their swords and fell very hard upon them; thus a great fight was begun, for the two knights were worthy and bold. But they had been there for only a short while when a knight rode in very daringly to help them. There the fighting was rough and lasted [237] a very long time. But now the story falls silent for a while about that, and we will tell you about another adventure. In this part the story says that when the giants were put to flight, Antor,> who brought King Arthur up, Kay the Seneschal, Girflet, Lucan the Wine Steward, Meralgis,® Gornain Cadrus,’ Gales the Bald,® who had been put in with them, Blioberis, Galesconde, the Ugly Worthy,? Calogrenant,!° and Kehedin!! the Fair—these twelve were riding very hard through the thick forest after the Saxons, and they killed and wounded many of them on the run.!@ The Saxons fled very fast before them, and they rode after them until they cut them down, at the heels of King Alipansin, who had with him two hundred Saxons, on very good horses, who were most angry for the harm done to King Rion and because they did not know what had become of him. And when the twelve companions caught sight of them, they rode headlong into the midst of them, and they began a most wondrous battle, for the companions were most worthy and bold. The fighting there was fierce, and it lasted until midnight, when]3 they broke apart and began fighting in three clusters: in the first were King Leodagan and Cleodalis his seneschal, in the second 4The text reads si abreue com il estoient (236, 1. 37): “as reduced in number as they were.” 5The following companions are first listed among the fortytwo knights who ride to rescue Cleodalis (148, ll. 3-23). Here many of the names appear garbled, as subsequent notes demonstrate. SFarlier meraugis de port le gues (148, |. 18): Meralgis of Portford; here ameraugis (237, |. 5). TEarlier gornains cadrus (148, Il. 18-19); here agornain & cadrus son compaignon (237, 1. 5): “Agornain and Cadrus his companion.” The latter is to be rejected not only because Cadrus does not appear separately in the earlier list, but more especially because, with the independent Cadrus, the knights total thirteen, not twelve, as the text specifies (237, 1. 7). Gornain Cadrus is named later (239, 1. 37). 8sommer’s text has ablechin le uoir (237, 1. 6): Ablecin the Right One (?). Such a name does not appear in the earlier list; however, Gales the Bald, which is found there (148, ]. 22), recurs later in the same group (e.g., 239, 1. 38). 9Sommer’s text has alait hardi (237, 1. 7); the earlier has & lais hardis (148, ll. 19-20), which recurs later (239, 1. 38). 10The text has atalogrenant (237, |. 7). Sommer conjectures that this should read Calogrenant (237, n. 3), which is consistent with the earlier list (148, 1. 15). UHere akehedin (237, 1. 7); Sommer conjectures Kehedin (n. 4), which is consistent with the earlier list (148, 1. 17). l2gommer’s text reads en la cache (“in the chase”) and continues quil font parmi la grant forest (237, 1. 9): “through the great forest.” 13gommer’s text has anchois que (237, |. 16): “before.” 298 were Sinados and Guiomar, and in the third were King Arthur’s twelve companions. Elsewhere were King Arthur, King Ban, King Bors his brother, and three of the companions of the Round Table, as the story has told you before, and all the others had gone back toward the city of Aneblayse.'* And when they came into the meadows outside Aneblayse and did not find any of their companions, they thought that they had been killed, and when the saw that neither King Arthur nor King Ban nor King Bors nor King Leodagan had been found, they mourned most sorrowfully, for they truly thought that they were dead. Even so, they waited to hear any news that might come, so they camped in the open meadows, for they did not want to go into the city, but kept watch over the city very well until daybreak. So the story stops speaking about them for a while and goes back to speak about Merlin. The story says here that when the Saxons and the giants were put to rout and driven from the fields, and the chase began, Merlin rode after a company of a good ten thousand men until he ran them down on a wide heath. Galahad, lord of the Land of the Grazing-Grounds, led that company, and as soon as they had come into the heath, Merlin cast a wondrous spell. He made a wide, roaring river well up before them in the way they had to go, and it fell so swiftly from the mountainsides that even the boldest among them took fright; and when they tried to turn back, they saw a fog coming in so thick and so fearsome that they did not know where to go, so they stayed there all night and did not go back or forward. And why Merlin cast this spell, the story will surely tell you, for it is right that it should tell you the truth about it in just the way the truth must run. [238] Now the story says, and it was true, that in the borderlands of Carmelide and Bredigan, and toward the lands of King Rion, that is toward the west, there was a most wealthy kingdom where King Amant was lord. King Uther Pendragon had waged war against that kingdom for a very long time, while he was alive, because King Amant would not become his liegeman, and his lands were so strong that he was not afraid of Uther. Even so, King Uther Pendragon bore down on him!}5 until he won from him a very rich castle that was called Charroie. This castle had five hundred knights in fee, each of whom owed the garrison a full three months every year whenever they might be called to serve, and the domain stretched for twenty leagues on every side. King Uther Pendragon gave that castle and the whole domain to King Bors of Gaunes and his heirs, for he held King Uther Pendragon in high esteem for as long as he was alive and helped him fight his enemies. And as soon as King Bors became lord of the castle, he gave it to his brother Guinebal to keep. Guinebal was a very good clerk, wise, skilled in fighting, bold, and he was his teacher. And King Amant was most unhappy about that. And when he heard it said that King Arthur was in King Leodagan’s land and that, meanwhile, the Saxons had fallen upon Britain, King Amant brooded and then thought that he would never, for a long while, have a better time than riglit then to win back his castle he had lost so long before, so he called his men Msommer’s text reads cyte de daneblaise (237, |. 22), cf. defors daneblaise (ll. 22-23) , etc. 15gommer’s text has les greua (238, 1. 6): “harmed them.” The Story of Merlin and brought them together, and soon there were a good seven thousand and more. So he set out and rode until he came to the valley where King Galahad had stopped with his men, who were a good ten thousand strong, and they had stopped there for fear of the water that Merlin had brought forth. And on the Friday morning after Whitsunday, it was still and the weather was fair and mild, and the water had gone away and the spell was broken, so the Saxons got on their horses and took to the road. But they had not gone far before they met King Amant, who had set out toward the castle of Charroie. When King Galahad saw King Amant and his men,!® he thought that they belonged to King Leodagan, who had ridden after them. On both sides they were all riding good horses. King Amant’s men rode hard and fast against King Galahad’s, who welcomed them very warmly with the tips of their lances, for many of them were good, strong knights, and harsh, fierce fighting began that lasted the whole day. But right now the story falls silent and does not say any more about them; rather it goes back to speaking about King Arthur, the two brother kings, and the three companions of the Round Table, Nascien, Adragain, and Hervi of Rivel. Here the story says that when King Arthur had pulled his sword out of the shield, he showed it to his companions, and they were all very glad; they esteemed it highly and praised it. Then they set out on the way back to Aneblayse. !7 They thought they were keeping to the right road, but they went astray when they turned to the left onto an old, grassy trail where it was very dark because of woods that were deep and high and leafed out as in the month of May; the moon, which had been full three days before, had not yet risen. And after [239] they had ridden a little while, they began to hear blows in a far-off battle resounding through the forest, so they went toward those parts, as the trail was taking them there. And as they drew nearer, they knew from the voices that it was their men who were still fighting the giants whom they had ridden after, so they hurried along toward the voices they had heard. The moon began to rise, and as they came still closer they could see a great battle, in which three knights were fighting against more than fifty Saxons; and after they were near enough to make them out, King Arthur recognized Guiomar and Sinados, but they could not make out who the third one was, although they did see that he was worthy, bold, and skilled, and the six companions who came upon the fight praised and esteemed him highly. They let their horses run and rode headlong into their midst so hard that they left them shaking, and they struck to the right and left, and they killed or brought down as many as they met. There King Arthur skillfully tried out Marmiadoise, the worthy sword that had belonged to King Rion, for the story bears witness to his having slain more than ten all by himself. And when the three knights saw that they had got such a wealth of help, they gave their horses free rein to run against them, and caused such a great slaughter that each one sent his man sprawling to the ground dead, and they dealt with 16“and his men” not in Sommer’s text (238, |. 27), but implicit in the plurals that follow immediately. MsSommer’s text has daneblayse (238, 1. 39). The Story of Merlin them in such a way that in very little time they had slain or wounded all but seven of them, who fled away into the woods with the others, who wanted very much to kill them if they could catch up with them, hot on their heels. But they had not been riding after the seven for long when they heard wondrously hard beating on helmets and shields, so that the great woods resounded with it. Then King Ban spoke and said to King Bors that they would have to delight in fighting all night, and King Arthur}8 said that he would not mind because he had not thoroughly tested the good sword he had won. “What?” said King Ban. “Haven't you already tried it out and tested it in this first fight?” “Not at all, sir,” said King Arthur, “for there were too few men. What’s more, you and the others brought so many of them down that I could not test it as I would wish.” Then the barons smiled at what he had said, and they found him all the worthier, and they praised him because they had beheld his valorous deeds, so they said that he would be a worthy man if he lived long enough. While they were thus talking, they drew close to the combat, which was heavy and deadly, and when they were near they saw a good hundred Saxons who were fighting hard against twelve knights, of whom four were on foot and eight on horseback, and they were all holding their own. And when they came closer still, they saw that it was their companions who had come with them to Carmelide, twelve of them by their reckoning; the four who were on foot were first Antor, second Gornain Cadrus, third Gales the Bald, and fourth Blioberis, and a fifth, the Ugly Worthy, was brouglit down from his horse! right before their eyes, but he was defending himself with great strength. When King Arthur saw Antor on foot, no one had to ask whether he was sorrowful, for he showed it plainly, and as he was coming nearer to the fighting, he spurred his horse, his naked sword in his hand, and stmick the first man he met so hard that he split him down to the waist, then he struck the second so that he sent his head flying, [240] and then the third and the fourth, and he began such an onslaught among them that it was a wonder to behold. And King Arthur fought so well with his good sword that he cut everyone he fell upon, and he said that King Rion was not wrong to love that sword, for Excalibur would never be worth anything beside this one, and he could work with it any way he wanted. Then the blows started up again even harder and more wondrous, for the twelve companions were very worthy and bold, and the six who came to their rescue were so skillful that they got the five who were on foot back on their horses; and then they rode against the Saxons in such a fierce and wondrous onslaught that they put them all to the rout and drove them from the field, and they dealt with them so harshly that no more than sixteen of them got away. And they went back gladdened and happy by the adventure that Our Lord had sent them. When King Arthur and his companions had helped rescue the twelve companions, as you have heard, and as 18¢4mmer’s text has il (239, |. 23), but the Harley manuscript specifies, as the context requires, that it is King Arthur (n. 1). 19Fr0m his horse” not in Sommer’s text, but implicit from the context (239, ll. 38-39). 299 they were riding back, they happened to meet Merlin, holding the dragon standard, who was riding their way. And as soon as he saw them coming, he said, “Ah! King Arthur, why aren’t you and your companions riding faster? For you don’t know the great harm that awaits you up here, unless God puts His mind to it. King Leodagan and Cleodalis his seneschal are fighting against more than fifteen giants, and they have already been brought down from their horses. They will soon be lost if you do not help them out. Now follow me, for I am going straight there!” And when they heard what Merlin had to tell them, they spurred after him, and the dragon that Merlin bore threw out from its mouth such a bright light and such great billows of fire that the twenty-one companions could see clearly where to go even though the night was darker than any in winter. And they rode, Merlin leading and the others behind him, until they came to two oak trees, where the two knights were still fighting very hard, for they had great courage and much strength. But they were woefully beleaguered, for they were both on foot and had fallen many times to their knees. When Merlin and his companions came upon the two worthies fighting, as they had been doing so long, King Leodagan had fallen to the ground, for he was so tired and he had been worn down so hard by the blows he had given and taken that he could no longer stand on his feet, so he went sprawling to the ground. Anyone who saw him in such a plight would feel deeply sorry for him. And the giants thought then that they would take him prisoner, [241] but Cleodalis leapt forward with his sword, and he defended him so well that none was bold enough to dare lay a hand on him. Then Merlin and his companions came up, and when they drew near enough to recognize them, Merlin shouted, “Now at them, noble knights! Now we’ll see who is a knight! Here you can show your skill and your boldness. Don’t worry if there are more of them than you, for more of your companions will come to your aid.” Then they flew headlong into their midst as fast as their horses could run, and they hit them and struck them down and broke the press, and at last they came to the two worthy knights who were beneath the oaks and still fighting as best they could. For King Leodagan had got up and was defending himself with all his might, and they quickly put him back on his horse.?° And the twenty-three knights were so worthy and so handy that they killed and wounded many of them. But when Zidras, Caulas! and Collocaulus saw the great damage they were doing to them, even though there were so few of them, each shouted to his knights, “Now at them! Shouldn’t we be ashamed that so few men have outfought us? There are a good seven score of us fighting against no more than a handful of them! Now avenge the harm and the hardship they have inflicted on us.” When the Saxons heard the will of their lord, they gave their horses free rein and charged, and they fell hard upon 20sommer’s text adds qui quen pesast (241, 1. 11): “whomever it might worry/whether they liked it or not.” 2lHere Sommer’s text reads callas, but elsewhere the name is caulus (236, |. 16, 242, 1. 16). 300 them, but they defended themselves fiercely. There? King Arthur, King Ban, King Bors, and Nascien, those four, did wonders of strength, as did the nineteen others, and when Merlin saw that the fighting was going thus, he left them and went into the forest. He did not tarry long before he brought back with him twelve knights, and they rushed in among the giants. Then Nascien, Adragain, and Hervi of Rivel looked and knew that they were beside their companions of the Round Table. Then the fighting grew heavy and wondrous, and Merlin went back into the forest, wherever he wanted to go, and he stayed there a very long while. And when he came back he brought twenty knights with him, and they drove headlong into the fighting with great strength. It was plain from the look of their armor that they had not been taking their ease! And they killed and brought down as many as they met on their way, and the ones who had come before them looked and saw that they were some of King Arthur’s companions. And they drew into formation, one after the other, for [242] they were very bold and skilled in knighthood, and Merlin still carried the dragon before them. Then he went to the three kings and said to them, “Do you want to know,” he said, “how those giants will be put to rout” And they said that they could hardly wait. “You must know,” said Merlin, “that there are but four men in this place who are keeping them going.” “And where are they?” asked King Ban. “Follow me now,” said Merlin, “and I'll soon show them to you if you dare to see them.” Then he spurred his horse and charged so hard that he knocked down as many as met his horse’s chest, and he held up the dragon, which gave off such a bright light that they could see each other clearly. When Merlin saw the four kings, he showed them to King Arthur and said, “Now you can put that good sword you have won to the test.” And he looked at them and wanted very much to have at them, for he was sure that they were the ones Merlin had told him about. But he was not so quick that he could fall upon them before Nascien was there, his sword in his hand, riding to meet King Collocaulus; he struck him with his sword right on his helmet and cut through down to his teeth, and Collocaulus fell to the ground dead. “Now there is one fewer!” said Merlin, and he said to King Arthur, “Now we’ll see whom you'll hit!” And King Arthur struck Caulas and sent his head flying. And King Ban struck the third one so hard that he sliced his arm off at the shoulder and cut so deeply that his liver and lungs showed. And King Bors hit Dorilas, an emir, on his helmet and cut him down to the shoulders. And when the other companions saw that they had fought so well, they rode against the Saxons so hard that there was not one of the enemy who was not brought down bleeding 22Sommer’s text adds an elliptical fist merlin & (241, 1. 20): “did Merlin and”; but ical .2t#j. fisent meruilles (“these four did wonders”) in the next line (1. 21) and the subsequent mention of the nineteen others (1. 22) suggest that the introductory statement should be eliminated. The Story of Merlin and dying, and when the giants saw that those who had been their leaders and lords had been slain, and that the Christians were doing them such harm, they said that anyone would be a fool who waited to be killed. So they turned and fled through the forest, each man for himself, and the Christians wanted to ride after them, but Merlin held them back and told them not to worry about giving chase, for in time men about whom stories would be told would mete out grief and sorrow to them. They then left at a slow gait and rode until they came out of the forest, and dawn was beginning to break when they got to the tents where the Christians were camped. And the guards recognized them and came out to meet them. They were very glad to see them, for they thought that they had all been killed, and the news was spread throughout the army that King Arthur had come back with King Leodagan, King Ban and his brother, and all their other companions. And a great store of food was made ready for them, for they had had nothing to eat for a long time, but first they went to sleep and to take their ease. When they had slept, the tablecloths were spread and they sat down, and they ate and drank a great deal, for they had rested well, and they certainly deserved it. After they had eaten and the tablecloths were taken away, they brought together all the great spoils they had won and put it into a heap, and King Arthur divided it following Merlin’s advice. King Leodagan had no part in it, nor, after giving his daughter to King Arthur, when he knew who King Arthur and the worthy men with him were, did he undertake to do anything other than serve and honor him. And when King Arthur had given out the wealth, so that nothing was left, he let it be known throughout the army that if there were any young knights*® [243] who wanted to win booty and would go with him wherever he would lead them,*4 he would give them so much when they came back that they would never be poor another day in their lives. And so many of them came forward from here and there that it was nothing short of a wonder, for many wished always to be in his company because of his openhandedness, and they swore and pledged that they would never fail him. He retained twenty thousand, and he could have taken more if he had wished, but he said he did not want to strip the kingdom of men, for fear that they could not defend themselves if anyone came into the land to do wrong. And he told them that if the need arose, King Leodagan® should send word to them to come to him, and they swore to do so, however far away” he might be. With that King Arthur left the others and took away the twenty thousand troops along with King Ban, King Bors, King Leodagan, and the companions of the Round Table. And after King Bors had ridden with them awhile, he took 23sommer’s text has bacheler (242, 1. 43), technically a squire aspiring to knighthood (also 243, 1. 24) (seen. 24). 2411 Sommer’ s text, in the singular (243, 1. 1), as is the antecedent (242, 1. 43), but subsequently shifts to the plural. 25sommer’s text has only the singular pronoun (243, Il. 8-9). Although King Leodagan leaves with Arthur, he accompanies him only as far as Carhaix and then returns (244, ll. 24-28). 26sommer’s text has en si estraigne lieu (243, 1. 9): “in however strange/foreign a place.” The Story of Merlin his leave of them and went back toward the castle of Charroie, and he took with him forty champions who had come with King Arthur into the land of Carmelide and enough other knights to number five hundred, and they made their way until they came to the castle of Charroie, and they had no hindrance whatsoever. And when those in the stronghold saw them, they were very glad, because King Bors had not been there for a long time, and he stayed there a whole week.?” But with this the story falls silent about him for a while, and it goes back to talking about King Amant and King Galahad and how they fought. 32. Bors Kills Amant; Gawain and his Brothers Knighted.’ Now the story says that it was a great battle and the fighting was deadly where King Amant and King Galahad were struggling against each other. For the giants were ten thousand strong, and there were many a good, bold knight among them, and King Amant had many young knights* who were very skilled at arms; and the battle lasted all day until the Saxons, of whom there were ten thousand, were about to be routed, and would have been had it not been for an adventure that happened to them. For the retinue of Zidras, which had fled King Arthur, happened upon them, and they certainly needed them because they had been dealt with so harshly that the ten thousand had been worn down to half. And King Amant had also lost half of the seven thousand he had brought with him; there the fighting was frightful and deadly, for King Amant’s men were in great distress, but it was helpful to them that the others were tired and worn out because they had not stopped fighting the day before and had not slept al] that night, and they were all the more harried and all the less fit because of it. And yet they went on fighting on every side until King Amant was utterly routed, and no more than three thousand of his men got away. There King Amant suffered a very great loss, and all those who remained alive were filled with great sorrow. They camped in a heath and were downcast, brooding about their kinsmen and friends whom they saw lying slain on the open heath, and they mourned so much that they did not eat or sleep all night. The next morning, when it was light, they went looking for the dead bodies and buried them, for the Saxons had all left. Then the news came to King Amant that King Bors was in the castle of Charroie. When King Amant heard that, he asked [244] how many men-at-arms he might have with him, and they said that he might have as many as five hundred knights. Then he told his council that he would not make a foray into the land because he had so few men left, but he would keep an eye on him until he could meet him in a place where he might easily fight him. 27sommer’s text has only .viij. tous plains (243, |. 18): “eight whole.” 1Corresponds to Sommer, 243-256. 2Sommer’s text has bachelers (243, 1. 24); see above ch 31. n. 23. 301 “For we have,” he said, “more men that he does, and still he comes there; I mean to succeed in another way, unless he can stop me.”9 Thus King Amant spelled out his wishes, and he could certainly allow himself to do that if he pleased, but some were thinking to avenge and so to renew their shame.4 So the story falls silent right here about King Amant and King Bors of Gaunes, until another time when my matter brings me back to tell what happened to them; and it speaks about King Arthur and his companions, who were riding away toward the city of Carhaix. Here the story says that King Arthur and his companions rode until they came to the wealthy city of Carhaix, where they were welcomed very happily. There they stayed for two full days, and on the third King Leodagan came to King Arthur and asked him to wed his daughter Guenevere, but Merlin told him that first he would have to accomplish a hard task: “But first he must go to the kingdom of Benoic.” And he told him the reason, but it was in secret because he did not want it to be known to anyone who was to go there. And when King Leodagan had heard about the task, he asked him to think about coming back as soon as he could. Merlin said that it would do no good to ask, but that all should get themselves ready, “for in the morning they will have to ride out.” Then King Arthur asked him, “Sir, shall we not wait for King Bors, who is in the castle of Charroie?” “You will wait for him,” answered Merlin, “at your castle of Bredigan.” And the king said, “As you wish.” They then made ready to go, got themselves dressed and armed, and in the morning set out on the road. So King Arthur left King Leodagan, and they kissed each other at their leave-taking, and Guenevere entreated him to come back soon. ‘For I will never rest,” she said, “or be happy until I see you again.” And he said that he would like to have come back already. With that, they parted, and King Arthur left with King Ban, and Merlin rode before them and led them; and the three of them led the companions of the Round Table and the twenty thousand men-at-arms the king had engaged at Carmelide. And King Ban chose a messenger and sent him to the castle of Charroie to his brother King Bors, and he bade him come to Bredigan, as they had already set out, and there they would wait for him; and he should come as soon as he could. And the messenger made his way until he came to King Bors, and he told him what his brother had asked him to do. And when King Bors heard it, he took to the road toward Bredigan, and Guinebal his brother went along with him, and they made 3Sommer’s text seems somewhat obscure: tout autrement en quide tou esploitier sen lui ne remaint (244, ll. 5-6). 4Sommer’s text has tels quide sa honte bien uengter qui lacroist (244, 1. 7): “He who believes he avenges well his shame increases it.” The proverb is attested from the end of the thirteenth century (Morawski, no. 2351: “Teus cuide venchier sa honte qui la croist’). It is found in Cotgrave (see Honte): “Tel cuide vanger sa honte qui l’'accroist”; the translation is Cotgrave’s. 302 their way until they came to the Perilous Forest, which was afterwards called the Forest of No Return. And why it was so named the story will spell out for you. The story says here that King Bors and Guinebal his brother had gone into the forest, and they had no more than forty companions with them. As it happened, they took a path to the right, and they rode at a fast gait [245] until they had gone deep into the forest. Then they found a most wondrous adventure, for they found an open meadow enclosed all about by a hedge, and within was the most beautiful dancing by ladies, maidens, and knights they had ever seen in their lives. To one side sat a child, and it was the fairest young lady there ever was, and to the other side a knight, who was at least fifty years old, was also seated in a folding chair. When King Bors saw the lady who was so beautiful, he dismounted, as did Guinebal his brother and all the others who saw her. And when the lady saw them coming, she rose to meet them, for she was noble, well-bred, and knowledgeable, and she took off her wimple, for she was fully aware that they had come to see her. And King Bors greeted her, and she returned his greeting in a most courtly way. They then sat down on the green grass and watched the merry-making. And Guinebal looked at the lady, and he yielded his heart and feelings to her, so that she stole into his heart and he could think of no one else but her. And then the young lady said that she would be very lucky if she could have such happiness all the days of her life. And Guinebal told her that she would indeed be so happy, if she wished and if she did not find him wanting. And she answered that she would never do that.® “Now tell me,” she said, “how can I have such happiness?” “In truth,” he answered, “if you granted me your love for all the days of your life, I would do everything, for your sake, to keep the dances going, so that all men and women who might come here and see the dancing would have to stay here. And this would go on until there came a knight who had never wronged Love in any way. Such a one is bound to be the best knight of his time.” And she answered that she would never refuse him, but he should hold to what he had told her. : “Now tell me,” said Guinebal, “whether or not you have ever had a lover.”” She said she had not. Never had such a good girl as she come out of any mother’s womb. “And yet,” she said, “I am lady of a kingdom they call the Inhospitable Land Upheld.”8 With that Guinebal told her that he was ready to fulfill his oath, and she gave herself wholly to him because he was 5Sommer’s text adds entre lui & sa compaignie (244, |. 37): “he (that is, King Bors?] along with his companions.” 6This passage translates a difficult idiom, repeated in Sommer’s text: & sen lut ne remanoit. & ele dist que en lui ne remandroit il ia (245, Il. 16-17); it recurs, translated somewhat differently, in 244, 1. 6 (above n. 3). 7The word in Sommer’s text is segnor (245, |. 25) (“lord”), which would normally be taken to mean “husband”, however, the context seems to call for a different kind of meaning. 8In Sommer’s text la terre estrange soustenue (245, |. 27). The Story of Merlin most handsome. And the old knight said that he would put a chair there that would be all ready for the knight who was faithful to Love to sit in. And King Bors told him that, as this adventure had happened to him, he would set his golden crown out there, the one he had brought with him from the castle of Charroie, for the knight to wear because he deserved it so much. Then Guinebal and the maiden swore to each other their oaths, which they would keep willingly and faithfully for as long as they lived; and she pledged that, even if Guinebal died before she did, the dancing would not stop until the knight came who had never forsworn Love. Then Guinebal cast his spells and started the dance in the way you have heard, so that the dancers would not stop? at any time until the one came who had never wronged Love, except to take their meals and go rest and sleep, and two of them would be dancing at all mes. When the dance was started, the maiden told him that he should make another pastime that would go on forever and that everyone would talk about after his death. Then with his own hands Guinebal made a chessboard with two sets of men, the pawns [246] with the rest of the household, that were very beautiful: one was of gold and the other ivory, for he was very clever in the work he wished to undertake. When Guinebal had got the chessboard and chessmen ready, so that whoever wanted to play could use them, he so worked his spells and his magic that if anyone!? sat down at the chessboard to play and moved a pawn or bishop or knight or queen or rook or king, the chessboard would make a move against him. And no one would know how to play so well that the chessboard would not checkmate him in the corner, like it or not, nor would the chessboard ever lose a game until the best knight in the world put it into checkmate; and he would have to be so endowed with grace that he had never betrayed Love, and he would have to be the son of a king and queen. In the way you have heard Guinebal started the dance and set up the chessboard. Afterwards he made up other tricks and taught them to the lady, and later she worked them many times after he had died. For he made the castle spin around and the dances that Meralgis found afterward in the City Without a Name. When Guinebal had accomplished all these things, King Bors took to the road. And King Amant found out from a spy that King Bors had left the castle of Charroie and was heading toward Bredigan, where King Arthur and King Ban were waiting for him. Then King Amant had his men mount their horses—as many as the five hundred who were left from the fighting—and they rode until they came to the Perilous Forest, to the way out on the road leading from the castle of Charroie that King Bors would be taking; and they camped!! in tents and pavilions within the forest °The verb is in the plural, with implicit reference to dancers (245, 1. 38). 101m Sommer’s text the subject and verb here are in the plural (246, 1. 5), but the pronoun at the end of the independent clause is in the singular (246, 1. 7). Msommer’s text has the singular se loga (246, 1. 20). The Story of Merlin so that they would not be caught sight of!* before King Bors rode out and left the dance that his brother Guinebal had set up so that all the knights who came there afterwards should stay and dance until Lancelot of the Lake came there, who undid it all, and he sent the chessboard that checkmated the players to Queen Guenevere, who was King Arthur’s wife. And because all the people who came there stayed there to dance, the forest was named the Forest of No Return. And when King Bors had gone from there, he knew nothing about King Amant before he came upon the tents and pavilions and saw his men. When King Bors beheld the pavilions, he sent to find out what men-at-arms they were, and they told him that it was King Amant, who had come there to spy on him. And when King Bors heard that, he ordered his men to arm and he withdrew to a stream that ran through the forest. And it was already pitch dark, and they kept their armor on all night; [247] and as soon as they saw the first light of day, they got on their horses and rode against the others. When they had got close to them, King Bors sent word to King Amant to come speak with him, and he went. And as soon as they met, King Amant said to him, “Sir, it is true that you sent for me, and I have come here; and I tell you that you have done me a very great wrong with respect to a castle of mine that you have taken from me. This is why I would beseech you, on my pledge that I will be your faithful friend, to give it back to me before anything else is done.” “Sir,” said King Bors, “the castle you are asking me for, it was not I who took from you, but the one from whom you held it as a fief, that is, King Uther Pendragon, may God rest his soul, whose liegeman you were to have been, but you were so full of pride that you never found it worthwhile to serve him as you ought and you did not swear fealty to him. And so he took away from you that which made you his vassal, and when he took it away from you, he entrusted it to me for safekeeping, because I had served him for a long time. But I have something much better to offer you. Come to Bredigan, where King Arthur is waiting for me, and swear fealty to him, as the barons will tell you you ought, and I will give the castle back to you free and clear.” “You will give me the castle in any case,”!5 said King Amant. “Not at all, sir,” answered King Bors, “for I owe you nothing;!* but become King Arthur’s liegeman, and I will give back to you the castle I have in my charge.” ‘I'll do nothing of the sort,” said King Amant, “for I'll never be his vassal as long as I live.” “Since you will not take my advice,” answered King Bors, “I will hold my tongue, and you'll never hear me say any more about it.” “Sir,” said King Amant, “you have brought but a few men with you, and I have brought few of my own. If we fought a battle against each other, great harm would surely 12Sommer’s text has the singular guil ne fust aperceus (246, |. 21). 13gommer’s text has Nen feres vous autre cose (247, ll. 16-17): “You will do nothing else about it.” 14sommer’s text has de vous ne tieng ie riens (247, Il. 17-18): “I hold nothing from you/I have no feudal obligation to you.” 303 be done on both sides, so let’s do something else. You are here on behalf of King Arthur, whom you hold as your overlord. Let us then fight in single combat, man to man, and agree that, if you defeat me, the castle will be yours free and clear and I will go off with you to Bredigan, where King Arthur is, and I will swear fealty to him for all my lands, I and all my barons. And if I should happen to defeat you, you will give the castle back to me and then go away a free man, for I ask nothing else of you. And thus we can bring to an end a thing that could be so hurtful.” “And if one of us dies,” asked King Bors, “what will happen then?” “If you kill me,” answered King Amant, “my men will go off with you and will swear fealty to King Arthur. And if you should happen to be killed, my castle will be left to me and your men will be free to go wherever they will, and if they wish to become my liegemen, I’ll willingly take them and with a glad heart.” Then they swore to keep this pledge, and they made all their men swear to hold to it without breaking their oath. With that they went onto a most beautiful heath, for they already had their armor on. And Ulfin and Bretel came straight to King Bors, along with the forty companions, and they said to him, “Sir, what are you trying to do? You want to go against that king man to man, but you will not fight him on our advice! Rather let’s all of us fight, for they won’t hold out against us. Are you afraid that they cannot be put to rout because there are more of them than us? [248] Never think of us as knights if we do not make all of them come begging you for mercy or else are killed trying! We will not let you fight him man to man; we would be blamed for it by your brother and King Arthur.” “Hold your tongues!” said King Bors. “Since he has asked!5 me for single combat, I will not go back on my word to him, for I would be forever dishonored. Say no more about it, I beg you.” And when they saw that he would have it no other way, they let it go and spoke no more about it. Meanwhile, Guinganbresil!® and his lord Brandalis!? came to King Amant and said to him, “Sir, what do you mean to do? A man as clever as you are ought not undertake combat and risk death out of greed for land or money.” “May God never help me,” answered King Amant, “if I ever leave here before it is all mine or I have lost it all!” “Now I'll tell you what to do,” said Guiromelant. “You will pit the two best men from over there against two from this side, and you will not fight, we will be better assured of you and our lands, for we have no doubts that they will be defeated.” “No one will fight but him and me,” said King Amant, “for that is what we have sworn to each other.” 1Ssommer’s text has ati (?) (248, 1. 4), with the variant from the Harley manuscript provided in a footnote: requis (248, n. 1): “requested.” 16Here guigaubresil (248, 1. 8), but later the more familiar ginganbresil (e.g., 249, 1.35). l7Here braudalis (248, 1. 9), but later brandelis (249, 1. 35). 304 “You can then be sure,” said Guiromelant, “that if harm befalls you—God keep you from it!—we will not swear fealty to King Arthur nor will any other man here with us who is a landholder!” When King Bors heard the arguing, he called Girflet and Guiret of Lambale over and said to them, “Go to King Amant and tell him for me not to have any dispute or quarrel with any of his men over the fealty he has pledged to me he would swear, for if I should happen to win, his men will be free to leave and go wherever they will.” And they went and told him this. And when King Amant heard it, he found it most praiseworthy. He then rode to the middle of the heath, where King Bors was already ready and waiting. And as soon as King Amant got there, they withdrew each to his side and then rode against each other, holding their lances to their chests, and struck each other so hard that their lances drove through their shields and against their hauberks. Their double-mailed hauberks were strong and sturdy, and their lances flew into pieces with the shock of the blows each one dealt the other, for both worthy kings!® were strong and bold. And they crashed together with their shields and bodies so hard that they were stunned, and each one thought that his eyes had spurted from his head. As it happened, King Amant fell from his horse so bewildered that he did not know whether it was day or night, and he lay on the ground for a long time in a daze from the hard jolt. But King Bors held himself on his horse and did not fall, for he was a very strong man, but he was still very dizzy. And when he had recovered from his dizziness, he drew his sword out of its scabbard—his was a sword of great merit, and afterwards Lionel his son struck many a fair blow with it, and he was most worthy and a good knight later on, just as the story will spell it out to you later. As soon as King Bors had drawn his sword, he looked about him and saw King Amant, who was still lying on the ground in a daze. He drew up to him, got down from his horse, and gave it to a young squire to watch over—he was very [249] worthy and bold, and his name was Galesconde. And when he had dismounted, he went to the spot where King Amant still lay in a daze, and he brought the tip of his sword to rest on King Amant’s chest and began to nudge him. And he said to him, “King Amant, get up, for you have been asleep for a long time. The day is going by, and I have far to ride. It is not courtly of you to keep me waiting here.” After a while King Amant came out of his faint. He had heard King Bors call him, and he had understood what he said to him, and in his heart he held him in high esteem and blessed him for waiting so long without hitting him, for Bors was behaving toward him with greater courtliness and nobility than he would have shown Bors if he had had the opportunity. And he quickly leapt up and drew his sword, which was of great merit, out of its scabbard. He was deeply ashamed to have found himself lying on the ground, so he thrust his shield over his head, ran straight for King Bors, and dealt as heavy a blow as he could strike with his arm; 18The expression here is & baron (248, |. 30): “barons” or “worthy men.” The Story of Merlin King Bors!? thrust his shield out, but the blow landed so hard that it split his shield down to the boss. And King Bors paid him back with a blow that split his shield into two halves and brought his helmet down to his shoulders, so that he could not see; and when he felt that he had been blinded, he jumped back, cut the straps off of his helmet, and threw it away; then he covered himself with his shield, for he was very much afraid for his head, where he had only his iron coif left to wear. When King Bors saw that King Amant had lost his helmet, he called over to him and said, “King Amant, now make peace with me, for you see plainly how it is with you. I beg you to come with me and swear fealty to King Arthur. It would be a great shame if you died here, for you still have a long life to live,*° and I would be very sorry to kill you.” “No,” answered King Amant, “you surrender and put yourself at my mercy! Do you truly think that you have beaten me just because I have taken my helmet off? You should know that I took it off only because it bothered me! Take heed of me, for I defy you!” With that King Amant, full of wrath, ran upon him, and he meant to strike him on the head. King Bors, who was very skilled at swordsmanship, took the blow on his shield, but it hit so hard that it sent a big piece of it flying into the field. Then King Bors got ready to strike a blow, and he made it seem that he meant to hit him from below; King Amant thrust his shield down, but King Bors struck down from above and hit him squarely?! on the head, splitting it through down to his shoulders, and he went sprawling dead to the ground. When King Bors saw King Amant dead, he was filled with sorrow, and he said that he would rather have taken him alive to make peace between him and King Arthur. And when Guinganbresil, Brandalis, and Guiromelant saw that King Amant had been killed, they left with three hundred knights and said that they would never love King Arthur or anyone who was his liegeman. But two hundred knights stayed behind and said that they would go with King Bors to King Arthur and swear fealty to him, for they could not have a better overlord than he. After King Amant had been killed, King Bors called his companions together and said that he would very gladly build a hospice there, where they would serve Our Lord thenceforth until the end of the world for the sake of King Amant’s soul, [250] and where the Body of Jesus Christ would be consecrated and served for the victory that Our Lord had given him. There was a clerk who had served King Bors many a day; he came to King Bors and asked him a favor, and he said that he would very gladly dwell there if it pleased him. And King Bors very willingly granted him this, and he bestowed on him income fees and left behind a great deal of his own money to build the hospice. And the clerk thus lived there as long as it pleased and suited him, and he was afterwards a very worthy man who led a very holy life. 19Sommer’s text has only the personal pronoun il (249, 1. 16). 20The text reads encore estes vous de bel eage (249, 1. 22): “you are still at a fair age.” 2IThe text reads a descouert (249, 1. 31): “openly.” The Story of Merlin And after King Bors had had King Amant buried and had entrusted the clerk with the revenues, he left and made his way until he came to Bredigan, where he found King Arthur, King Ban his brother, and Merlin, who were very happy to see him. And King Bors said to King Arthur, “Sir, here are part of King Amant’s knights, who have come to you under my charge, and they say that they will swear fealty to you and hold their lands from you; and they are worthy and wealthy gentlemen, just as I have always been given to understand. Take their oaths and welcome them, as you ought.” And King Arthur told them that they were most welcome and asked them to believe that he would do only what was good for them, provided that they willingly acknowledge him as their overlord;22 and they stepped forward and swore fealty to him. And after they had sworn their fealty, he asked them what kind of man King Amant had been in his country. They began to weep with great feeling and said that he was dead, and they told him the whole adventure: how he had left his lands to go to the castle of Charroie, how they rode ahead on the road King Bors would take in order to do battle with him, how King Bors and King Amant?3 fought man to man in single combat, and how King Amant*4 had been killed. When King Arthur and King Ban heard about King Bors’s deeds at arms, they were wondrously gladdened. Then Merlin came to King Bors and said to him, “Sir, you have not told us about betrothing your brother Guinebal.” And King Arthur asked Merlin to tell how the betrothal was carried out. And Merlin told him about the tricks and spells that Guinebal had worked for the sake of his lady friend. Then King Ban asked Merlin if he knew who the knight was who would put an end to the dancing. And Merlin told him that he had not yet been fathered. “And don’t bother to ask any more, because we don’t have the time right now.” And when everyone knew that King Bors had slain King Amant, they held him in high esteem and praised him for it, and they said outright that never had there been such worthy men as the two brothers were, and if it had not been for them, King Arthur would have lost everything. And so they stayed there two full days. And King Arthur sent out for workers with picks and hoes, and there were a good five hundred of them. Then they went after the treasure in the forest that Merlin had told them about, and they dug and burrowed in the ground and found the greatest hoard that had ever been seen. They took it out of the ground and loaded it into wagons and carts in great numbers of [251] barrels, and when they had loaded it they sent it to Logres, King Arthur's chief city, where his nephews were waiting for it. 22The expression is por tant qual le voelent amer (250, 1. 16): “as long as they are willing to love him.” 23sommer’s text has the plural personal pronoun il (250, 1. 21). 24sommer’s text has the singular personal pronoun i! (250, 1. 22). 305 And beneath an oak tree Merlin had the earth dug out deep down until they found in a leather holder*® twelve swords, the most beautiful and the best that could be found in any ground. King Arthur brought this treasure back to Logres, and he kept them in his treasure-house until those came to court who might own them, and then they were put to good use. As soon as Gawainet, his brothers, and the other companions heard it said that King Arthur was coming, they got on horseback and rode out to meet him all together, and not one of them was left there who did not go out happy and joyful, for never will anyone make such a show of gladness. And as they drew nearer, Merlin took King Arthur aside, along with the two brother kings, and he had them dismount in a quite beautiful bower to wait for the youths who were coming, and they commanded the army to keep to the road until they came to Logres and to take lodging and to spend their time resting. And when they heard the king’s orders, they left straightway and rode until they met the young men, who were coming at a gallop. When the young men*° met them they asked where the king was, and they showed them the bower where he had dismounted, and the youths headed straight for it because they were in a great hurry. And Gawainet rode out before them, for they took him for their lord and master, and they were right, for he was the most knowledgeable man there ever was, the most courtly?” and the most clever. The story says that the young men rode until they came to the bower where the three kings and the companions of the Round Table had dismounted. And as soon as the young men saw them, they got down from their horses and ran to where the knights were seated on the green grass in the forest shade; they were taking the fresh air and cooling off, for it had been very hot all day and they had ridden with all their armor on, for they did not dare take it off because of the Saxons who had run into the land. And it was as warm as it should be at the end of May. The companions of the Round Table saw the young men coming closer—they had taken one another by the hand, and they were so delightfully dressed and adorned, and they were so handsome, that it seemed clear to those watching them that they had come from good stock,?° and it was most fitting that they were holding one another by the hand, and they took it as a mark of their high birth that they got along together so flawlessly. And when the knights saw them coming, they got up to meet them, and as they drew closer Gawainet spoke and greeted them, and asked them which one was King Arthur: “Please show him to us, if you would be so kind.”29 25The word is vaissel (251, |. 3): “vessel.” 26sommer’s text has the plural personal pronoun il (251, 1. 16). 27Sommer’s text expresses this negatively as qui mains auott uilounte (251, 1. 20): “who had the least villainy/lowborn behavior.” 28The expression in Sommer’s text is de botne eu (251, 1. 32): “from a good place.” 2°The expression in Sommer’s text is par uostre merci (251, 1. 37): “by your mercy.” 306 Nascien, whose behavior was that of a highborn man, answered him: “My boy, there he is over there with those worthy gentlemen, and he is the youngest of them all.” And he pointed Arthur out to him. When Gawainet heard that, he moved by him and answered, “Sir, many thanks!” And he went straight to where King Arthur and his companions were, and they stood up as soon as they saw him coming. When Gawainet saw his uncle and his companions, [252] all the youths fell to their knees and greeted the king and his companions. “Sir,” said Gawainet, “I have come to you with my brothers and our cousins and kinsmen because you are our earthly liege lord, and these others have come as well, in part for the good they have heard about you and also because they wish to have from you the order of knighthood; and they will serve you most willingly and with a glad heart, just as we must serve you if our service pleases you. That is not to say that they have not already served you as though they were yours while you were away from this country, for they helped safeguard your lands against your enemies just as if it had been their own, and they have come to the aid of those who have kept your lands for you. And since they have come here, they have undergone great hardship, and I would like you to know it, for we should bring before®? the worthy gentleman the good things we have done for him, but hide them from the evil man because he will not be troubled to reward them, and his eyes do not have the strength to behold a worthy man.” When King Arthur heard the young man speaking with such wisdom, he took him by the hand, and he ordered everyone to stand up, and they did. And King Arthur began speaking to them, and he asked Gawainet who they were. “Sir,” said Gawainet, “before you learn that from us, we wish to know what you want to do, whether you mean to retain us, so tell us what you want and then, after that, ask us what you will and we'll tell you very gladly whatever we know.” When the three kings heard the young man’s speech, they heid him to be very clever, and King Ban told King Arthur that he was right. Then King Arthur said to him, “Dear, fair friend, I'll very gladly retain you, and with my own hand I will make you and your companions knights, and you will all be welcome. And I want you all to be my friends and companions of my own household.” And when the brothers heard what the king had to tell them, they all thanked him and fell to their knees, but the king bade them stand up, and he took Gawainet by the hand and said to him, “Dear friend, now tell me who you and your companions are, for I am very eager to know.” “Sir,” said the youth, “by my right name they call me Gawainet, and I am the son of King Lot of Loonois and of Orkney, and over here these three young lords I’m holding 30The word is reprocier (252, 1. 11): “to bring out, bring to the attention of,” specifically in order to cast blame, “to reproach.” Gawain definitely means to suggest revealing good things to the noble man as opposed to hiding them from the unworthy man; perhaps he also intends an elegant play on “approach”/ “reproach.” The Story of Merlin by the hand are my brothers. The eldest after me is named Agravain, and the second is Guerrehet and the third Gaheriet. And our mother has led us to understand that she is sister to King Arthur on his mother’s side. And those young lords over here are our first cousins, for they are our aunts’ sons. This stout young man is named Galescalain,>! and he is the son of King Neutres of Garlot. And this other young squire is the son of King Urien, and his name is Wonet, and the other young lord whom Wonet*? is holding by the hand is his brother by his father, and his name is Wonet too. The other young lords you see there standing with us? are very highborn men. This tall, brawny one is the son of King Belinant of North Wales, and he is Galescalain’s cousin. Those other two have come from the king of Estrangort; one is named Kay of Estral and the other Kehedin the Small. And those other two young lords standing together are first cousins, and they belong to King Lot, my father, and they are sons of earls; one is named Yvonet of the White Hands and the other is Yvonet the Buck.*4 And this other one is Yvain of [253] Rivel, and this one is Yain of Lionel. And this other young lord, so brawny with the smiling face, whose limbs and body are so well built, is the grandson of the emperor of Constantinople, and his name is Sagremor of Constantinople, and he has come with us in a spirit of the highest nobility*® to take his arms from you as you make him a knight, and he will serve you gladly; and I would wish that he and I were companions in arms as long as it pleases him to stay in this country. And these other young lords whom you see all about us, of whom there are a great number, are all men of high birth, and they are our friends and kinsmen; they have left behind their honors and their lands to come serve you, because of their love for you.” When King Arthur heard the youth speak of these things, he threw his arms around his neck and told him that he was indeed welcome, and he kissed him and embraced him and showed him how glad he was to see him. And after they had made merry for a long while, he said to Gawainet, “Dear nephew, here! I bestow upon you the post of high constable of my household and, after me, lordship over all my lands. Henceforth you will be commander over all who live in my lands, and this is my will.” Gawainet fell to his knees and said, “Sir, I thank you!” And the king bestowed this office with his right glove, and then he made him stand up. Afterwards they went to their horses and mounted, and they rode until they came to Logres. When King Arthur went into the city, his sister, mother of Gawainet, came to meet him, and with her came 3lgommer’s text has galescins (252, 1. 33). 32The name here in Sommer’s text contains another dimunitive ending: yuoniaus (252, |. 35), rather than the expected yuones (cf. 1. 35). 33The verb entretenir (252, |. 37) suggests standing together in a group. 34}1ere Sommer’s text has clains (?) (252, 1. 42) for the usual dains (“buck”); in the same vicinity is found lesclains (254, 1. 2). 35sommer’s text reads par sa deboinarete & par sa franase (253, 1. 4). The Story of Merlin Morgan, who was his other sister, and she was endowed with great learning.*© And when the king recognized them, he was very glad to see them, and they rejoiced with great gladness, because they had not been together for some time. And they kissed one another like brothers and sisters, and then they went up to the high hall which was hung all over with silk cloth, with fresh and tender, sweet-smelling green grass strewn all about, and everyone through the whole city made merry with such great rejoicing all day long that it cannot be told. That same day the king ordered the young men to go to the main church to keep watch until morning, and the story says that it was the second Sunday after Whitsunday,3? and King Ban, King Bors, and the companions of the Round Table were there, and they kept watch with the brothers, for they did not want to leave them for any reason since they had got to know them. Next morning after Mass, King Arthur took his good sword, the one he pulled from the stone on Merlin’s advice, and he girded it on his nephew Gawainet’s side, and then he put his nght spur on him and King Ban the left, then King Arthur embraced him* and besought God to make him a worthy man. He then dubbed*? the three brothers and gave each one a sword from among those found in the hoard that Merlin had shown him. Then he dubbed the two sons of King Urien and Galescalain, Dodinel, Kay of Estral, and Kehedin, and he gave each one a sword from the hoard. And after them he bestowed on Sagremor arms such as those he had brought with him from Constantinople, for he had been outfitted very well with everything a new knight needs, and the king girded him with a very good sword he had brought from Constantinople, where his forebear King Hadrian had given it to him, and he then put on his right spur and King Bors the left, and then King Arthur hugged him [254] about the neck. Then King Arthur dubbed the four cousins Yvonet of the White Hands, Wonet the Buck,*° Wonet of Lionel, and Yonet of Rivel, and Alles and Aces, who were their kinsmen, and he gave each one a sword from the hoard. But the story says that Dodinel never had one of those, but he got the sword that had belonged to King Amant, and King Bors gave it to him because his kinsmen were from far away. After the brothers had been dubbed, each one of them dubbed those they had brought with them as companions. And when they had all been dubbed, they went to the church to hear Mass, which the archbishop of Brice sang; 36sommer’s text reads qui moult estoit boine clergesse (253, ll. 19-20): “who was a very good woman clerk.” 37The text reads la quinzaine apres la pentecouste (253, ll. 26— 27). 38That is, gave him the ceremonial collee (253, 1. 33) which may also have involved a tap on the neck with a sword, similar to the modern notion of dubbing. 3%Here adouba (253, 1. 34), meaning literally that he conferred arms on them; confused in English with to dub (“to hit, tap”) with respect to /a colee, also part of the investiture ceremony (see preceding note). Henceforth, adouba is translated “dubbed” in this passage, except in the case of Sagremor, where the context requires the primary meaning (253, Il. 37-40). 40Here Sommer’s text has lesclains (?) for the more usual dains, see above, n. 34. 307 and after Mass had been sung, they went up to the great hall and sat down to eat. King Arthur held court most grandly and gave quite a great feast; it is not fitting to speak of the foods they were served that day, for it would be tiresome to put it all down, and it would be a waste of words. After the meal, when the tablecloths had been taken away, the young men wanted the target dummy to be set up out in the meadows, but the king forbade them to do so, on Merlin’s advice, for the country was too upset and full of too much warfare, and Christendom was being harrowed by the Saxons who had forayed into the countryside. Thus they left aside the games and merrymaking of the young lords who were new knights, and they stayed inside the city for three full days. And King Arthur gave out great shares of goods to the young men he had engaged, and they came there from everywhere in huge numbers, from here and from there, until there were at least sixty thousand, some on foot, others on horseback, not counting those he had brought with him from the kingdom of Logres and from Carmelide. And while they were staying in the city, Morgan and Merlin became friends; she was endowed with great learning,*! and she grew so close to him and came around him so much that she found out who he was. He taught her many wonders in astrology and necromancy, and she kept them all in her mind. And when the third day came, Merlin spoke to the king and told him that they should get ready, for they had to leave and could not stay, for Pontius Anthony and Frollo, with the men of the king of Gaul and Claudas of the Land Laid Waste, had already come into the land and the kingdom of Benoic. And the king answered that he would leave whenever it pleased Merlin,*? and that he awaited only his orders. “Go,” said Merlin, “and order all your men to keep their armor on tonight and to mount their horses in the early hours. But you will lead only twenty thousand men out of this land along with the twenty thousand you brought out of Carmelide who belong to King Leodagan’s kingdom. And you will leave twenty thousand behind in this city, for this city must not be bereft of men-at-arms, so you will leave Doon of Carduel here to safeguard the city. With that their counsel ended, and the king ordered Gawainet to do what Merlin had entrusted to him, and he got their baggage together, divided everyone up, and had all the ones they were to take with them ride out of Logres. And when he had done this, he went straight to the king and Merlin, and he found them taking counsel together and told them that he had got everything ready. When Merlin saw him coming, he told the king to ask him who the knight was who brought him to rescue his mother. And the king called him over and said to him, “Gawainet, dear nephew, who was the knight who took you to rescue your mother in the meadowlands of Glocedon?” 4lThe expression is boine clergesse (254, 1. 22); cf. 253, |. 20, and above, n. 36. 42The text reads il ii plaircit (254, |. 28): “when it pleased him.” As the context indicates, Arthur refers not to his own, but to Merlin’s pleasure. 308 And Gawainet asked him what he knew about it and who told him about it. “You may know for a fact,” said the king, “that the one who told me about it knows the truth.” “God help me,” said Sir Gawainet, “I never [255] saw him well enough to know him again.” “Now ask him,” said Merlin, “whether he knows the one who brought him the letter from his cousin Wonet, son of King Urien.” And Sir Gawainet looked and saw the one who was sitting beside the king, and he wondered why he was having him ask him those things. He then began thinking, for he was quite clever and sharp-witted, and he recalled the words Doon of Carduel had spoken to him. And the king asked him if he knew the man with him, and he told him that he did not; “however, I have been led to believe that it was Merlin, but in truth I don’t know him, and I’m sorry for that, for he has done me many other kindnesses and services. He had Sagremor, the grandson of the emperor of Constantinople, brought back to me from the danger of death he was in, as well as Yvain my cousin, and me he saved beneath the castle of Arundel. He is the one man in the world I would like best to know right now.” “You will know him very soon,” said Merlin. Then the king began to laugh out loud, and he said to him, “Gawainet, dear nephew, sit down beside me now and I will tell you what I know about it.” And he sat down on the bed, and there were three of them, no more. Then he said to him “Dear nephew, look, here is the gentleman because of whom you went to Arundel when you fought against the Saxons, the day Dodinel the Wildman and Kay of Estral came from their countries. Now thank him for the services he has done for you, for you should thank him, love him, and serve him if need be, because he has served you very well. “Sir,” said Gawainet, “I don’t know what to offer him or give him, but I say this much nevertheless, that I am his man and will do what he orders. He is so wise, I am sure of this, that he already knows the feelings I have for him in my heart.” And he answered that he was his friend and that he did know very well what was in his heart, and he wished him to be his friend, his intimate friend. But he asked him not to tell anyone else what he had told him, however close a friend that might be. “And you will see me in so many shapes,” he said, “that you will be astonished. I do not wish to be recognized by anyone, for envy and jealousy are strong in this world.” And he told him that he would not speak to anyone about that. That is how Gawainet came to know Merlin in the presence of his uncle King Arthur. And after they had spoken together for a while, Merlin said to him, “Dear friend, go take leave of your mother, then get to the army and have your men mount in the early night hours. Take to the road and head straight for the port of Dover. Get boats and bring them together on the shore, so that your uncle will have only to go aboard when he gets there, as well as the two kings who are very worthy gentlemen, and for God’s sake, do them their due honor: they are King The Story of Merlin Arthur’s men, and they come from the noblest stock there is. Be careful not to let anyone know where you are going.” And he said that everything would be done as he had ordered. With that Sir Gawainet left, and he took leave of his mother, who was a very well-bred lady, and she loved him a great deal with a great love, and she commended him to God and besought Him to keep him from harm. And he left and went straight to the army, he and his brothers, Sir Yvain whom he greatly loved, Galescalain, Dodinel, Sagremor, Yvain the Bastard and his four cousins who were all named Yvain, Kay of Estral, and Kehedin his nephew. These men were never foot soldiers, but the army [256] was under their leadership,** just as Gawainet had taught them, and they were all ready to go. When early night came, Sir Gawainet had all their equipment bound up, put into trunks, and loaded onto pack horses, and he set up a watch all around the army so that no spy could get in, and the ones the story has named for you were in the watch. Then they set out on the road at a slow gait, and they made their way until they came to the port of Dover. But King Arthur stayed behind in Logres with Merlin, the two brother kings, and the forty knights from the kingdom of Carmelide who were the companions of the Round Table. And when Sir Gawainet had come to the port of Dover, he sent messengers throughout all the harbors and landing places to look for boats, and he had them taken and brought together until he had gathered a very great fleet. When Merlin found out that everything was ready, he had the three kings mount their horses at night, and he commended them to God and told them to have themselves taken straight to La Rochelle, “and when you go ashore there,” he said, “you will not set out until you see me, “What?” said King Arthur. “Won’t you come with us?” “No indeed,” said Merlin, “but you will have been there only one evening before I come.” With that, they went their own ways and commended one another to God. Merlin went to Blaise, his teacher in Northumberland, who was very glad when he saw him, because he loved him with a great love. And Blaise besought him to tell him what he had done since the last time he had been there, and he told him everything just as you have heard it in the story after he left him, and Blaise put it all down in writing, and this is how we still know it. And when Merlin came to the part about the young lady whom he loved with his whole heart,44 Blaise was deeply sorry, for he feared that she might betray him and that he might lose his great knowledge, so he began to give him warnings.*> He told him about the prophecies that had 43The sentence (255, 1. 43-266, 1. 1) is constructed on a pun: oste (“tenant,” a freeman of higher status than a serf, but who does not own his farm) / ost (“army”). Sommer’s text reads: ial ne furent onques oste cl orent lost en lor baillie 44Sommer’s text has quil ama par amor (256, 1. 21), which implies that he is in love with her, by contrast with the deep affection Blaise feels for Merlin: moult lama de grant amor (256, 1. 18). 45sommer’s text has castoier (256, 1. 23), which suggests forewarning by means of moral lessons. The Story of Merlin already been fulfilled and others that came about in the land afterwards, just as the story will recount for you later. And Blaise put it all down in writing just as Merlin told it to him. But with that the story falls silent right here about him and goes back to speaking about King Arthur and his companions. 33. Arthur’s Forces Battle Claudas’s at Trebes.! In this part the story says that on the very first day of June King Arthur left Logres, his chief city. Mild weather had come back with the pleasant season when the orchards and woodlands are in leaf, when the birds sing sweetly and softly and the blossoming, leafy forests ring with their singing, when the meadows are thick with grass and the gentle waters go back into their beds—and when it is better to make war than any other time of the year. In this season King Arthur rode out with King Ban, King Bors, and their companions, and they did not stop until they came to the sea at the port of Dover. And when they got there, they boarded the boats without tarrying. They had a good, soft wind and sailors who steered them so well that they lost nothing, and at last they came to La Rochelle. Then they got off the boats and camped in tents and pavilions outside the city, and there they awaited Merlin. He came the next day at the noon hour, just as he had told King Arthur. And they were very glad to see him—the three kings and Sir {257} Gawainet, who loved Merlin with a very great love, as Merlin loved him because of the great faithfulness he found in him. And they stayed there and rested, and they put watchmen along all the roads and byways so that no one might come and go who could take news to their enemies. But now the story falls silent for a while about them, and speaks no more of them right here, but it goes back to Leonce, the lord of Payerne, and Pharian of Trebe, who were most faithful and worthy toward their liege lord. Here the story says that when Merlin left Leonce, lord of Payerne, after he had told him about Pontius Anthony and Frollo of Germany, who were coming with forty thousand well-equipped men, and about Claudas of the Land Laid Waste, who had twenty thousand men from the kingdom of the Land Laid Waste, Leonce sent out and called his men together from near and far, his kinsmen, men-at-arms for hire, and his friends, until he had a good ten thousand from the kingdom of Benoic, all with good horses and well armed, not reckoning the foot soldiers he garrisoned in the strongholds. Meanwhile, for his part, Pharian sent word throughout the kingdom of Gaunes and called together a good ten thousand men on horseback as well as foot soldiers he garrisoned in the castles and strongholds, where they brought in food from everywhere to store it for safekeeping. And when they had done these things, Pharian went to Benoic with his army, as did Leonce, and they waited until news came to them that their enemy was overrunning their land and setting fire wherever they thought they could do the most harm. But they found 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 256-268. 309 little to take in the countryside or anywhere else in the land, because it had all been stored away, and Claudas of the Land Laid Waste was upset and angry because of that, and he was right to think that the enemy had been warned by someone of their coming. That is why the foragers did not stop running throughout the land, but they found little to take. After they had run up and down, they went back into the great army and talked about what they could do. Then they agreed that they would lay siege to the castle of Trebe, so they rode there and encamped in the meadowlands beneath, but it was far away, for the castle was built very high up, and at the bottom was a deep marsh all around; there was but one way in, across a long, narrow causeway that went on for nearly half a league. In those meadowlands, Pontius Anthony was camped on one side, Frollo of Germany on another, and Claudas of the Land Laid Waste on another, while on yet another were the king of Gaul’s men, who were led by Randol® the Saxon, his seneschal, who was very bold and skilled at fighting; and each one had twenty thousand under his banner. Thus the castle of Trebe was besieged on four sides, and the besiegers were so thick that no one could go in or out without being taken and held prisoner, for they thought that they could take the castle by force. But no assault would work,? for no one could get to the castle because of the marsh that went all the way around, so they were at siege there for a very long time. And Queen Elaine, who was within, and her sister were most distressed, and they were afraid they might be taken prisoner by force or through a betrayal, so they wept long and hard for their husbands, who had been away for so long, and from whom they had had [258] no news. And Gratian comforted them and told them not to be frightened of anything, for it would not be very long before they would be helped in a grand way, and they were sure to see their husbands very soon. Thus did Gratian comfort the two ladies who were sisters. And he had a son whose name was Banin of Trebe; he was King Ban’s godson. This Banin was a young lord, a worthy lad, and he was a kinsman of Leonce of Payerne, who was a kinsman of the brother kings. When he saw that the castle was under siege, he sent word to Anselm the Seneschal to come speak to him, and he came straightway. And when he had come, he told him to get his gear together, “for tonight you must ride out. And be careful to move so stealthily that no one will know where you are going, and wait for our men in the forest of Briosque at the spring in the middle of the clearing. And make sure that the army is so well guarded that no one can get away who might give news to our enemies.” And he said that he would do that so well that there would be nothing to set right. With that Anselm the Seneschal left, and he did everything as Leonce ordered him to. And Leonce took 2Here raudoul (257, |. 33), but elsewhere randol (261, |. 16 and n. 1). 3sommer notes that the Harley manuscript contains a phrase apparently omitted in his base text: ny avoit mestier (257, n. 3): “was of any use to them.” 310 one of his nephews and sent him to Gaunes to Pharian, and he asked Pharian to come to the forest, to the place he had spelled out, and to be outfitted as he knew he should be. And his nephew made his way as he had been asked and gave his message just as he was ordered to do. And when Pharian heard that Leonce had set out and was already on the road, he got himself ready quickly and gathered around him as many men as he knew would be needed, and he took to the road through the narrowest places he knew of, and they were a good ten thousand strong by count. And Leonce was on the road with Anselm, and they rode until they came to a great valley, enclosed all about by a thick growth of trees, in the forest of Briosque, just as Merlin had told him. And the army was so well guarded that no one got out, and they stayed until Pharian came there with his men; and they were all there until the Monday before St. John’s Day, which was to fall on the next Sunday. And when Merlin found out that they were all ready and waiting only for the help he had promised them, he said to Sir Gawainet, “Sir, take ten thousand of your men, and no more, and put yourself on one side of the field. Be sure that Ulfin bears your standard, for he is worthy and faithful. Now do all this right away.” When Sir Gawainet* heard Merlin’s order, he left with Ulfin and his men, and they put themselves on one side of the field with ten thousand men. Afterwards Merlin called King Ban over and said to him, “Come forward, noble knight. You will lead the second echelon, and there will be ten thousand men with you, and we will see how you defend your lands and how you take revenge® against King Claudas for the harm he has done you, and he still beleaguers you every day as much as he can.” “Sir,” said King [259] Ban, “it will be as it pleases God, and if I ever have happiness, it will be from God and from you and King Arthur.” “Go,” said Merlin, “and take your men over to one side, and have them put their armor on forthwith to ride against your enemies.” With that, King Ban left and took ten thousand knights from the army and led them to one side; they were young, untried knights,° but they were most worthy and very skilled at arms, and he had them get ready. Afterwards Merlin called King Bors of Gaanens. over and said to him, “My lord king, come forward. You will lead the third echelon, and you will have in your company the three hundred knights from King Amant’s land, and you will take enough others who came from the kingdom of Carmelide so that you will be ten thousand strong, and you will get them ready to defend themselves. Take swiftly to the road. And take care that knighthood is not brought low by you. And we will see how you fight and how you defend your land against your enemies!” “Sir,” said King Bors, “we will do what pleases God, and we will do our very best.” Then King Bors left, took his men away from the main army, and had them mount their horses, 4Sommer’s text has au roy artu (258, |. 29). 5 Sommer’s text repeats desfendres (258, |. 36), “defend.” SSommer’s text has iouenes bachelers (259, 1. 5). The Story of Merlin Afterwards Merlin spoke to King Arthur: “Sir,” he said, “you will lead the fourth echelon, and the companions of the Round Table will be with you; they will not let you down even if it means their death.” Then the king ordered Nascien, Adragain, and Hervi to get them armed and ready, and they did so well that nothing was left to do but mount their horses. Then Merlin took the dragon and called Kay the Seneschal: “Sir, come forward. Carry King Arthur’s ensign, for that is your right. And take care that knighthood is not brought low by you. You know what you will do when you come upon your enemies: you will keep riding and holding the banner up!” And Kay said that he would do so. By the time the echelons had thus been made up, it was the noon hour; they prepared to eat, and they sat down. And after they had eaten, the barons gathered together to ask what they would do. “T will tell you what to do,” said Merlin. “Tonight, in the early hours, you will set out, so that tomorrow evening you will be at Trebe, for your enemies have besieged it on all four sides, and each of the princes has laid siege to one side, and each one has twenty thousand men with him. And each of our echelons will go fall on one of the armies, so that there will be onslaughts on all four sides. Now, they have set up very good watches, and we'll have to move very craftily.” “What?” asked King Arthur. “Do they then have more men than we do?” “Yes,” said Merlin, “we have half as many. But help will come to us in a grand way, for twenty thousand more men will come there on time, and they have camped in the forest of Briosque.” “How will they know that we have got there?” “Sir,” he said, “I’ll go and fetch them. Blioberis will lead the army, and he will ride out ahead, for he knows the ways and byways I’ll show him. And when you see that day has broken, spur your horses all together and ride very fast to where you'll hear a horn blowing. There you will see a great fire burning high up in the air: you will look over that way, for there the help I'll bring you will be made ready.” “Sir,” said King Arthur, “when will you take to the road?” “Right away,” answered Merlin, “for we mustn’t tarry. I commend you to God.” [260] Then Merlin left the king, and when he was away from the army he disappeared so thoroughly that no one knew what had happened to him. Before the hour of nones he appeared in the army of Leonce of Payerne, who was not expecting any news of him. Merlin came there with Pharian, Anselm, and Gratian; and he said, “Leonce, why are you and your men not mounting your horses? You will find King Arthur as soon as you come to the army.” And when Leonce heard it, he was very joyful. And when they had rejoiced, they asked him news of their lords, and he told them that they would see them in due course, because they were riding at full speed, “but now form your echelons, and I'll lead you to the army.” “Sir,” said Leonce, “many thanks. Now I know that we will prevail, since you will be with us.” Then the four companions divided their men into four groups. The seneschal took five thousand and separated The Story of Merlin them from the others; and Gratian also took five thousand, as did Pharian. And Leonce stayed with the rest, and his men, who were well armed, numbered five thousand or more. But now the story falls silent about Merlin and Leonce the lord of Payerne and their companions and returns to King Arthur. Here the story says that when Merlin left King Arthur, King Arthur had all his men mount their horses, and one echelon moved out after the other, and Blioberis rode ahead of Sir Gawainet’s echelon, for he was the one who knew the ways through better than any in the land. There could be seen many an ensign of gold and silver and silk waving in the wind. The weather was mild and still, and the countryside was delightful, for there were many forests and meadowlands where birds were singing in the many ways that gladden those who are deeply in love. They rode that night until it was daylight before they knew it, for they had listened so closely to the bird songs that they forgot what they were doing. Suddenly they came to a very fair heath that was filled with shrubs in bloom, and it was beside the Loire River. The grass was so high that the horses stood up to their bellies in it. There King Arthur’s men rested all day until the hour of vespers, and they ate and drank as they needed to, and they slept, for it was a pleasant and delightful spot. When it was past the hour of vespers on Tuesday, all of them put on their armor, big and small, and they mounted their horses, for they had only seven leagues to ride to come to King Claudas’s army. There you would have seen many a faithful warrior’ with rich clothing, many a thick hand-held lance with a sharp iron tip, many a dazzling helmet and shield; and they rode drawn tightly together, one after the other, and Blioberis the first in line. They rode at a slow gait without shifting the shields they held before their chests, for they yearned to strike hard and fight well.8 The echelons rode nearly a half-league apart, and King Arthur was in the lead, where Kay bore the dragon. And the four? echelons went thus one after the other all night until day broke, when they came out of the forest of Briosque. They rode along the Loire River and then [261] stopped there to watch for Merlin’s sign, for he had told them about the fire that was to burn up in the air, and he had said to listen for the sound of a horn blowing. They had drawn so close to the enemy army that they were five arrow-shots away. They saw clearly that there were a great many fires burning and a great many men, and they heard the horses neighing, and as they drew closer still the men guarding the army could hear the great din. They sent men out on horseback to spy on them and find out whose men they were, and they rode out and looked at their armor. When those in the enemy army heard the news about King Arthur’s men, they ran to put on their armor, broke away from the main body, and drew up in ranks, each one under his banner, in the middle of the field, and they all said one to another that they did not know what army had 7The text reads maint vassal (260, ll. 34-35): vassal can simply designate a warrior or indicate the quality of his fighting. 8The text reads & de lor cvors desfendre (260, 1. 38): “and defend themselves.” 9Sommer’s text has 1. (260, 1. 40). Bid come riding against them in such numbers. And Pontius Anthony, who knew a great deal about warfare, rode out from the main body wearing all his armor, and he went into the forest of Briosque toward the way they were coming in, and he ordered his men to follow him, which they did as soon as they put their armor on. And Frollo, the duke of Germany, rode out after him, and he set his path toward a litde river called the Arroux. And Randol, the king of Gaul’s seneschal, went toward the orchards, while Claudas of the Land Laid Waste set out toward the causeway. And they all rode away from the tents and pavilions in great strength, in troops, and they all went under their banners. While Arthur’s men!° were listening to them putting their armor on and making ready, Merlin came out of his hiding place in the woods, for he was well aware of all their comings and goings; then he took a horn and blew it so loudly that the river and the whole woods resounded with it. After that he cast a strong and wondrous spell, for he made a great fire appear up in the air redder than a lightning bolt, and it was right above the tents of the enemies’ army. When King Arthur’s men saw the great fire burning in the sky and heard the horn blowing, they crossed themselves for the wonder they felt; then they let their horses run as fast as they could. And Sir Gawainet flew headlong into the camp of Duke Frollo of Germany, King Ban of Benoic overran the tents of Claudas of the Land Laid Waste, King Bors rode in among Pontius Anthony’s pavilions, and King Arthur among the tents of Randol the Seneschal. There tents and pavilions were brought crashing down, and the uproar and the yelling rose so loud on every side that the hearts of the boldest shuddered. There they lost many of those who were still in the camps, for they were not yet fully armed, and many were killed and wounded, and the wounded wailed and screamed, for they were beset by death. Then it was broad daylight and the sun began to rise. The sun shone on the armor, which flashed in the light, and it was so beautiful and pleasing to look at that it was a delight and a melody to watch. When Claudas, Frollo, Pontius Anthony, and Randol saw the great harm the attackers had done to them, they were filled with sorrow, for they believed that they had lost more than ten thousand men all told from their ranks. And when Randol the Seneschal saw the harm the men who ambushed him had done to him, he was so full of wrath that he nearly went out of his mind. He then rode back toward [262] the tents he had left, in order to rally his men around him. And when Sir Gawainet looked and saw Frollo coming, he boldly rode to meet him. Frollo had many bold knights with him, and they were a good fifteen thousand men strong, but he had lost a good six thousand of them, killed and cut into pieces. And as they drew closer, they ran upon one another as fast as their horses could go. As the armies crashed together, Sagremor was the first one in, and Frollo, who was full of anger, rode out to meet him; he was tall and wondrously strong. He and Sagremor struck each other so hard with their lances that each brought the other to the ground with his horse falling on top, but both sprang back up on their feet, for they were both skillful, strong, bold, and nimble. They drew their 10Sommer’s text has non-specific cil (261, 1. 20): “they.” 312 swords from their scabbards and thrust their shields over their heads and ran against each other, and they began such a great fight, rough and fierce, that both of them were in great danger of being killed, unless they got help, for they were wonderfully good knights, and their swords were so good that they did not need to look for better ones; and they fought for a long time before they stopped. When Sir Gawainet saw Sagremor on the ground, he and Ulfin, who bore the ensign, spurred their horses to his rescue, while those on the other side rushed to free the duke. And they hit one another on their shields with their lances, and they struck down and killed one another, and there began a great and dreadful battle that lasted a long time. And there was such clanging and crashing together that Sagremor and Frollo!! were put back on their horses while the fighting was heavy and fierce and wondrous. There the twelve companions, who were new knights, did wonders, as did the forty companions who were with them. But after the noon hour had passed, there was none who fought better than Sir Gawainet: he did wonders, and he struck down and killed men and horses, as did in their turns Sir Yvain, son of King Urien, his brother Yvain the Bastard, and Galescalain, son of King Neutres of Garlot,; and Gaheriet fought so well that he was held to be the best of them all after Sir Gawainet. And elsewhere Agravain, Guerrehet, and Sagremor fought very well, as did all the companions together. On the other side King Ban was fighting King Claudas’s men, and it happened that King Ban and Claudas met in the midst of the ranks, which were big and dangerous. As soon as they had caught sight of each other, they ran against each other with their drawn swords held high. Claudas was a very good knight, strong and sure of himself, but he was envious of those who were set above him. He struck King Ban so hard on his helmet that burning sparks flew into the air, and he ran against him so hard that he made him hunch over his horse’s neck. But with great bearing King Ban sat back up straight, and he gave him a heavy blow on the helmet; he hit him with a glancing blow, for he was leaning over, and it fell on his horse’s neck, and he cut his horse through the backbone and brought it to the ground with Claudas astride. Claudas sprang up very quickly, but before he was upright, King Ban dealt him three blows on the helmet such that [263] he nearly made him fall in a faint; he made his blood spurt from his mouth and nose, but Claudas was so strong that he kept himself from falling. He threw his shield over his head and came straight for King Ban, and the fight began, and the war would have been ended forever for King Claudas if they could have kept together for just a little longer, but his men, of whom he had half again as many as King Ban, very forcefully rescued him. King Ban’s men numbered only ten thousand, and the others were a good eighteen thousand strong. Nevertheless, each side fought as hard as the other, until Claudas got back on his horse and King Ban’s men had to withdraw, and if King Ban himself had not been the help they needed, they would have been driven from the field and put to rout; but he kept the battle going all by himself, and no one could run him off the field, any more 1 The text reads & doi (262, |. 21): “the two.” The Story of Merlin than if he had been a castle keep, and he held his ground there in that way until after the noon hour. Elsewhere King Bors was fighting against the men of Pontius Anthony at the tents and pavilions, where they lost many of the ones who had stayed behind there. And when Pontius Anthony saw the great harm that had befallen them so suddenly, he was wondrously angry and upset. And when he had got his men in order beside the forest where he had taken them, he went back toward the tents, where he saw the great slaughter. When King Bors saw them coming, he went to meet them with his shield about his neck and his lance very boldly clenched in his fist. And when Pontius Anthony saw him coming, he went to meet him and struck his horse with his spurs as hard as he could, for he was in a great hurry to get to him, and, riding their horses very fast, they struck each other on the shield with all their strength and drove through and shattered them; and Pontius Anthony broke his lance on King Bors. But King Bors struck him so hard that he drove his shield against his arm and his arm against his body, and he thrust the tip of his lance through him above the trappings of his sword and opened a great wound on his left side. Red blood ran down over his thigh to his heel, and King Bors jolted him so hard that he sent him sprawling, so that the ground shook all around with a thud. Pontius Anthony lay there in a daze for so long that no one knew whether he was dead or alive, and when his men saw him thrown down they were very much afraid that he would be killed, so they spurred to his rescue. And King Bors’s men rode against them and welcomed them with the tips of their lances, and they put many of them to death. There the battle was wondrous and the jousting!? deadly, for there were twenty thousand on one side and ten thousand on the other. Pontius Anthony was rescued and put back on his horse, and his men found that he had been wounded a little on the left side, but he had no wound that would not heal harmlessly, even so, he was quite a bit worse off from his fall than from his wounds, for he had never before been brought down from his saddle by a blow from a knight, and he would gladly take revenge for his shame and distress if he ever got the chance. So he drew his sword and entered the jousting, which lasted a long time, and then Pontius happened to meet King Bors, who was doing wonders all by himself. And as soon as Pontius An thony saw him, he recalled that it was he who had struck him down, so he ran against him with his sword drawn and dealt him such a blow on his helmet that he split it and made him hunch forward over his saddlebow. [264] And as Pontius Anthony was recovering to strike the second blow, King Bors hit his horse with his spurs and flew into the midst of the fighting. Then he reined his horse around and came back clenching his sword, and Pontius Anthony came against him as well, and they hit each other on the helmet with such hard blows that they were both stunned. But in striking they were not equals, for King Bors struck Pontius Anthony so hard on the side of his head that he made his blood come spurting from his nose and mouth, and he stunned him so much that he sent him sprawling to the 12The word here (263, 1. 33) and elsewhere (e.g., 1. 40) is tournoiement, “tourneying.” The Story of Merlin ground in such a daze that he never knew where he lay. And King Bors jumped atop him and trampled his body until it was utterly broken. Pontius Anthony fainted from the agony he felt, and King Bors would have gladly got down from his horse to cut off his head, but he did not have his way, for the Romans came that way spurring their horses to rescue Pontius Anthony, and they flew headlong right into the middle of King Bors’s men and so hard that they drove them back an arrow-shot, for there were a very great many of them. And they kept the battle going that way until after the noon hour. Elsewhere King Arthur was fighting very fiercely against the men of Randol, the king of Gaul’s seneschal. They had found more than seven thousand of their men killed and maimed among the pavilions, and when Randol saw the very great damage and losses, he was filled with great sorrow. He came out against King Arthur and his men}3 with the fourteen thousand armed men he had left; they were skilled at warfare, bold, and heartened to avenge the deaths of their friends and kinsmen whom they had seen slaughtered before their eyes, so they rode against them, with their lances under their arms, full of wrath and eager to do them great harm. So they, who were so learned4 in warfare, came against them, and they were good leaders, but Arthur’s men held them in very low esteem, for they saw that they would be taken,!® so they welcomed them with the tips of their lances, and many of them were left dead and wounded. There many worthy knights!© were killed and maimed, which brought great sorrow and losses to their friends. There the knights of the Round Table did wonders, for they killed knights and horses, and with them was King Arthur, who made all the ranks shine forth wherever he went,!’ and they fought so skillfully that they broke through them and cast them aside by sheer force, like it or not, and they did not once stop until they came upon Pontius Anthony’s men, who were sorely beleaguering King Bors and his men. And when they got to them, there was such a great din that no one could have heard God thundering, and they raised so much dust that the sun, which was high in the sky, was dimmed. And Kay the Seneschal followed them, holding the dragon that Merlin had entrusted him to bear, and it gave off from time to time such great bursts of fire that they rose up in the air and were so huge and dreadful that the hearts of all who had never seen it before shook 13sommer’s text has lor (“them”) without an explicit antecedent (264, 1. 19), l4sommer’s text has ditit (264, I. 23), which he marks as a curiosity (n. 2) without offering a variant. It seems appropriate to connect the form with doit (<doctus) (“learned”) or the verbs diter (<dictare) (“to dictate, teach”) or doitier/ditier (< *digitare) (“to point out, teach”). 15sommer’s text has si les prisierent moult petit car il uirent quil furent pris (264, |. 24): “and they prized them very little for they saw that they were taken.” The meaning, somewhat obscure, seems to depend in part on the association of the words pristerent and pris (which as a noun can mean “price,” “value,” etc.). 16The word here is uassal (264, |. 26): “worthy men.” 17sommer’s text has par tout lo il aloit (264, 11. 28-29), perhaps for par tout l’o [for ost] [ou] il aloit: “throughout the whole army where he went”? 313 with fear. And they all said one to another, “What will become of us?” For all that, the dragon had great meaning in and of itself. For thus were meant King Arthur and his power, and the flames that shot from its mouth stood for the great suffering that people underwent [265] and the great slaughter that happened in the time of King Arthur. And its tail, which was all twisted, was a sign of the great betrayal of his people, by whom he was himself betrayed afterwards, who were stirred up against him by Mordred, his son, whom he fathered with his sister, King Lot’s wife, when he went across to take the land of Benoic because of the wrath of Lancelot of the Lake. He had laid siege there because of the ill will that had grown up between the two of them over his wife, Queen Guenevere, whom Lancelot loved, just as the story will recount later. But here the story speaks no more about that, for it is not yet the place; rather, we will tell you about the battle that was in the meadowland below Trebe, between King Arthur’s men and the men of Randol the Seneschal. He had yielded the field and run helterskelter into the men of Pontius Anthony, who were keeping King Bors’s men at close range, and King Bors was in very great need of help. When Pontius Anthony saw the runaways coming, he rode out to meet them and shouted his battlecry; then he rushed against his enemies. King Bors was quite overwhelmed, and he would have been thrown from the field if Kay the Seneschal had not come up with his echelon.!® There the fighting was quite wondrous and very heavy, and many fell on both sides; yet the two sides were about equal. Elsewhere Sir Gawainet and his companions had fought so hard against the men of Duke Frollo of Germany that they made them shift about and overrun the echelon of Claudas of the Land Laid Waste. He was fighting against King Ban of Benoic, who was in very dire straits. And when the four echelons came together, they all upheld one another, and the din and the fracas grew loud and the fighting grew very heavy. There Sir Gawainet did wonders all by himself, and never thereafter did anyone see a man work such wonders as he did that day. And the story says that it was after noon when Sir Gawainet happened to meet Claudas, who was fighting with about thirty men against King Ban, who had only about twenty, and King Ban was in very dire straits. And Sir Gawainet rushed headlong into them, his sword held high, to strike Claudas on the head. And Claudas thrust his shield against the blow, and Sir Gawainet hit him so hard that he sent his shield flying in two halves, and his sword fell upon his saddlebow and sliced his horse between the shoulders so that it stumbled to the ground in a heap. Gawainet rushed right by and did not stop, for he did not know who it was, and he met another one and struck him and split him down to the teeth; this was a very skilled and very bold knight from the house of King Claudas. And afterwards he struck Antorilas so hard that he sent his head flying. He struck right and left until he killed twenty of their men, who were all lying at the feet of the king, and he fought so well that none who saw or felt his blows dared take a stand against him. 18The word here is bataille (265, 1. 16): “battalion.” 314 When King Ban saw the wonders that the young man was doing, he thanked God for him and worshipped Him, and he came to him and said, “Gawainet, you are most welcome, and you are doing much good for me. God help me, King Arthur has not misplaced the authority he gave you to lead his army, for he could not have entrusted it to anyone better than you. And I beg you for God’s sake to grant me your company all day today.” “Sir,” said [266] Sir Gawainet, “I very gladly grant it to you today and any other time, and thank you very much for asking. But I must go looking for my brothers and cousins, for I do not know what has become of them. As soon as I have found them, I'll come back to you.” “Sir,” said King Ban, “I would gladly go with you, but I would very much like to know how I can take revenge on my deadly enemy, whom you have brought down, for this war would be brought to an end if he could be killed.” “What?” said Sir Gawainet. “Which one is it? Show him to me.” “Look, there he is!” said King Ban. “See his armor painted with silver blossoms and his parted shield, half white and half red, with the lion rampant! He has got back on his horse as you and I are speaking!” “Sir,” said Gawainet, “we can yet bring this to an end today. Let us overrun them, for you see that I’m all ready!” “Indeed,” said King Ban, “I wish nothing so much as to harm him, for it is because of him that I have had so much harm done to me.” “What is his name?” asked Sir Gawainet. “His name is Claudas of the Land Laid Waste,” answered King Ban. “What?” said Sir Gawainet. “Is it thanks to him that all these men have come here?” “In truth, yes.” answered King Ban. “Then let’s ride to him together,” said Sir Gawainet, “for we mustn’t tarry.” With that they spurred their horses to where they had seen King Claudas, and as soon as he saw them coming, he very boldly came out to meet them, and the clanging and fighting began. And Sir Gawainet and King Ban fought with help from their companions until they sent Claudas’s men on their way. And when King Claudas saw that it, was his turn to have losses, he rushed headlong into the press where it was thickest, for he greatly feared the ones who threatened to cut off his head—he was sure of this—if they could lay their hands on him. And when Sir Gawainet and King Ban saw him ride away, they set out, spurring their horses after him; and when Claudas saw them coming, he turned in flight and rode hither and thither through the battlefield, and after him were Gawainet and King Ban, who did not want to let him go. And had it not been for something that happened to them!9 on the battlefield, he would never have escaped from them. While King Ban and Sir Gawainet were giving chase through the battlefield, Gawainet looked and saw his brother Agravain lying on the ground with his horse on top of him, and Guerrehet was also down with his sword in his 19sommer’s text has se ne fust une auenture quil trouerent en la bataille (266, ll. 27-28): “if it were not for an adventure they found in the battle.” The Story of Merlin hand, and elsewhere he saw his cousin Galescalain, whom Duke Frollo of Germany was holding by the helmet; and Duke Frollo had more than two thousand men who were helping him, and they would have killed them”? had it not been for Sagremor, Gaheriet, Sir Wonet,?! and his brother, and Wonet of Lionel, Dodinel the Wildman, Kay of Estral, and Kehedin the Small were also there, along with the forty companions who were with King Arthur in the kingdom of Carmelide—these kept the battle going against the two thousand, but they could not bring out the three who had been struck down. And when Sir Gawainet saw the trouble his brother was in, he said to King Ban, “Sir, I am sorry. Iam going to help those men over there whom I am bound not to forsake.” He then showed the ones who were in dire straits. And when King Ban saw them, he said to him, “Spur your horse on; we can't lose any time!” And they quickly spurred to that side and rode [267] as fast as their horses could carr~ them, and they flew into the fray so fast that all the ranks shook, and they went straight to where Agravain and Guerrehet had been brought down, and they hit and slaughtered and struck down right and left as many as they met, so that none dared stand up to them; even the boldest and strongest gave way to them, for in very little time they knew them to be the worthy gentlemen and good knights they were. And when Agravain and Guerrehet saw help coming, each one jumped on a horse, with his shield about his neck, for there were many of them all around them. And when they were back on horseback, the fighting began to be wondrously heavy; but Galescalain was not at all well off, for he was still under the horses’ hooves. When Sir Gawainet saw the danger he was in, he rushed into the fighting so hard that he brought down more than seven men before he could get to him. As he drew closer, he struck Duke Frollo so hard with a lance that he went through his whole shield, but his hauberk was strong and so sturdy that he broke not one link, but Sir Gawainet had hit him so hard that he bore him sprawling to the ground; then he took his horse by the rein and had Galescalain get on. Galescalain had the heart to avenge his shame, if he ever could, and indeed he did, and he lost very little time in doing it. After he had got back on a horse, he saw that Duke Frollo had also remounted in the midst of his own men, but Galescalain hit him so hard that he knocked him back down to the ground most shamefully, and he had ridden back and forth over him more than seven times without stopping before any of his men came to help him; and when, after the seventh time, Duke Frollo happened to get back up, he again sent him sprawling back down to the ground so shamefully that his men expected his death. In this way Galescalain brought Duke Frollo down, and he rode his horse over him seven or eight times before his men could get to him to take him away or even move him, so angry was he about the harm he had done him and his distress, and he broke him and crushed him against the 20Sommer’s text has the singular personal pronoun 1’ (266, 1. 33). 2lRather than the more usual diminutive Yonet, Sommer’s text has in this passageyvaines (266, 1. 35). The Story of Merlin ground; and Duke Frollo was so distraught and so full of agony that he was very much afraid that he would die. Sir Gawainet saw everything Galescalain did to Duke Frollo, and he showed it to King Ban and said to him, “Sir, look there and see my cousin Galescalain, how daringly and how boldly he behaves toward his enemies!” “Indeed,” said King Ban, “anyone who has Galescalain as a companion can boast that he is with one of the best knights in the world.” With these words that King Ban spoke, they came to where the fighting was going on,** and they were all running one another down helter-skelter, burning to hurt one another as best they could, for King Arthur, King Bors, and the knights of the Round Table were striking and hitting right and left, until at last with main force they drove Pontius Anthony’s men and Randol the Seneschal’s into Frollo’s men and Claudas’s. These welcomed them warmly because they were worthy gentlemen and good knights. There was a great heaping up of bodies, and the dust rose so thick that out on the battlefield as well as in the meadows, you should know this for a fact, no one could see anything. And after the four echelons had come together, just as you have heard, there was such a profusion of horses and men that it was a wonder to behold; [268] they were drawn tightly together, so close one to another that if anyone had taken a glove and thrown it on their helmets, he could have ridden a half league at a slow gait before it fell to the ground, so thickly were they crowded together. But all of King Claudas’s men were very much afraid, and they dreaded the dangers they were up against. When King Arthur saw that the men he had been fighting*? had thus got away and run headlong into the others, he spurred after them with very great vigor, and he and his companions rode helter-skelter into the press. There the fighting grew heavy again, hard and wondrous. So the story now falls silent about them for a while, and we will tell you about the two queens who were in the castle of Trebe. 34. Victory of Arthur’s Forces; Elaine’s Dream.’ The story says here that when those in the castle of Trebe heard the hue and cry raised by the people outside, they wondered in amazement what it could be, and the uproar grew so loud that the two sisters climbed up to the highest windows of their tower and looked down into the meadows, and they saw the biggest crowd of people they had ever seen. And they saw the dragon Kay bore that threw such great bursts of fire out of its mouth that the air grew red from it, and the dust that had risen also glowed red wherever the dragon had gone. And when the ladies and 22sommer’s text has uindrent les batailles (267, 1. 33): “the battles (or battalions) came.” 23Ssommer’s text has the ambiguous pronoun ail (268, I. 5): “they/those.” 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 268-279. BID) those of the city saw the ensign,* which they had never before seen, they crossed themselves for the wonder they felt. Then they sent someone to find out who those men were who were fighting against the men from the army and whose ensign that was, and they sent a messenger outside the castle. And when he came to the battlefield, he met a knight from the kingdom of Logres who was laying aside his helmet and putting another on that was strong and whole, for his own was worth nothing anymore. And the knight’s name was Bretel, and the boy came over to him and greeted him, and he returned the greeting most courteously. “Sir,” said the boy, “I would like to entreat you with all courtesy to tell me what people you are who are fighting against those from this army.” “Dear friend,” said Bretel, “you can tell those in the castle yonder who have sent you here that it is King Ban of Benoic and King Bors of Gaunes who have brought King Arthur from Great Britain to rescue their lands and country from their enemies, who have wrongly and sinfully overrun them; but now the time is drawing near when they will have their reward and win their renown, if God keeps King Arthur safe. There you see his banner with the dragon which the seneschal is bearing.” When the boy heard this, he commended him to God and thanked him very much for what he had told him. With that the boy went away happy and gladdened by the news he had heard, and he could hardly wait to tell it to the two sister queens, and so he came straight back to the castle. And he would say nothing to anyone who asked him about those on the outside, but told them that anyone who wanted to find out should “follow me to the great hall.” And when the ladies saw him coming back, they went out to meet him because of the great number [269] of people they saw coming after him. And when he had come before them, he told them, loudly enough so that all who had come there to hear the news understood it, everything just as Bretel had told it to him. When the ladies heard the news the boy told them, the joy they felt was not slight, and they went back up to see the fighting, which was the worst they had ever seen in their lives. And on both sides they fought on until they were utterly weary. But those inside had been watching those on the outside fighting for just a short time when they saw coming out of the forest of Briosque four banners, which were going unhurriedly one before the other. And when the banners drew closer, they recognized the banner of Anselm, seneschal of Benoic, and the second belonged to Gratian of Trebe, the third to Pharian of Gaunes, and the fourth to Leonce of Payerne. And when those within saw them, they were very greatly gladdened, and they would very willingly have gone out if someone had let them, for they had been shut in for too long a time and there were many good knights whose kinfolk and friends were there, but they could not go out because it was forbidden on pain of death. And Anselm was drawing nearer all the while. 2Instead of enseigne (“ensign, banner”), Sommer’s text has le signe (268, |. 18): “the sign.” Farther down (273, 1. 1), it is clearer that sigve means both “ensign” and “sign” (see below, n. 11). 316 And then King Arthur looked and saw the banners; he recognized them and showed them to Sir Gawainet, and he said to him, “Sir Gawainet, you can be sure that soon our enemies will be put to rout, for I see four banners over there bringing us very able help that will strike fear in them.” And then Sir Gawainet said, “Let’s withdraw awhile and go look for our friends and kinsmen until we find them and bring them all together, for before long our enemies are bound to ride away in flight; and after we are gathered together, we will go out first and put ourselves where we think they will be heading. Do you ‘know why‘ I am telling you this? So that, after they have seen, in the place where we'll have lain hidden in the woods, that they have been thoroughly punished, those who are left alive will go into their country and can say and bear witness to the fact that they did not come across stable-boys or hired hands, and that next time they will keep themselves from coming into your lands or the fiefs of King Arthur of Great Britain. And you can be certain that in the end they will not be happy!” “Sir,” said King Ban, “I wish it all to be as you want and would like it to be.” With that they drew to one side of the battlefield, first the companions of the Round Table, King Arthur, and King Bors, and then afterwards the forty knights who were engaged in the land of Carmelide, and after them the sixteen young lords who had become new knights. And when they were gathered together, there were three hundred knights, all very worthy men, and they were the flower of the army. Then Pontius Anthony rode headlong into the battlefield as fast as he could make his horse run. There was much splintering of lances there and much clanging of swords. There King Ban of Benoic’s battlecry was loudly shouted and that of King Bors of Gaunes, and there was a great slaughter of men and horses. And when Gratian came, he flew into the fray so hard that they all yielded ground to him, the meadows and the stream, and the companions spread out down through the meadows, and the fighting grew so heavy and deadly that many a knight there was killed or bleeding wrongfully and sinfully, for they never deserved it. Thereby Holy Church was brought low so [270] shamefully that more than twenty thousand of them died on both sides, and all was due to the faithlessness of Claudas of the Land Laid Waste, who afterwards had his evil reward, for he died bereft of his earthly birthright, as the story bears witness of it to us. But with this the story falls silent about that right now, and we will tell you about the two armies that were fighting in the open fields before the castle of Trebe.> In this part the story says that the fighting was fierce and the combat deadly where the echelons had come together, that is, those from the kingdom of Benoic had 3Sommer’s text reads il ne puet remanoir que grant defoulement ni ait (269, ll. 22-23): “there cannot fail to be a great stampede.” The text does not specify, although the context makes it implicit, who will be in the stampede and where it will be heading. 4Sommer’s text has coi (“what”) rather than por cot (“why”) (269, 1. 24). 5sommer’s text adds en mi la praerie (270, |. 5): “out in the meadow.” The Story of Merlin become jumbled together with Duke Frollo of Germany’s men and those of Pontius Anthony with King Arthur’s, and they fought very hard on all sides, and after they had spread down through the fields, no one knew which ones had the upper hand, for on the side that had been Claudas’s there were yet some thirty-five thousand, and they all fought about equally as well. And the three hundred companions had withdrawn to one side, and King Arthur had a good thousand companions as well. The three hundred were repairing their armor and fixing their helmets. Meanwhile, King Claudas’s men thrust forward and drove back those from Little Britain and the kingdom of Logres; these got the worst of it, whereas they had had the best, and they wondered at what had become of their prowess. But these were not the ones who had done wonders fighting that day, and they were most distressed at not hearing news of those who had; nevertheless, each one tried to defend himself as best he could, for they knew very well that they were as good as dead if they had lost the three hundred who had helped them when they needed it and who had done wonders fighting. While they were in such distress, Pharian of Gaunes, holding his ensign, came with five thousand men in iron armor; and when Claudas saw him coming, he knew very well who he was, and he grew very frightened because Pharian had often done him harm in less weighty times. He then told Pontius Anthony and Frollo to set their minds to fighting well and cutting down his enemies, “and I'll ride against them, for there I see new forces coming. If I could send them along their way, we would quickly be rid of the others. You should know for a fact that he is one of the men in the world who have done me the worst harm.” With that, Claudas left with ten thousand armed men, and they rode against Pharian. And when Pharian saw them coming, he boldly went out to meet them, for he was a worthy, bold, and skilled warrior, the most reasonable in the country. And after they had moved closer together, they spurred against each other as fast as their horses could run, gripping their lances, and many fell on both sides. But Pharian’s men were hurt worse, for it was two men against one of his, but Pharian’s men were newcomers and Claudas’s were tired and worn down, so Claudas lost more men than Pharian, and if there had not been [271] so many of them, they would have been routed, but in the end Pharian’s men had to withdraw toward the forest where they had come from. When Claudas saw that they were leaving, he thought they had been beaten, so he drove against them so hard that they had no relief and could not recover, and Pharian was so upset that he nearly went mad. And he shouted “Gaunes!” time and again, but it was not worth his while, for skillful fighting by him or anyone else would not have kept them all from being killed and crushed to bits until Leonce of Payerne came with five thousand men in iron armor, and he flew into them so hard that he sent more than a thousand to the ground never to get up again. Then the fighting grew fierce and deadly, for each side hated the other, and they fought equally well and neither side gave the least bit of ground. Meanwhile, those from the kingdom of Logres were fighting and getting the worst of it. At last Merlin, who knew all these things, saw the men of The Story of Merlin Logres® so beleaguered, so he went to the place where King Ban, King Bors, and Sir Gawainet were hiding in the woods. And when he got to them, he said, “What, my lords? Have you come to this country to watch the jousting and all the skillful fighting the men from here know how to do? You should know that you have behaved badly with respect to one thing, for many of our men have been lost since you rode away, and they are frightened because they do not see you. Now get going and ride against your enemies, and you will turn against them the rest you have taken here, so that any who slip out of your hands can say that they did not find hired hands or stableboys in the kingdom of Logres, but worthy men and good knights. And you, sir,” he said to King Arthur, “this is the reward King Ban and his brother King Bors deserve! They have so often put themselves in danger of death to help you out in times of less need when all others failed you, and now you have come here to hide like a coward! You can be sure that this is something you will be upbraided for many times by many people—and by your lady friend when she finds out how you have behaved, and she will rebuke you for it.” When King Arthur heard Merlin’s speech, he hung his head in shame, and he was so upset that he was awash in sweat from the shame and distress; at the same time, he dreaded that Merlin might be angry with him. After that Merlin went to Sir Gawainet and his companions and said to them, “Young men!’ Where are the knightly skills you used to brag about? You said that you were coming to fight against your enemies in Little Britain and that you would see whether they could bear arms! Now you have shown what good knights they are by the fright they gave you. Did you come here to hide? And you den’t have the heart or the boldness to let them see how afraid of them they have made you!” Then he said to King Ban and King Bors, “And you, my lords, what did you come looking for in this country? You were supposed to be good knights, worthy and bold, but it has been proved now that you believed in those traitorous cowards who are so cravenly hidden away here! You ought to have put yourselves at risk to help and uphold those who have risked themselves and their lives to free your lands from your enemies. Now [272] they will have a right to say, when they go back to their countries, that they were in the service of wicked men who left them in danger of death.” “In truth,” said King Ban, “we have not done it out of wickedness or cowardice.” “Then,” answered Merlin, “whatever your reasons,® you have behaved badly. Now see to it that the harm they have 6Elsewhere Sommer’s text has cil del roialme de logres “those of the kingdom of Logres”, (271, II. 11-12), but here reads ail des loges (271, 1. 14). 7The term is vassal (271, 1. 33). Used as a term of address to young men, as the context of reproach suggests, the word does not necessarily imply knightly virtues, as it does in 260, 1. 35 (“faithful warriors”) and 264, |. 26 (“worthy knights”). 8The text reads comment que uous laues fait (272, 1. 4): “however you may have done it.” 317 done you will cost them very dearly, so that they can boast of nothing if they get away from you.” “Sir,” said Gawainet, “let me tell you this. Whether or not I have behaved like a coward, before I eat again, I will make known whether or not I am worthy and valorous, even if I should be cut to bits, and I'll fight so well before I leave the battlefield that people great and small will know who I am, nor will any cowardice I may have done ever be held against me, God willing, or against my uncle King Arthur, as long as I am alive. And you,” he went on, “my brothers, my cousins, my companions, if you wish to prove me blameless, follow me, for we'll soon show them that I did not steal away and hide out of cowardice!” Then Merlin broke out in a smile, and he came straight to Kay the Seneschal and took the dragon out of his hand and told him he should not bear it, “for never should the ensign of a king be stolen away and hidden from the battlefield. No, it should be borne out in front!” Then Merlin shouted, “Now we'll see who'll follow me, for soon it will be known who’s a knight!” And when Arthur saw him leaving, he said to King Bors that there was a very worthy gentleman in Merlin, and without a doubt he was full of knightly valor, and he was strong of body and limb, but he was dark-skinned and thin, more hairy than any other man, yet he was highborn on his mother’s side. But of his father I will tell you nothing more, for you have earlier heard a great deal about the one who fathered him. But as we read, we do not find that he ever laid a hand on any man to hurt him, but it happened often that, when he was fighting in a press, he would strike down!° both man and horse. After Merlin had taken the dragon from Kay the Seneschal’s hands, he set out on a great black horse that ran wondrously fast. And when he had drawn near the battlefield, he flew in so hard that the whole rank shook and shuddered until he got to where Frollo and Pontius Anthony were fighting. They were striving hard to put the men of Logres to rout. What did it matter that all their best men had been killed? They had already performed so well that their enemies were very nearly routed. The people within the castle of Trebe were grief-stricken, so more than five hundred squires ran to put on their armor, and they all went out on horseback. They were led by Banin, a young lord, son of Gratian of Trebe; he was King Ban’s godson, and he was still no older than twenty, but he was very skilled at arms and quite bold. And they charged headlong into the battle, and they fought very well for squires and foot soldiers, for there was not one knight with them, and had it not been for them, the others would have been put to rout. With that, Merlin and his companions, who were more than a thousand strong by count, left the woods, and he was holding the dragon, which gave out from its mouth such brightly glowing fire that the air grew red because it. And those who had never seen it before said that Our Lord was dreadfully angry with them, [273] since He had made such 9Sommer’s text reads quant il vous escaperont (272, |. 6): “when they escape from you.” 0sommer’s text adds del pis del cheval (272, |. 26): “from the horse’s chest” (?). 318 a sign!! appear to them. Then the way the battle was going changed for those who had had the better of it, for as soon as Merlin’s companions had come rushing in among them, they all began doing such feats of battle that everyone who saw them was astonished, for they struck down so many men that in a very short time notice had been taken of them. There King Arthur did wonders all by himself, for he had his shield thrown behind on his back, and he wielded his sword, which was of such great worth, in both hands; he began to kill and maim everywhere he fought, and nothing could withstand him. And the story says that by himself alone he wounded more than two hundred, which was a great shame for Christendom, and all because of Merlin’s sarcastic rebuke; !? and he held the horse’s reins in his right hand and let it run where it would. Meanwhile, Merlin was doing wonders as well as King Ban and King Bors, for they were doing their utmost to harm their enemies, they were very good, bold knights, and their knightly skill had always been wondrous and above that of all the knights of their time. The story says that King Arthur had fought his way so deep into the battle that no one knew what had become of him, and they knew nothing of King Ban or King Bors. And when the companions of the Round Table became aware of this, they brought about such an outburst of fighting that no one stopped to wait for anyone else, and so did the forty companions, whom the story has sometimes named, as well as the eighteen young lords who were new knights. And there began such a great slaughter and such bitter fighting that they drew apart one from another, and no one knew where the others had gone; so it happened many times that day that they got separated and then found one another.'® That day it happened over and over again that in that onslaught Sagremor did wonders, for the story says that he was one of the best in the whole army. And Galescalain was such an outstanding knight!4 that many times he was pointed out. And Sir Wonet, son of King Urien, began to fight so boldly that they needed none better than he, and the three brothers of Sir Gawainet stayed together all day long and did such feats of arms that they were praised many times. At the same time, the knights of the Round Table fought back very well, but!® Sir Gawainet did better than any of the others. He drove in so deeply among the warriors that no one knew what he become of him, and people looked for him high and low. 1 The word is signe (273, |. 1). Elsewhere (268, 1. 18) the word seems to be more nearly equivalent to enseigne (“ensign, banner”), whereas here both meanings (“sign,” “ensign”) are appropriate. 12The word here is ramprousne (273, 1. 10), “reproach” or “mockery” that is characteristic of the seneschal Kay, who is known for his ironic and sarcastic speech. 13Sommer’s text is hard to understand here: Si auint.. . que le tour quil se partirent se trouverent (273, 1. 22): “So it happened ... that the day they got separated they found each other.” It is noteworthy that Cel tour auint occurs in the next sentence (I. 23), while maintes fois recurs in 1. 25, which suggests the possibility of scribal anticipation in |. 22. M4 The text reads t fist tant darmes (273, |. 25): “executed there such feats of arms.” 15The text repeats the formulaic structure se recombatent tant... que (273, ll. 28-29): “fought back so well... that.” The Story of Merlin After Sir Gawainet had gone into the fray, he looked high and low among the ranks until he found Randol, the King of Gaul’s seneschal. As soon as he saw him, he fell upon him, for Randol was very worthy and bold. And Sir Gawainet struck him so hard in passing that he cut through his helmet right against the back of his neck, for the horse had taken him too far, and the sword went down right along his shoulders, cut through all the links in his hauberk it hit, and sliced off a good deal of flesh. As the sword slashed downwards, it cut through the saddle blanket, split the horse’s backbone, and went into its bowels, and the horse stumbled to the ground in a heap. Then he happened to meet Dodinel the Wildman, Kay of Estral, and Kehedin, who had been knocked down off their horses, and it was a wonder how Pontius Anthony and his men were right on top of them. And when Sir Gawainet saw them in such dire straits, he turned to that side and [274] launched such an attack all about them that he drove them out and back and put them to rout, like it or not. And Dodinel, Kay, and Kehedin, who were very bold, jumped onto horses, for there were quite many of them all about. Then the fighting grew very heavy again, and most wondrous, and they tried their best to stay close to Sir Gawainet, but it was not long before he was so far away from them that they did not know what had become of him. Very heavy was the fighting in the meadows beneath Trebe, and the knights of the Round Table did wonders.'® They looked for King Arthur all throughout the army, but they could not find him because he had ridden so far away from them. He had gone so far that he had fallen upon Frollo and Pontius Anthony, who had seven hundred knights with them, the best in their whole army. And King Arthur fought hard against them, and there was none who dared stand up to him right away; he was without a shield and wielded his sword with both hands, and all he met were hit so hard with his flawless blows that no armor could keep them from death. And when Pontius Anthony saw him, he and his men rode against him. Then Sir Gawainet happened along with his sword drawn, and they fled from him too on all sides, for no one, no matter how skilled and bold he was, dared take a stand against him right then. And when he saw his uncle King Arthur—for Pontius Anthony and Frollo of Germany had struck him from in front and behind and had made him hunch forward over his horse’s neck—he was so filled with wrath that he nearly went out of his mind. Then he put his sword back into its scabbard, and he hurled himself against the others with his bare hands, and he snatched a lance out of a knight’s hands so fiercely that he brought him to the ground. Then he held the lance straight and went right for Frollo. And when Frollo saw him coming, he rode off to one side, for he did not dare stand up to him right then. Rather, he went straight into the thickest press he could find. Gawainet kept hot on his heels, but Frollo’s knights moved in between them, and when Gawainet saw that he could not get to him, he threw the lance so hard that it drove through his shield and into the hauberk right on the left shoulder; in fact, he sent the up and the shaft in so deeply that the tip stuck out the l6The text adds de lors cors (274, 1. 7): “all by themselves.” The Story of Merlin other side, and Frollo fainted because of the anguish he felt. And when his men saw this, they were sorely distressed, for they truly thought that he had been killed. A little while after that, Frollo came out of his faint, and he had his armor taken off and his wound bound, for it was bleeding a great deal. And Sir Gawainet went straight to his uncle, who was fighting very hard. Pontius Anthony and Randol had got back on horseback, and they endeavored to avenge the blow Sir Gawainet had dealt Frollo. Then Sir Gawainet went flying headlong in among then, striking right and left, and he fought long enough to free his uncle. Then Sir Gawainet met Pontius Anthony, and, in passing, he struck him so hard on the shoulder that he drove his sword into the bone, and he went flying from his horse to the ground, and he was badly hurt from his fall. Gawainet then struck Randol the Seneschal through his helmet, and he cut through his iron coif down to his skull, he bore him bleeding to the ground, and all who saw it thought that he was dead. Then it happened that the enemy began to withdraw their echelons,!” and they led them as far as the echelon of Claudas, who was fighting against Leonce of Payerne and Pharian. After all those echelons had been linked together, they fell back against King Arthur’s men. [275] There was a great crush of men and horses then, for those who were retreating were crowding in on King Claudas.!® When King Arthur saw that they were riding away, he called Sir Gawainet over and said to him, “Dear nephew, come closer to me, for it seems to me that they are going away. Don’t leave me now, but stand by me here.” “Sir,” said Sir Gawainet, “they are right to leave, for staying behind is very harmful for them. But let’s ride after them! Let’s help them run away in defeat!” “After them right now!” shouted King Arthur. “For it does us no good to stay behind.” While the king and Sir Gawainet were talking, behold King Ban and King Bors striking out among them with their swords drawn, and they killed and brought down as many as they met. And it was very lucky for Pontius Anthony and Randol the Seneschal, for they had fled before the pursuit began. And when the four friends saw one another, they were filled with great joy. They began the chase anew and rode after those who had turned in flight. They then met the three knights of the Round Table who had fought very well all day: one was Nascien, the second Adragain, and the third Hervi of Rivel. They were all seven of them worthy, bold knights. After the chase had begun, the seneschal Kay found King Arthur’s shield lying on the ground, and when he saw it, he was very much afraid that he had been killed or taken prisoner. He had a squire pick it up, and he told him to The word here, as frequently elsewhere, is batailles (274, 1. 41, cf. 1. 42): “battalions.” 18Sommer’s text reads Hi fuiant se retiennent le roy Claudas (275, 1. 1): “the retreaters hold King Claudas back,” perhaps, but se (intended as the reflexive pronoun?) is ungrammatical as a second direct complement. The possibility adopted is k fuiant sere tiennent le roy Claudas for & fuiant tiennent le roy Claudas sere (“the retreaters hold King Claudas squeezed in”). 319 come after him; he said that he would go looking for King Arthur until he found him. Then he joined the chase after the others; it lasted a long time, for they did not stop before they got to Claudas’s echelon.!® They were held up there for quite a while, for there was a great plenty of people; and Kay followed the pursuit until he found the companions I have named for you. He was very glad that he had found King Arthur, and he went to hang his shield about his neck. Then Merlin came along holding the dragon, and he shouted to them, “Now at them, noble knights, and they will soon be put to rout.” And Sir Gawainet took a lance and was the very first to break ranks. He struck King Claudas on his shield, which he went through as well as his hauberk, and he drove it all the way through his left side. He hit him so hard that he sent him sprawling to the ground. He then trampled him with his horse, and Claudas fainted from the agony. Then Sir Gawainet drew his sword and flew in where the press was the thickest he could find, and he broke in so hard that he went all the way through. All of the companions were talking about the bold deeds they saw him doing. And the others rode in to rescue their lord King Claudas; it was very hard for them to bring him out of the press and put him back on his horse. With that Agravain, Guerrehet, and Gaheriet came spurring their horses. And when they saw the men gathered about Claudas, they flew headlong in among them so hard that they drove them all away. There King Claudas was brought to the ground again, and he was wounded very painfully in three places, not counting the wound that Sir Gawainet [276] had given him; so badly hurt was he that he nearly died. Even so, his men struggled hard until they had rescued him, but they lost many before they got him away. Then it happened that their echelons” swung about wildly and rode away in flight one after the other, but Pontius Anthony, Frollo of Germany, Randol the Seneschal, and King Claudas pulled aside. King Claudas was so badly wounded that he could hardly ride, and the others were not so well off themselves. When they saw their losses and the harm that had come to them, they grew most sorrowful, and they asked one another where they should go. “Sir,” said King Claudas, “it is my advice that we should go into the Land Laid Waste,2! for that is the best refuge we could have, and it is the strongest and the closest. And we should go through the Humber Forest along an old trail I know about. But I am so badly hurt that I can barely ride my horse.” While they were talking thus, they saw their echelons break up and fall back one upon the other. Then the pursuit grew so fast and so wondrous that they did not know where they were going, but King Ban’s men2? struck 19The word here is lesschiele (275, 1. 22). 20The word here is batailles (276, 1. 3): “battalions.” 21The word here is le deserte (276, 1. 9), that is, King Claudas’s homeland. 22The noun phrase les gens au roy ban (276, Il. 14-15) is in the oblique rather than the nominative. In fact, the grammatical and syntactical relationships with each other of expressions representing the two sides are confused throughout. For example, 320 down and killed so many of them that the place was heaped up with the dead and wounded. As soon as King Bors’s men saw the tide turning against them, they posted themselves at a narrow pass they knew about, and King Arthur struck out among them with his men scattered all about, for they longed only to kill and maim them, and they took and killed as many as they wanted. And when those who had been put to flight came up against King Bors’s men, who had gone to the pass, so many of them were killed that the field was heaped up with them. The pursuit lasted all day until nightfall, and a very great many prisoners were taken. King Claudas, Pontius Anthony, Duke Frollo of Germany, and Randol, the seneschal of Gaul, defended themselves as well as they could, but very few of their men were left, for the story says that of the eighty thousand they had numbered at the beginning, not half got away, nor even did ten thousand go back home with them, for they had run in flight through the wild forests to save themselves and to stave off death. Thus were the four princes put to rout, just as you have heard, on the advice of Merlin, and after the three kings had run after them until nightfall, they turned back with a great many prisoners, and went straight to the castle of Trebe. And they took lodging in tents and pavilions, which they had got set up, and they were very happy and made merry all night long, for they found the places where they stayed to be very well stocked with everything a man needs, and nothing lacked, nor did they have to use up any of their own food at all. The next evening, when they had settled in through the whole army, Gratian and Pharian stood watch so that they would not be taken by surprise by anyone. And King Ban and King Bors took Sir Gawainet straight to the king and his companions of the Round Table, the forty knights the story has named for you, and the new knights in the castle of Trebe, where everyone was glad to see them. There were at least three hundred knights from the countryside by count, so they were indeed well served that evening with everything that befitted them. However joyful they may have been, it came to nothing beside the great rejoicing the two sister queens did when they saw their husbands they had longed for, and no wonder, [277] for they had not seen them for a very long time and they were young ladies of very great beauty. And everyone sought to serve and honor King Arthur and his companions. Why should I go on telling you about their merrymaking and the happiness they felt? For they were richly served as befitted gentlemen as worthy as they were. And after they had eaten they went to bed, for they needed very much to lie down, because they were tired and worn out from the hardships they had undergone all day. And in the next sentence (Il. 15-17), King Bors’s men are depicted as moving out when they saw that they were being routed: si tost comme il virent la descomfiture sor aus tourner (“as soon as they saw the rout turning against them”); but sor aus surely must refer to the enemy. Indeed, in the following sentence Arthur’s men are hot on their heels and strive to kill and maim any and all. 23The text has only the ambiguous personal pronoun il (276, 1. 29): “they.” The Story of Merlin King Arthur, Sir Gawainet, Sir Yvain, Sagremor, Didoine, and Kay all slept in a quiet room off by themselves. And after King Ban and King Bors had seen to their comfort, the knights of the Round Table and the newly-dubbed knights were made comfortable in another room by themselves. And then King Bors and King Ban went to bed with their wives, and they left the tapers burning where the barons were. That night the two kings showed their wives their great love, for they loved them very much. And that night, so says the story, Queen Elaine, King Ban’s wife, conceived a child. And when they had lain together enough, they went to sleep. And the queen fell into a wonderful dream*‘ that lasted a long time, and she was very much frightened by it as she slept, for she thought that she was on a high mountain, and she saw all about her a great many wild beasts of various kinds that were feeding on the grass that grew fair and thick. After they had fed for a while, there welled up among them such a loud uproar that they began to run into one another and tried to run one another away from the feeding-ground. And they broke up into two herds, and one went one way and the other another, and each was led by a wonderful lion. On one side were fewer than half of them, and a lion wearing a crown was their leader, but he was smaller than the other one by more than a foot. This crowned lion had with him eighteen cubs, all wearing crowns, each one of which had lordship over part of the beasts that were turned toward the lion. And the other lion, which was not crowned, had thirty cubs in his company; they were all crowned, and each one had lordship over a part of the beasts that had turned toward the big, uncrowned lion. After the beasts had been broken up and divided into herds, she looked toward the one belonging to the crowned lion and saw four hundred bulls that were tied together about the neck and gathered in a circle eating tender stalks from a haystack.?5 And because it seemed to the crowned lion that the feeding-ground was better around the crownless lion, he was beset by envy and ran against him to take it away from him. And the uncrowned lion took part of his beasts and put them into three great flocks, and they went out to fight against the crowned lion, which had his beasts gathered into eighteen flocks each with a cub that had lordship over the others and led them. And the four hundred bulls, which were fearsome and full of pride, and three of the eighteen flocks*® that were with the crowned lion undertook together such hard fighting that you have never heard tell of any harder, but in the end the crowned lion’s beasts had to fall back, even though the other lion had been very much frightened that he might lose his feeding-ground. While the beasts were fighting, it seemed to the lady that a great leopard, [278] the lordliest2” there had ever 24The word here is pense (277, 1. 17), a state of brooding. 25The text has dun rasterlier lerbe menue (277, 1. 33). 26The word here is monchiaus (277, 1. 39): “heaps.” 2’The expression is i plus orguillous (277, 1. 43 - 288, |. 1): “the proudest,” with pride taken as a sign of lordly power; cf. autresi comme li lupars est orguilleus sor toutes autres bestes, autresi sera il li mieudres (280, ll. 10-11): “just as the leopard has lordship over all The Story of Merlin been, was running through a deep valley, but it seemed to her that a thick fog was keeping her from seeing what was happening to it. After she had lost sight of it, she turned back toward the wild beasts, which were still fighting, and she saw that the crowned lion was getting the worst of it by far. Then?® a great leopard came out of the forest and watched the beasts’ battle for quite a long time; and when he saw that the crowned lion was losing, he went to help him and fell upon the crownless lion and fought his beasts so fiercely that he drove them back, and as long as he was against them the uncrowned lion could not win. When the uncrowned lion saw that he could not win as long as the leopard was against him, he left the fray and befriended the leopard so that he finally took him away with him. And on the third day the battle among the beasts started all over again just as it had been before, but the leopard was on the side over the lion that was not crowned, and the beasts fought hard together until the crowned lion was put to rout thanks to the leopard, which was against him. When the leopard saw that the crowned lion was being put to flight, he made a sign toward the crownless lion that the crowned lion? should go to him and beg his mercy. He did so, and peace was made between the two lions, so that never thereafter did they get angry with each other. And then the lady looked carefully at the leopard to see whether she could find out who he was, and it seemed to her at last that it was he who had sprung from her loins and had grown so tall and strong and made such efforts that all the beasts of Great Britain, and all those of Gaunes and Benoic, were bowing down to him. And after he had won lordship over these beasts, the lion went away; she did not know where or what had become of him. The lady was wrapped in this dream all night long, and she did not come out of it until daylight, when she awoke and crossed herself because of the great wonder she had seen in her sleep. And when the king saw her so frightened, he asked her what was wrong with her, and she told him the dream just as she had seen it in her sleep. And after she had told him everything, the king said that, God willing, it could only be something good. King Ban and his wife then got up as early as they could and went straight to the first Mass; they did not want to awaken King Arthur or his companions, who were still asleep, for they had been sorely worn down the day before. And King Ban prayed Our Lord to give him death when he should ask Him for it; he was a most worthy man in his faith and belief, and he uttered this prayer many times afterwards, until it happened one night while he was asleep that a voice told him that his prayer had been heard. He would have death the first time he asked for it, but first he would have to commit the deadly sin of adultery one time before he would die, and it would not be before long; he should not fear, for he would be reconciled with Our Lord. In the dream King Ban was having, it seemed to him that the voice that had told him those things was withdrawing, when it let out such a loud scream that it beasts, so will he [an unknown knight] be the best there will be in that time.” 28The text has Quant (278, |. 5): “When.” 29The text has only quil (278, |. 16): “that he.” ae sounded like the most deafening thunder and the most wondrous he had ever heard. And the king, who was holding the queen in his arms, began shaking so hard that he almost fell out of the bed, [279] which was big and wide, on top of her. The queen was so frightened that she could not utter a word for a long time, and her husband was so upset that he did not know where he was. And when he regained his memory, he got up and went straight to church, where he made his confession and heard Our Lord’s service. Thereafter he always confessed every week and took the Holy Sacrament from the altar, and King Bors, who was a most worthy man and led a good life, did likewise. Thus was King Arthur in the kingdom of Benoic, and he stayed there a whole month. And they overran King Claudas’s land every day and plundered it and laid it waste so that it would be a long time before he would overrun King Ban. But afterwards he did, thanks to the forces of Pontius Anthony and the king of Gaul, as the story will reveal it to you later, and hurt the two brothers so badly that they had not one acre of their lands left, and they were so stripped of their wealth that they died poverty-stricken, and their wives were so poor and distraught that they became nuns in the royal convent out of fear of king Claudas.*° For afterwards they could not get help from King Arthur, who had so much to do in his own country that he could not give them heed; the heirs the two kings fathered were for a long time without their birthrights, but later King Arthur won their lands back for them, and he gave them the kingdom of Gaul, as the story will reveal it to you later. I will stop telling you of these things until it is the time and place for it; instead, we will tell you about Merlin and King Ban and how Merlin told King Ban and his wife about the dreams they had had. 35. Merlin and the Emperor of Rome.’ Here the story says that one day King Ban came to Merlin and said to him, “Sir, I am filled with dread about a dream that came to me in my sleep and one my wife had, too. [am in great need of counsel, and you are the most learned man now alive, so I beg you to tell me, if you will, what this dream means.” “In truth,” answered Merlin, “there is great meaning in these two dreams, and it is no wonder if you are afraid.” Then King Arthur asked what the dreams were, and Merlin related them just as King Ban and his wife had dreamed them as they slept, so that the king himself knew that he spoke the truth. When King Arthur, King Bors, and Sir Gawainet heard the dreadful words Merlin had spoken, they were greatly amazed as to what they could mean, and they brooded on them long and hard. And after they had thought awhile, King Arthur said to Merlin, “Sir, you have told us what the dreams were, now 30sommer’s manuscript has roy cler (279, t. 15]) but he notes (n. 1) that in the Lancelot it is once again a question of King Claudas. 1Corresponds to Sommer, 279-291. 322 tell us the meaning, if you please, for I would very much like to know it.” “Sir,” said Merlin, “I mustn't explain everything to you from beginning to end, for I don’t wish to, even so, I'll tell you something about them, as much as it is fitting for me to do.” Then he began to tell about the lady’s dream. “King Ban,” said Merlin, “it is the truth that the great lion that is not crowned stands for a prince, a very wealthy man in goods and in friends, who will conquer thirty kingdoms,* and he will bring all thirty kings together as his companions. And the other lion, the crowned one, which came with eighteen cubs, [280] signifies a most powerful king who will have eighteen kings under him who will all be his liegemen. And the four hundred bulls she saw in her sleep stand for four hundred knights who will have sworn oaths to one another to help them to the death, and they will all be that king’s men. And the prince I told you about before will fall upon that king to take his lands, but he will defend himself as best he can. And when, as it will happen, that prince begins to defeat that king, there will come an unknown knight who has been lost for a long time, and he will help the king until the prince cannot drive him from the field or put him to rout. And the leopard stands for that knight, for just as the leopard is lordly above all beasts, so will he be the best knight in that time. And by that knight will peace be made between those two princes, who'll have hated each other so much. Now you have heard about the dream and its meaning,” Merlin went on, “so I will go away right now, for I have much to do elsewhere.” And when they had heard the wonder of the dream Merlin told them about, they fell more deeply into thought than they had before. Then the king asked him if he would enlighten them any more, and he said that he would not. With that Merlin left the three kings and went straight to his lady love, who was waiting for him. And it was on a Saint John’s Day that she was waiting for him, according to the oath she had sworn to him. And when she saw him, she was very glad to see him, and she took him with her to her rooms so stealthily that no one ever took note of it. She asked him many things she sought to know about, and he taught her quite a lot, for he loved her so deeply that he nearly went mad. And when she saw that he had welcomed her greeting? with such great love, she begged him to teach her how to put a man to sleep as deeply as she would like without his waking up. Merlin knew very well what she was thinking, so he asked her why she wanted to know this. “Because,” she said, “every time I wanted to talk to you, I would like to put my father—his name is Dyonas—and my mother to sleep so that they might never take note of you and me. You can be sure that they would kill me if they found out anything about what we’ re doing.” She very often said such things to Merlin. One day they happened to have gone into a garden, beside a spring, and 2The text adds jf. mains (279, 1. 41): “one less” or “one morning”? 3The text has quil lauott cualli[e] (280, ll. 21-22): “that he had welcomed her,” that is, that he had accepted her welcome of him. The Story of Merlin the maiden had him lie down with his head in her lap, and she drew him to her from time to time, so that Merlin was burning with love for her.° Then the young lady begged him to teach her how to put a lady to sleep. He knew what she was thinking, but even so he taught her this and other things besides. For God our Lord wished it so, and he taught her three names that she should write down, and every time he wanted to lie with her, they would have such great power that, for as long as she had them on her person, no man could know her carnally. And from that time on, she worked on Merlin in such a way that every time he wanted to speak with her he did not have the power to lie with her. And this is why they say that women have one more wile than the devil. So Merlin stayed there with the maiden a full week, but we do not find, when we read, that Merlin ever sought anything unworthy? of her or any other woman, but she was very frightened of him while she knew him, and she had found out how he was sired, and so she armed herself against him. And he taught her everything the human heart could think of, and she put it all down in wmiting. And [281] then Merlin left her and came straight to Benoic, where King Arthur and his companions were, and they were very happy when they saw him. And Sir Gawainet had overrun King Claudas’s lands, and he had taken a great many knights with him, and they had plundered the whole land and laid it waste. Nor was Claudas ever so bold as to stand up to him. And as soon as Sir Gawainet and his companions had gone back from Claudas’s lands, Pontius Anthony left Claudas, as did Frollo of Germany and Randol the seneschal of the land of Gaul, and they were sorrowful and angry about the harm that had been done them. So they swore an oath that never would King Ban or King Bors ever be served by them, and just as soon as they could avenge themselves, they would give due rewards for service done on their behalf. Thus was Claudas left poor and distraught. But he got all of his land back, as the story will reveal it to you later, with the help of the king of Gaul and Pontius Anthony. Pontius Anthony came back from Rome with a very great horde, but this was ill-timed for his own good, for afterwards he was put to death by the hand of King Ban of Benoic in the meadowlands before Trebe. But Claudas had such a great horde that he besieged the castle, as you will hear later in the story when it will be the place to tell it.” But now the story falls silent about all of them and goes back to talking about Sir Gawainet, who came back from Benoic happy and lively. When Gawainet had plundered Claudas’s land and laid it waste, he went back to Benoic, to the three kings who were there, and Merlin with them, for he had come back from his lady love. And when they saw the great wealth that 4The text reads le mist couchter en son giron (280, ll. 29-30): “laid him down in her lap.” 5The text reads que merlins lamoit a menuteilles (280, 1. 30): “so that Merlin loved her wondrously.” 6The word here is vilounte (280, l. 39): “lowborn behavior, uncourtliness.” 7Text from “with the help of the King” to here is not in Sommer’s base text, supplied by him from other manuscripts (281, n.1). The Story of Merlin Sir Gawainet was bringing back, they showed how very glad they were. And the next morning they took to the road to go to Gaunes, a wealthy city and full of all kinds of goods. There they were made most welcome, for King Bors served the greatest feast that could be brought together. They stayed there for three days, and on the fourth they set out toward La Rochelle, where they put to sea. But before that, Merlin had drawn the three kings and Gawainet aside and told them that, as soon as they could, they had to go to the kingdom of Carmelide, and they should take only three thousand men-at-arms with them, the best in the whole army. “What” said King Arthur. “Merlin, dear friend, will you not come to my wedding?” “Sir,” answered Merlin, “I have hard work to do that I must see through to the end. But you will not have been in the kingdom of Carmelide long before you see me there.” With that, they set out and went their own ways. King Arthur put to sea with his companions. But here the story falls silent from talking about them, and it will tell you about Merlin. Now the story says that when Merlin had left King Arthur, he went to dwell in the wide and deep forests of the country about Rome.§ At that time Julius Caesar was emperor, and that is why he went there, and it is right that I should tell you why he went there. In truth, so says the story, Julius Caesar had a wife who was of the highest birth and of very great beauty, but she was lustful above all women, though by the emperor she had but one daughter, who was also most beautiful.? That lady kept with her twelve noble youths dressed as girls!® with whom she went to bed every night the emperor was not with her, for [282] she was most lustful, more than any of the other women in the land of Rome. And because she was afraid that beards would grow on her twelve boys,!! she had their chins smeared with lime and yellow arsenic! steeped and boiled in stale urine, and they were dressed in big, flowing gowns and wrapped in wimples, and their hair was long and grown out, and cut in the manner of maidens, so that they looked very much like girls.!5 They were with the empress for a long time without being found out. At that time it happened that a maiden came to the emperor’s court. She was the daughter of a prince whose name was Mathem, and he was a duke in Germany.!* And that maiden came to court dressed as a squire. Now Frollo had stolen that Mathem’s birthright from him and driven him from his land, so his daughter came in great distress, because she did not know what had become of her father 8The expression is es fores de romenie (281, |. 32). °The emperor’s daughter is named Foldace (292, |. 36). 10The text reads damoisiaus atorne a guise de damoiseles (281, |. 38): “young lords dressed as young ladies.” lHere the word is serians (282, |. 2): “hirelings.” 12The word is orpiement (282, 1. (<aunipigmentum), tri-sulfide of arsenic. 13tHere the word is puceles (282, |. 6): “maidens.” lM4The text reads dus dalemaigne (282, |. 8): “duke of Germany.” This would seem to be an appropriation of Frollo’s tide. Later Merlin refers to him as duc Mathem de Soane (291, |. 10): “Duke Mathem of Soane.” 3): “orpiment” 323 and mother. And she was tall, straight, and strong, and in every way she behaved as a squire behaves without unseemliness,!° nor was she ever taken to be a woman. She stayed with the emperor and was most skilled at arms, and she sought to serve the emperor better than all the men. Indeed, she was so outstanding in serving him that he made her a knight on Saint John’s Day, along with the other young lords, of whom there were more than two hundred, and afterwards she was seneschal of the whole land. She had herself called Grisandoles, but in baptism her name was Lovely.!© And the emperor had made her seneschal of all his land because she was most worthy. It happened one evening that the emperor lay beside his wife, and he went to sleep. A dream came to him in which he saw a great sow right in the middle of his court before his great hall, and it was bigger and more wonderful than any he had ever seen. The bristles on its back were so long that they trailed more than a yard behind, and on its head was a circle that seemed to be of gold. And it seemed to him that he had seen it other times and that he had bred it, but in no way did he dare say that it belonged to him. And while he was looking at that sow, he saw twelve wolf cubs coming out of his bedchamber, and they made straight for the sow and lay with it,!” and all twelve went out one after the other. When the emperor saw the wonder, he asked what should be done to the sow with which the wolf cubs had lain. And someone told him that it was not worthy to be around people and that no one should eat anything that was born of it, and it and the wolf cubs were condemned to be burned; and it seemed to him that they were all burned up in a heap. Then the emperor awoke very frightened and deeply worried about that dream; and he did not wish to talk about it with his wife, for he was a very wise man. In the morning he got out of bed as soon as he could and went to hear Mass in the church; and when he had got back, he found that his barons had come back and gathered in the high hall, for they had already heard Mass. They spoke about one thing and another until the meal was ready and the tables set up, then they sat down to eat and were very well served. Then it happened that the emperor fell into deep thought, brooding about the dream he had seen in his sleep, and when the barons saw him stewing they grew very worried and stopped talking all at once. And there was The word is uilonie (282, 1. 12): “lowborn behavior, boorishness, uncourtliness.” 161d French auenable (282, |. 17). l7Sommer’s text reads & estoient a planije (282, 26): “and they were combed” (taking a planijeas aplanozé [“smoothed, planed, caressed”}. Sommer notes a variant from the Harley manuscript: et luy estoient plaisans (282, n. 1): “and they were pleasant/loving to it.” Just below, the action is more clearly summed up as la trute a qui li louel auoient ieu (282, ll. 28-29): “the sow with which the wolf cubs had lain,” which squares with Merlin’s subsequent account (288, I. 1). Significantly, Merlin’s account, which is fuller, refers to the sow as aplanoie (287, |. 36) and to the cubs as aplanoies (287, |. 41). In fact, the lines xj. loutaus biaus & aplanoies & venotent tot par mi la sale a la truie si gisotent tout .xij. a li lun apres lautre (“twelve beautiful wolf cubs and they all came through the hall to the sow and all twelve lay with her one after the other” [287, 1. 41-288, 1. 1]) suggest that here a scribe garbled the text by telescoping. 324 not a single one of them who dared utter a word, for they sorely dreaded making the emperor angry. But now the story stops speaking awhile about that, and we will tell you about Merlin, who was in the forests around Rome.!® [283] Here the story says that while the emperor sat brooding so at the meal, as you have heard, Merlin knew very well about it, so he came all the way to the gate leading into Rome, and then he cast a spell and took on a wonderful new shape. He became a stag, the biggest and most wonderful that anyone had ever seen; he had one white forefoot and five-branched antlers on his head, the biggest that anyone had ever seen on a stag. Then he struck out running throughout Rome and made as great an uproar as if a thousand men were after him. And when the common folk saw him running all about, there arose from every side such a great hue and cry that no one could have heard God thundering there. And they all ran after him, big and small, with fire and sticks and all kinds of arms, and for a very long time they ran after him through the whole city until they came to the great hall where the emperor was sitting at his meal. And when the serving men heard the people, they sprang to the windows of the hall, and when they found out what it was, they went outside. And the stag came running at full speed, with the common folk after him, and he came to the great hall and stormed headlong through the main gate. Then he dashed in among the tables and spilled food and wine and meat everywhere, and there began such a great breaking of pots and dishes that it was a wonder! And when the stag had had enough in that part of the hall, he came right up to the emperor, knelt, and said to him, “Julius Caesar, what are you brooding about? Stop stewing, for it is not worthwhile. You will not find anyone to tell you about your dream until the Wildman vouches for its meaning, and you would be wasting your time to worry about it any more.” Then the stag stood up and saw that the doors of the hall were closed, and he then cast a spell so that the doors opened! so fast that they flew into bits. After the doors had opened, the stag sprang out and went running down through the city, and the chase after him began again and lasted for a long time, until at last he ran out into the open field, and he disappeared so that no one knew what had become of him. And when the folk had lost him, they turned around and went back. And when the emperor saw that the stag had not been held back, he grew very angry and had it cried out throughout the city that he would give his daughter and half his kingdom to anyone who could take the Wildman or the stag, so long as he was a man of noble birth, and after his death he would have all the kingdom. Then many a wealthy young lord of great worth got on his horse and looked for the Wildman through the forest and great stretches of countryside, but it was all for nothing, for no one could find out anything about him, so they turned back. But whoever else may have gone back, Grisandoles did not, but rode back and forth 1BAgain, es fores de rommenie (282, |. 42); see above, n. 8. 191y this clause i huis del palais ouri (283, 1. 23) is in the singular. The Story of Merlin through a great forest, one hour each way, and he? was there for a full week. Then it happened that, one day, he got down from his horse to pray Our Lord to give him counsel as to what he was looking for. And while he was praying, it happened that the stag that had been in Rome came up before him and said to him, “Lovely, you are running after madness, for you cannot succeed in your quest in any way unless you go after pork stewed in pepper, milk, and honey, and hot bread. And bring four companions with you and a serving boy who will turn the meat on a spit until it is cooked. And come into this forest, to the thickest part you can find, and set up a table beside the fire and put out the bread, the milk, and the honey, [284] and you will hide some distance from the fire. Do not be afraid, for the Wildman will come without fail.” And after the stag had said this, he went away galloping through the forest, and Grisandoles climbed on his horse and began brooding about what the stag had told him, and he said in his heart that it was a spiritual thing, for it had called him by his right name, and he said that only something very meaningful could come from such an event. These were the things Grisandoles thought about and worked out in his heart while he was riding. At last he came to a city near the forest, and he got there everything he needed. Then he went back into the forest to where the stag had spoken to him, and he took four men and a boy with him. When they came to the depths of the forest, they found a great, leafy oak tree, and they got down from their horses, because Grisandoles and his companions found it to be a cheerful spot. They let their horses graze and lit a great and wonderful fire, where they started roasting meat. And the odor of the meat on the spit spread throughout the forest, and people smelled it quite far away. Then they set up their table next to the fire, and when everything was ready they hid themselves and crouched by a bush. And Merlin, who knew all these things and had worked out a disguise so that no one would know him, came by there one morning, batting cabbages from oak tree to oak tree. He was black-skinned, wild-haired, bearded, and shoeless, and he was wearing a ragged tunic. He came straight to the fire where the meat was cooking. And when the boy saw him coming toward them, he was nearly frightened out of his wits. And Merlin came up to the fire and began to warm himself and rub his hands over the heat, and he kept looking at the meat. He began to smack his lips like someone who was starved, then he looked and saw that the food was done to his liking and made ready just as you have heard. And when he saw that the meat had been cooked long enough, he went over to the boy and snatched the spit out of his hands like a madman, and he ate until nothing was left of the meat; then he ate some of the warm bread and honey. And after he had eaten all that and was so stuffed that he almost burst, he warmed himself by the fire and fell asleep. And when Grisandoles saw that he was asleep, he and his companions went straight to him as stealthily as they 2°The masculine is affirmed in the next sentence: quil fu... descendus (283, 1. 36): “he had... got down.” The Story of Merlin could, and when they reached him they wrapped an iron chain around his waist, and they tied one of their companions to the other end of the chain. After they had tied him up, he awoke, jumped up, and started to pick up his cudgel like a madman, but Grisandoles grabbed him around the waist so hard that he held him still. And when he saw that he had been taken prisoner and bound, he was ashamed and downcast. Then the horses were brought and he was raised onto one of them, and they bound him fast to the saddle with two tethers, and the one who was tied to him climbed up behind him and rode with his arms around his waist. Then they took to the road, and the Wildman looked and saw Grisandoles, and he broke into a broad smile. And when Grisandoles saw him smiling, he came alongside him and began to ask him about many things, but he did not want to say a thing. And he asked him why he had smiled just then, but he answered nothing but, “Unnatural creature who have gone from one shape [285] into another, deceitful trickster worse than any other thing, more stinging than a horsefly, deadlier than a snake’s poison, be still! I will say no more to you until we go before the emperor, where we are headed.” With that the Wildman fell silent and said no more to him. And they rode together for a very long time, and Grisandoles was thunderstruck by what the Wildman had said to him and talked to his companions about it. They thought that he was a very smart man and said that because of him wonders would come to the land. So they rode along together talking about many things until, one day, they went by an abbey where they saw a great many poor folk before the gate waiting for alms. And when the Wildman saw them he began to smile. And when Grisandoles saw him smiling, he came to him and asked him most courteously, for God’s sake, to tell him why he had smiled. Then the Wildman looked at him sideways and said to him, “Unnatural, reworked image, do not ask me anything anymore, for I will tell you nothing until we come before the emperor.” When Grisandoles heard this, he let him be and did not ask him any more for the time being, but they all talked about this and that and rode the whole day until evening and the next morning until the hour of prime. And it so happened that they were about to pass a chapel where Mass was about to be sung, when Grisandoles and his companions alighted from their horses and went inside the church to hear Mass. There they found a knight and a squire who were listening to the service. When the knight saw the man wrapped in chains, he wondered who it might be. While he was looking at the Wildman, his squire, who was standing in a corner of the chapel, came toward his master, raised his hand, and slapped him so hard that it resounded through the whole chapel; then he went back to where he had come from, filled with shame that he had struck him. But by the time he had got back to his place, he was not bothered about it any more, for the feeling of shame lasted only as long as it took him to walk back. And when the Wildman saw that, he burst out laughing, and the knight who had been struck was all bewildered, so that he did not know anything to say or do except take it. And Grisandoles and his companions wondered what this could be. And they had not been there 325 for long before the knight was slapped even harder by his squire, who went back to his place. And the Wildman burst out laughing very hard. If the knight was thunderstruck before, he was even more so the second time. And after the squire had gone back to his place, he was not bothered by it. And Grisandoles and his companions were struck with wonder, but they still went on listening to the service. And as they were listening to it, the squire went back a third ume and slapped his master still harder than he had done before, and when the Wildman saw it he started to laugh again. Then Mass had been sung and was over, and Grisandoles and his companions left the church. And the knight whom the squire had struck went out after them, and he asked Grisandoles who he was and what kind of man he was taking with him all tied up. And he said that they belonged to Julius Caesar, the emperor of Rome, “and we are taking him a wildman we caught in that forest; he is to tell the meaning of a dream he had. But tell me now, fair [286] lord,” said Grisandoles, “why this squire has slapped you three times and you didn’t say a word about it? Is this a custom you have?” And the knight answered him that he would know that soon if he was willing to wait a little while. Then the knight called his squire over to Grisandoles and asked him why he had struck him. He was so ashamed and downcast that he answered that he would rather be dead, “but an urge came over me.” The knight asked him whether he had any urge to hit him then. And he said that he would rather die, “but such an urge came over me that I couldn’t hold back.” And Grisandoles crossed himself in wonder. Then the knight told him that he would go to court to hear the things the Wildman had to say. With that they set out on the road, and Grisandoles rode side by side with the Wildman and asked him why he had laughed in the church when the squire struck his master. He looked at him askance and said to him, “Reworked, deceitful image, sharp as a sting,*! likeness of a creature by which many a man is killed and maimed, razor more fit for slashing and sharper than any weapon,” be still! And don’t ask me anything until we go before the emperor, for I'll tell you nothing.” When he heard his strong words, he was astonished, and he never dared ask him anything thereafter, so they rode for many days until at last they came to Rome. And when they went into the city, the people caught sight of them and came running to meet them to see the Wildman. The news spread throughout the city, and they gathered about him to see what he looked like, and they took him along with them until they reached the great hall. And the emperor came out to the hall’s doors to meet them, for they had managed to climb to the top of the steps. And then Grisandoles came to the emperor and said to him, “Sir, look. You see here the Wildman, whom I give you 2IThe text reads comme a lesne for comme alesne (286, 1. 15). 22The text continues fontaine sourians hi ia niert espuchie (286, I. 12-13); “smiling fountain that will never dry up.” 326 as a gift. Guard him well from now on, for I am handing him over to you. You can be sure that I have had a great deal of trouble with him.” And the emperor said that he would reward him very handsomely and that he would have the Wildman very well guarded. Then the emperor sent for an ironsmith to put him in bonds, but the Wildman told him that he need not bother with that, for he would not go away without his leave. The emperor asked him how he could be sure of that, and he answered that he would swear it to him on the Christian faith he held to. “What?” said the emperor. “Are you then a Christian?” “Sir, 1am,” he answered, “without a doubt.” “And how did you come to be baptized?” asked the emperor. “I will be glad to tell you that,” he said. “The truth is that my mother was coming back one day from the market in a town and it was getting late. She went into the Forest of Broceliande but strayed from her path, so that she had to spend the night in the forest. And when she saw that she was all alone and lost, she lay down under a tree and went to sleep. Then a wildman of the forest came along and sat down beside her. And when he saw that she was alone, he lay with her, and she did not dare defend herself, and that night I was fathered in my mother. And when she got back home, she worried for a long time. And after she saw that she was with child, she carried me until I was born and baptized in a font. And she raised me until I was grown, and as soon as J could get along without her, I went away to live in the deep forests. Because of my father’s nature I had to go back there, and it is because he was wild that I am. [287] “Now you have heard how I was baptized and became a Christian.” “May God never help me,” said the emperor, “if ever you are bound and chained on my account, as long as you pledge to me that you will not go away without my leave.” Then Grisandoles told the emperor how he had laughed when he caught him and when they were before the abbey and in the chapel, and he told him the various things he had said to him. “So ask him why he laughed that way so many times.” And the emperor asked him, and he answered that he would know everything in a short while. “But send for your barons and then I'll tell you this and something else.” With that the emperor took the Wildman and went straight to his rooms, and they spoke together about many things. The next day the emperor sent for his barons, who he thought would gather quickly. And they did come very gladly from everywhere. On the fourth day after the Wildman had come, the barons were gathered in the great hall. And the emperor brought the Wildman in and had him sit beside him, and everyone stared at him long and hard. Then they asked the emperor®? to tell them why he had sent for them. And he answered that it was because of a dream that had come to him in his sleep, “and I want it to be explained before you.” 23The text has the ambiguous singular personal pronoun & that could refer to the emperor or to the wild man (287, 1. 14). The Story of Merlin They said that they would gladly hear its meaning. Then the emperor ordered the Wildman to tell him, but he answered that he would say nothing until the empress and her twelve maidens had come there. She was called for, and she came in with a cheerful face, because she did not worry about anything he might say. When the empress and her twelve maidens came in, the barons rose to greet her. But as soon as the Wildman saw her, he burst out laughing scornfully. He stopped laughing after awhile and then stared fixedly at the empress, the emperor, Grisandoles, and the twelve maidens. Then he turned toward the barons and began to laugh loud and hard as though to mock them. When the emperor saw him laughing thus, he entreated him to have the kindness to tell him what he had sworn he would and why he had laughed then and just before. “My lord, my lord,” said the Wildman, “if you will swear to me before all your barons gathered here that you will not hold it against me, that no harm will come to me from it, and that you will give me leave to go as soon as I have interpreted your dream, I will tell you.” And the emperor granted him this and swore that he would do everything he wanted. Then the Wildman said that he would tell him. So he began to speak: “Sir,” said the Wildman, “one evening you happened to go to bed with your wife, who is over there. And after you had fallen asleep, a dream came to you in which you saw a sow before you that was fair and well-groomed. And the bristles on its back were so long that they trailed more than a yard behind it. And it had on its head a circle of shining gold. It seemed to you that it had been bred in your household, but you could not recognize it, although it seemed to you that you had seen it before. And after you had wondered at this thing for a time, you saw twelve beautiful, well-groomed wolf cubs come out of your bedroom and go to the sow into the middle of the hall. [288] All twelve lay with it one after the other, and when they had done to it as they wished, they went back into the bedroom. Then you went straight to your barons and asked them what should be done with that sow you had seen behaving in such a way, and the barons answered that it was unworthy and unfaithful, and they condemned it to be burned along with the cubs. Then a great and wonderful fire was set in this courtyard, and the sow and the cubs were burned. Now you have heard the dream just as it came to you in your sleep, and if I am mistaken in anything, say so before your barons.” And the emperor said that he was not mistaken in even one word. “My lord emperor,” said the barons, “since he has told you what your dream was, we can believe him as to its meaning, if he will tell you what it is. And this is something we would very much like to hear.” “Indeed,” said the Wildman, “I will explain it to you so plainly that you will see clearly that I am telling the truth.” “Then tell us,” said the emperor, “for I would very much like to hear it.” “Sir,” said the Wildman, “the great sow you saw stands for your wife the empress, who is over there; its bristles that were so long stand for the robe in which she is dressed; and the golden circle it was wearing on its head stands for the The Story of Merlin great crown with which you had her crowned. And for the sake of your feelings, I would stop talking now and say no more.” “Indeed,” said the emperor, “you must speak if you wish to fulfill your pledge.” “Sir,” said the Wildman, “then I'll tell you. The twelve wolf cubs you saw coming out of your bedroom stand for the twelve maidens who are with your wife. I swear to you that they are not women, but men, every one of them. Have them undressed and you will see whether or not this is true. And you should know that every time you leave the city, your wife has herself served by them in her rooms. Now you have heard the meaning of your dream, and you can find out whether it is true or not.” When the emperor heard that his wife had broken faith with him, he was so astounded that he could not utter a word for a time. Then, full of wrath, he spoke and said, “We will soon see.” Then he called to Grisandoles, his seneschal, and said, “I want these maidens stripped right now, for I want my barons to see the truth.” And Grisandoles sprang up*4 and had them strip before the emperor, and they all found that they were formed in every part of their bodies just as other men are. When the emperor saw them, he was so deeply shamed that he did not know what to say. Then he swore an oath that he would have justice done straightway as it was meet. Some of the barons judged that, since the empress~” had been so unfaithful to her husband, she should be burned and the wanton boys hanged. There were others who judged that they should be skinned alive. But in the end they agreed that they should be burned up in a fire. Then they told the emperor that they all deserved to be burned. As soon as the emperor heard the barons’ judgment, he ordered the fire to be set in the courtyard,*6 and as soon as he had given his orders it was done. Then he had their hands bound, the empress’s as well, and had them all thrown into the fire. They were very quickly burned up, for it was a wondrously huge fire. [289] Thus did the emperor take vengeance on his wife, and the news was widespread throughout the whole country. And after justice had been done to the empress and her twelve whoremongers, everyone said that the Wildman was very wise and a great seer, “and he will yet tell us about a very great wonder that will happen to us and to the whole world.” Thus did the emperor learn, thanks to the Wildman, about the life his wife had been living for quite some time. And the emperor asked him if he would tell them anything more, and he answered that he would indeed tell him anything he asked. “I want you to tell me,” said the emperor, “why you laughed when you saw Grisandoles, when you rode before an abbey, and when he took you to2’ the chapel where the squire hit his master with his hand, and I want to know what words you spoke to my seneschal when he asked you why 24sommer’s text adds E tiers (288, 1. 30). 25The text has the personal pronoun ele (288, 1. 35). 26The word here is la plache (288, |. 40). 27The text repeats deuant (289, |. 9): “before.” B27 you had laughed. And please tell me why you burst out laughing when you saw the queen come into the great hall.” “Sir,” said the Wildman, “I will gladly tell you these things. The first time I laughed was because a woman had taken me prisoner, thanks to her powers and her wiles, as no man could do even with all the power you have. And you should also know that Grisandoles is the most beautiful woman and the best in all your land, and he is a maiden. And that is why I laughed at him. As for my laughter before the abbey, I laughed because there is to be found the greatest treasure in the world, before the gate buried in the ground, and I laughed because the treasure was under the feet of the ones who were waiting for alms. And they had greater wealth under their feet than the whole abbey and all that was dependent upon it were worth, and I laughed because of the treasure that was within their grasp and they did not know how to take it. “And when Lovely, your seneschal who had herself called Grisandoles, asked me why I was laughing, the words with hidden meanings I spoke to her were because she had taken on the form of a man and was wearing clothing other than her own. Yet all the words I spoke to her are true, for through woman is many a worthy man shamed and cast down, many a city burned and laid waste, and many a land plundered. I do not say these things out of any spitefulness, for you can see on your own that by woman many a man is brought to shame. But now you needn’t worry about your wife, whom you have destroyed, for she deserved it fully. And don’t be angry at other women, and do not scorn them because of what she did. For there are many of them scattered here and there who have not done wrong to their husbands. But for as long as the world will last, they cannot help but sink lower, and this will happen to them through the sin of lust, which dwells and smolders within them. For woman is of such a nature that, when she has the best husband in the world, she believes she has the worst. This comes from their great weakness. But do not bother yourself with that, for there are many faithful ones in the world. And if you have been betrayed by your wife, you will yet have one who is worthy of becoming empress and being given such a mighty empire as this is. If you will believe it, you will win much more than you lose. “But the prophecy says that the great dragon will fly out of the Roman country.28 It will see the kingdom of Britain brought down and the crowned lion put under its lordship despite being forbidden by the dove that the dragon had fed under its [290] wings. And as soon as the dragon stirs to fly against Great Britain, the lion will go out to meet it and will fight until a fearsome and proud bull, which the lion will have brought, comes into the battle. And the bull will strike the lion with one of its horns and will hurl it down dead. In this way the great lion will be saved. But I will not tell you the great meaning of these words, for I mustn’t, but it will happen in your time. Do not believe evil counsel, for there is much of it all about you. “The second time I laughed in the chapel,” said the Wildman, “was not because the squire slapped his master, but because of the great meanings there are in it. Do you 28The text has rommenie (289, 1. 40); cf. 281, 1. 32). 328 know what they are? In that very spot where the boy stood is a wonderful treasure heaped up under the ground. The slap means that because of wealth man grows so proud that he finds no one worthy and does not love or fear God, any more than the squire feared his master. Rather the wealthy seek to ample upon the poor. And this makes the rich unfaithful when anything bad happens to them, for they curse God and wrong Him, and they say that He will have a hard time getting what He has given them. Do you know that it is pride in the wealth they have that makes them say that? “The second slap stands for the rich usurer who bathes in his treasure. He goes about mocking and poking fun at his poor neighbor and the man who comes to him in need to borrow a few pennies from him. He watches”? him and waits to see how he can hurt him, and he weighs him down litde by litle until he must sell his land, like it or not, to the man who has hankered so much after it and because of whom he has lost’ so much of his wealth. So you can see that this one is a wicked slap. “The third slap stands for wicked lawyers who wrongly buy and sell*! their neighbors out of hatred, for they see them thriving without being under their sway. And when lawyers see that their neighbors do not serve them as underlings, then they bring suit against them in order to take away what belongs to them. This is why they still say that he who has a bad neighbor gets only curses.>* Now you have heard why those slaps were given, but the boy did not have that in mind when he dealt the blows. Rather, Almighty God, who knows all and sees all, willed it thus in order to bring out the meaning”? that He did not wish mankind to become proud because of wealth. For ever since*4 wealth came into the world, riches have meant only death to those who fall asleep in sin and forget God to do the works of the devil, who leads them to everlasting death* through the delights they find in great wealth. “But I still must tell you why I laughed this morning when the empress came in with her lechers. You should know that it was only because of her sinfulness and I did it scornfully, for she had as her husband the worthiest man 2Beginning here pronouns referring to the usurer and verbs are in the plural (290, Il. 19-21). : 3°The verb is presente (290, |. 22): “given away.” 31The text reads ki uendent & enpruntent (290, Il. 34-35): “who sell and lend (to).” 32The proverb gut a mal uoisin il a mal matin (290, 1. 28) is recorded by Morawski (no. 1809). The positive antithesis (Morawski no. 1785) is cited by Cotgrave as “Qui a bon voisin a bon matin,” who translates “bon matin” as the greeting: “He that hath a good neighbor gets good words” (under Voisin), “hath a good morrow” (under Matin). Cotgrave also gives a proverb, not found in Morawski, referring to lawyers as neighbors: “Bon advocat mauvais voisin,” translated as “The best lawyer is the worst neighbor” (under Votsin) and as “A good lawyer is an evil neighbor” (under Advocat). 33The text reads por prendre exsample (290, 1. 30): “to take/serve as an exemplum.” 34The text reads Car aust comme (290, 1. 31): “For just as”; however, the sense is unclear. 35The text reads a la pardurable fin (290, 1. 34): “to the everlasting end.” The Story of Merlin known of your youthful age, yet she gave herself over to twelve whoremongers; she meant to keep up her unfaithfulness for the rest of her days, and so underhandedly that she would not be found out. But I was greatly distressed by it for love of you and of your daughter. For there is no doubt that she is your daughter, and you can be sure that she will not be like her mother. “Now you have heard why I laughed. Now I will leave, if you will permit.” “Please stay awhile,” said the emperor, “and we will see the truth about Grisandoles, and we will send someone to dig up the treasure, for I'll want to know whether or not it is true.” [291] And he agreed. With that the emperor ordered Grisandoles to be undressed, and it was done; and they found that it was one of the fairest maidens that anyone had ever seen in any land. When the emperor found out that she was a woman, he crossed himself many times in wonder. Then he asked the Wildman what advice he had to give him about his having granted her his daughter and half of his kingdom, for he did not want to break his oath. “I will gladly tell you,” said the Wildman, “if you are willing to take my advice, and it will be good.” “Tell me then,” said the emperor, “and I will love you for it.” The Wildman said, “You will wed Lovely. And do you know whose daughter she is? She is the daughter of Duke Mathem of Soane, whom Duke Frollo drove from his lands, and he fled with his wife and a son, who is a most faithful youth, and they are in Provence, in a wealthy town called Montpellier. Send for them and give them back their birthright, which they have lost wrongfully. And wed your daughter to Lovely’s brother, for he is most handsome and worthy, and his name is Patrick. Rest assured that you could not do any better.” When the barons heard what the Wildman had said, they took counsel among themselves and said that the emperor could do nothing better. Then the emperor asked the Wildman what his name was and who the stag was that had come to speak to him. And he answered, “Sir, don’t say anything more about it, for the more you saw and heard, the less you would know who he was.” “Won't you say anything more?” asked the emperor. “Yes, sir,” he said, “about the crowned lion I was telling about a while ago and the flying dragon. I want you to remember this, so I’ll tell you in another way. It is true,” the Wildman went on, “and the prophecy has said so, that the great wild boar of Rome, which is meant by the dragon, will go toward the crowned lion of Great Britain against the forbiddance of the dove with the golden head that will have been the boar's®® friend for many a day, but the boar will be filled with such great pride that he will not believe the dove, rather it will go off with all its offspring to the faraway parts of Gaul to fight the crowned lion, which will have come there to meet him with beasts from everywhere. Then it will come to pass that one of the crowned lion’s offspring 3€The text has the ambivalent samie (291, 1. 25): “its friend.” The Story of Merlin will slay the great dragon. And this is why I beg you, if you will do anything for my sake before I go, to do nothing against your wife’s forbiddance from the day you are betrothed to her. If you will do as I say, you will profit greatly. “With that, I am leaving now, for I have nothing more to do.” And the emperor bade him farewell and commended him to God. And on his way out of the hall, he wrote letters above the door?” that were all black, and they said, “May all who read these letters know that the Wildman who interpreted the emperor’s dream to him was Merlin of Northumberland; and the antlered stag that spoke to him in full sight of his barons, which had been chased through the city of Rome and had spoken to Lovely in the forest, that was Merlin, chief counsellor of King Arthur of Great Britain.” Then he left without stopping again. So with that the story falls silent about Merlin and tells about the Emperor of Rome. [292] 36. The Saxons Defeat the Rebellious Princes.’ Here the story says that when the Wildman had left the emperor of Rome, the emperor sent men to find the father and mother of Lovely and Patrick, their son, in Montpellier, where they had taken refuge, and they came back happy and cheered by the good fortune God had bestowed on them. When they got back to Rome, they were greeted joyfully, and the daughter was very glad to see her father, mother, and brother, as they were to see her, for they did not think they would ever see her again. They stayed with the emperor, but they had not been with him long before he gave them back their lands, which Frollo had taken from them. Frollo contested this as well as he could, and the war lasted a long time because he was quite powerful, but at last the emperor made peace. And when he did so, he gave his daughter to Patrick, while he himself took Lovely as his wife. And the joy and merrymaking were great that the barons did, for the lady had made herself loved by every man and woman. While the emperor was rejoicing and making merry, a messenger came to the emperor from Greece to tell about a dispute that had arisen between the barons of Greece and the Emperor Hadrian. For the Emperor Hadrian, who was their rightful lord, could no longer ride on horseback, except for a short while, because he was very weak and quite old. And after the messenger had told what he had to say, he started out on his way back, and he happened to look up above the door to the great hall, and his eyes fell upon the letters that Merlin had written there. As soon as 37The text says es listes del huis (291, Il. 34-35): “at the edges of the door.” The translation “all around the door” would be satisfactory here, but later the text specifies that they are above the door and the reader looks up to see them (292, Il. 18-19). 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 292-298. 329 he had seen them, he read them easily because he knew his letters, and after he had read them he began to laugh out loud. Then he went back to the emperor and said to him, “My lord, my lord, is it then true what the letters say?” “What do they say?” asked the emperor. “Do you know?” “The one who wrote them down,” he answered, “interpreted your dream about your wife, and he has let you know that he spoke to you in the likeness of a stag, and it was Merlin, chief counsellor of King Arthur of Great Britain, because of whom you have wed Lovely, your wife.” When the emperor heard these words, he crossed himself for the astonishment he felt. And then a great wonder happened in full view of all who were there. For as soon as the emperor heard what the letters said, they all disappeared and faded from sight, so that no one knew what became of them. And when they saw this, they were struck with amazement, and afterwards the news was spread far and wide throughout the countryside. But with that the story falls silent about the emperor, who dwelt happily and joyfully in his country with his wife Lovely, and they lived a good life for a long time, for they were quite young. The story says that at that time he was no more than twenty-eight years old, and Lovely was only twenty-two, so they lived a good life for a long time, and Patrick and Foldace were even happier. But the story falls silent about them, and we will tell you about Merlin. In this part the story says that as soon as Merlin had left Julius Caesar, he took to the road back toward Great Britain, to Blaise, his master, who welcomed him warmly and gladly. The trip did not bother him much, for he came from Rome in one day and one night, for he was endowed with powerful art. [293] Then he told Blaise all the things that had happened in the Roman country, and then he told him about how ten kings and one duke had banded together to go fight the Saxons before the city of Clarence; he told him about the battle that had been fought before Trebe in the kingdom of Benoic with King Arthur against the Germans, against the Romans, and against the Gauls, and about Claudas of the Land Laid Waste and how he was put to rout, and about how King Ban had fathered a child by his wife who would rise above all the knights of his time. And after he had told Blaise everything, Blaise set it down in writing, and it is because of him that we still know it. But now the story falls silent about Merlin and Blaise, and we will tell about the ten kings and one duke who had gathered together with their armies. Now the story says that when the ten kings and the duke had gathered in the fields of Cambenic, and they took counsel as to how they would arrange their echelons, and then they would move out at night so that no one would catch sight of them. So the King of the Hundred Knights led the first echelon,? and he had eight thousand men with him. And Tradelmant of North Wales led the second with seven thousand men wearing armor. King Belinant of South Wales led the third echelon with seven thousand men wearing armor. King Caradoc Shortarm led the fourth 2The word here and elsewhere is bataille “battalions” (293, 1. 15, cf. 1. 19), as opposed to echieles (293, 1. 14), echiele (1. 17, etc.). 330 echelon with seven thousand men. King Brandegorre led the fifth echelon with seven thousand armed men. King Clarion of Northumberland led the sixth with seven thousand armed men. King Yder led the seventh echelon with eight thousand men. King Urien led the eighth echelon with eight thousand men. King Aguisant led the ninth echelon with five thousand men, for he had lost more in the war than all the others. The king of Orkney led the tenth echelon—he had lost everything, wife, children, and all his fair household, and he was so full of grief that he would rather die than live; he had been so stricken as to have but few left of the fourteen thousand men he had before the war, but those he did have were very worthy, very bold, and the best in the whole army at bearing up under distress and hardship. King Neutres of Garlot led the eleventh echelon; he was deeply worried about his son Galescalain, for he had with him but two thousand men, so many he had lost in the war against the Saxons. And Duke Escant of Cambenic led the twelfth echelon with seven thousand knights in armor. After their men had gone their way, the barons asked how they should wage the campaign. In the end they agreed that they would go fight before the city of Clarence, and they would ride only at night; they would be very watchful throughout the whole army, and they would fall upon their enemies by surprise. For they said that they would rather die with honor than live in shame. With that the baron’s council was over, and each one went into his pavilion. And when they had eaten their evening meal, they ordered their men to put on their armor and get ready to take to the road, so they armed themselves and set out. There was a spy from King Hargadabran there who had heard what the barons meant to do. That spy left [294] so stealthily that no one took note of him, and he made his way until he came to the city of Clarence, which was under an awesomely heavy siege. The spy came straight to King Hargadabran and told him everything he had seen and how the Christians were coming; he said that there were at least forty thousand of them. When the Saxons heard this, they scorned them, and they did not think it worthwhile to arm even a fourth of their men; even so, they set up a watch to look for the army night and day. Meanwhile, there were twenty kings who were unwilling to get their armor ready after they had heard the news about the Christians. But with that the story falls silent about them, and I will tell you about the Christians. In this part the story says that the Christians’ armies rode from nightfall until they came near the Saxons’ encampment a litde before daybreak. There was a heavy fog, and a thick, misty rain began to fall, so that the men in the Saxon army were all the drowsier and slept all the more soundly. Nor did the Christians worry that anyone would attack them in such weather. When the Christians saw the encampment, and no one went out to meet them, they took up their arms. And when they were ready, they split into three battalions.* In one were King Lot of Orkney, the King of the Hundred Knights, Duke Escant of Cambenic, and 5The word here and afterward is parties (294, 1. 17, cf. Il. 18, 20, 21): “parts” or “divisions.” The Story of Merlin King Clarion of Northumberland. In the second battalion were King Neutres of Garlot, King Caradoc, King Brandegorre, and King Yder. In the third battalion were King Belinant, King Tradelmant, King Aguisant, and King Urien. And after they had been divided and split up, they rode on at a slow gait with their heads down under their helmets, holding their lances, wearing armor all over, and armed with every weapon. And when they came to the encampment, they let their horses run as fast as they could go, and they cut the ropes and strings that held up the tents,4 and they brought down tents, pavilions, and everything else that was in their way, and the hue and cry rose so loud that the whole forest resounded with it. There was much bloodshed there and a great slaughter of the Saxons before those who were to safeguard the army could get on their horses. When they saw that they had been taken by surprise, they jumped on their horses and went to tell King Hargadabran. Horns and trumpets blew everywhere, and the men, armed and unarmed, gathered. Then the twenty kings mounted—each one had twenty thousand men with him. As soon as the two sides laid eyes on each other, they let their horses run, and with their lances they struck one another and pierced shields and hauberks so that the tips came out the other side; they traded blows and slew one another most wondrously. There the fighting was heavy and hard, and the slaughter was dreadful on both sides. The Christians lost many, but the twelve princes bore up under the fighting, for they were very good knights; and Segurade, Adrian, the Lord of Salegne, Dorilias, Brandilias, the Lord of the Dolorous Tower, and Brun® the Ruthless put themselves forward as well. No man has ever fought better than they did. And King Caradoc, his brother the Lord of the Narrow Borderland, the Castellan of Gazel, the Lord of Blaskestan, the Lord of the [295] Marshlands, the Lord of Windsor, Galien, and King Urien’s nephew Bademagu°— these are not to be forgotten either, for no armor had withstood their blows,’ no matter how strong and hard. These twelve knights had put themselves in the twelve princes’ ranks as soon as they had seen them in the encampment where they had begun the battle. There the fighting was hard and wondrous, and the Christians killed so many that the horses were up to their fetlocks in blood. But there were so many Saxons that because of their sheer strength the Christians had to withdraw away from the tents. Yet their withdrawal was not unbecoming, for the worthy men and the good knights saw that they had been 4 cordes & lices dont li os estoit logie (294, Il. 25-26): “ropes and strings with which the army was sheltered.” 5The text reads brehu (294, 1. 40); elsewhere, however, his name is bruns (177, 1. 27; 2: 297, |. 32). The text reads gaudins li nies le roy vrien (295, 1. 1). Elsewhere, Urien’s nephew is named Bademagu (e.g., 165, ll. 18-19), as is true later in this same episode (296, 1. 23), while gaudins (Waldin) is Arthur’s nephew (177, |. 32) or King Aguisant’s nephew (297, Il. 34-35), The text reads caus (295, 1. 2): “lime” (?). Based on a (rather weak) reading in the Harley manuscript (encontre leur corps (“against their persons”]), Sommer suggests that an exemplar may have read cops (“blows”) (295, n. 1), perhaps, one might add, with a variant spelling such as cous. The Story of Merlin driven back, and they were deeply shamed and very bitter. The Christians shouted their battlecry, gathered together, and turned back to face them, and the fighting was wondrous. Every man displayed his boldness, and they said that there should never be a knight who did not put himself forward in this time of need, so that he might be spoken about all the days of his life and, after his death, for as long as the world lasts. Then they struck their horses with their spurs and yelled their battlecries, and they ran headlong in among them so fast that they left dead and wounded lying on the ground. But the Saxons were coming out of their tents in such numbers that they could not be counted. King Hargadabran went straight out before the others, and the story says that he stood fifteen feet tall (in the feet they had then), yet he was not more than twenty-eight years old. He sat on a big, gray warhorse, with his shield about his neck and holding his lance, and he had a cudgel hanging from his saddlebow with which he gave many a man cause for grief and worry that day. When the Christians saw that great devil coming and were most fearful about him, the very best and worthiest knights in their army made way for him. Then Caradoc of the Doleful Prison happened to meet him, for he was the biggest and the brawniest in the whole Christian army, and he rode the best horse, and yet he was not yet thirty years old. And as soon as he saw that great devil coming, he let his horse run toward him and held his lance straight out, and the other one, who feared him not at all, came toward him, and they hit each other on their shields so hard that their lances flew into pieces against their chests, and as they passed, they hit each other so hard, body and shield, that they took each other down with their horses under them. When the Christians and the Saxons saw those two spill to the ground, men from both sides spurred to the rescue. There the Christians suffered much strife and great hardship before Caradoc was on horseback again; the rain also bothered them a great deal, for it did not stop raining until after midday, and their ensigns were so wet that they could barely recognize one another except by their speech. There the Christians showed their worth, for despite all their enemies they got Caradoc back on his feet, and Bnos of the Emplacement brought him a horse from which he had struck down King Graelent. And Mathans and Aliborc kept up fighting so well that they could not be found blameworthy. Then the weather [296] began to clear, for it was after midday, and the sun shone very hot and dried their armor, so the Christians were very glad, for they could fight all the better. But there were so many Saxons that the Christians had to withdraw from the battlefield, and they were driven back to a hedgerow. There they stood their ground for a long time, for the King of the Hundred Knights was the first to take a stand: he shouted the battlecry many times, and he said to the barons, “My lords, what is this? Where are you going? We are holding very poorly to what we have worked out, for we are all hale and hardy, yet we have been routed so badly that none of us knows what he is worth when put to the test! This should be held against us for the rest of our lives, and we must also remember that, after we go our own ways, we have not come out of this strife any the better for it.” 331 When the barons heard the King of the Hundred Knights, they turned about and began fighting. They flew into the midst of the Saxons, and each one hit the first man he met and struck him down dead. And when the Saxons saw them taking a stand, they ran upon them giving their horses free rein, and the fray grew so dreadful and so deadly that one could barely tell about it. There the King of the Hundred Knights did wonders all by himself, for he withstood the onslaughts so well before he left the field that all the barons were awestruck. For his shield was cut to pieces, and he had only a third of it left, and his hauberk was broken through and the links were coming undone, while his helmet was all bashed in. His arms were filthy with blood, and his forward saddlebow and the neck of his horse were smeared with blood and brains, so that no man could know who he was but for his speech. Meanwhile, Urien, his nephew Bademagu, King Yder, King Lot, King Neutres, and King Belinant—they were unwilling to give up the fight for as long as they could last in that place. So they did very great harm to the Saxons, for they killed more of them there than they had all day before then. When the Saxons saw the harm they were doing to them, they blasted on their horns and trumpets, and they blew so loudly that people heard them four leagues away. Then a king came in with four thousand men in armor, who were fresh and rested, and they rode into the fray so hard that they made all the Christians give ground. And the uproar grew louder and the pursuit harder, and it lasted for the rest of the day until nightfall. The Christians could not have recovered and taken a stand, rather they would have been put to rout; if night had not fallen quickly, they would have got the worst of it. And when the Saxons had lost their daylight, they came back to their tents, took off their armor, and went to eat, for they had indeed had an easy time! And after eating, they rested and slept as though they had nothing to fear, although they were quite angry about the harm the Christians had done them that day. But they yearned to take vengeance. And the history® says that the Saxons lost twenty thousand and the Christians ten thousand. But with that the story falls silent for a while about them, and it goes back to the twelve princes who were distraught over the rout, and they said that it would not be thus for long and that they would not leave in such a state. [297] After the Christians had been beaten, they rode a short distance from the Saxons’ tents. They alighted from their horses and tied them up, then they repaired their armor. And they were all so filthy with blood and brains that the color of their armor did not show through. When they were ready again, they mounted and rode at a slow gait drawn tightly together, and so stealthily that no one could hear them utter a single word. They rode until they came to the tents, and then they stormed in fast. They were better than five thousand strong, all on horseback, and they struck down tents and pavilions, and they killed and maimed as many men as they met. Nothing that fell into their hands got away. 8Here the word is estoire (296, 1. 39), rather than conte. 332 And the Saxons, who were asleep, leapt from their beds and ran about the tents screaming, “We’ve been betrayed! Now to arms!” Then they gathered at Hargadabran’s tent, where horns and trumpets were blowing so loud that the ground shook, and the Saxons tried as hard as they could to run where they heard the trumpets and drums. There they got dressed as quickly as they could, and they lit lanterns, tapers, and torches in great numbers, so that the light could be seen from four leagues away. But the Christians did not stop slaughtering and striking down as many as they came to, and they were over their ankles in blood, which flowed in streams as though from a spring. The bloodshed and killing lasted that way until daylight. And when the Saxons saw the loss they had suffered and the harm that had come to them, they were so distraught that they nearly went out of their minds; filled with wrath, they ran upon the Christians and meant to destroy them. The latter defended themselves as well as anyone could wish, but still the Saxons drove them from the tents. Then the Christians’ horses began to slow down, for they had not been fed for two days and they began to weaken, and the barons saw that they were in danger of dying. Then, as it pleased God, the feeling came into their hearts, and those of the young men? whose names I have told you, that they should go joust with the Saxons in order to win horses to ride, or else, if they did not, they would be killed. Then each of the barons took a straight, strong lance, and up to forty knights of worth put themselves into rows. And it is fitting and right that I should give the names of some of them. There were the eleven kings I have named to you before, and the Duke of Cambenic was the twelfth. Then there were the Lord of the Deep Valley; the Lord of the Dolorous Tower; Brun the Ruthless; Domas, the King of North Wales’s nephew; King Aguisant’s nephew, whose name was Waldin; the Lord of Salergne;!° Bademagu, King Urien’s nephew; Caradoc the Great—and so many other knights who were most worthy and bold. These rode out front, in the first row, and they held their lances in the felt holders ready to joust, for they sorely needed horses. And each one struck his man so hard that he brought him down dead to the ground; they took the horses by the reins‘and rode away with them, then dismounted from theirs and climbed on the new ones. And as soon as they had come into the ranks, the fighting and hitting became heavy and was so awesome that they killed and wounded everyone they met. [298] They began to knock horses down; they took the best ones and let their own go, and thereafter they and their new horses never wanted to be apart. °The text reads, ambiguously, lor vint en corage comme a dieu plot & as touenchaus (297, ll. 26-27): (1) “it came into their hearts, as it pleased God and the youths” or (2), as translated, “it came into their hearts, as it pleased God, and the youths’ [hearts].” The former is the clearer syntactically, the latter, while syntactically quite plausible but more complicated, has the advantage of putting the youths on a level with the barons (lor/fouenchaus) rather than with God (a dteu/as iouenchaus). 10The text reads Hi sires de salergne (297, |. 35). Elsewhere, Brun the Ruthless is referred to as the Lord of Salerno (177, |. 27). The Story of Merlin But the Saxons grew in numbers, and they made the Christians empty the field, like it or not, but it was a great struggle, for the Christians did their best to avenge the harm that the Saxons had done them; but they wanted to avenge the deaths of their friends whom the Christians had slain, and in the end they put them to rout and drove them from the field. There the forty knights underwent great hardship, for they put themselves behind the others who were fleeing to defend them because their horses were so slow they could barely walk, and the forty companions understood that if they left them behind they would be killed or taken prisoner, so they kept the battle going as long as they could. By their sheer strength they kept fighting until the others had got away; then they set out after them and, after they had followed them for a while, they stopped and fought the Saxons very hard once more. Whenever one of their companions happened to fall, the others did not yield before he was back on his horse. Nevertheless, they lost many men in the end, for many were killed or taken prisoner. Thus were the Christians put to rout, and the Saxons ran after them until they had driven them into a forest; this is how they lost them—and because night fell. And the Saxons went back with a great many prisoners. But from that time on, the Saxons were never as secure as they had been before, and they set up forty thousand men to guard their army so that no one would harm them. And the Christians sought refuge in the forest, and they rode until they came to a very beautiful heath, where they dismounted. They bewailed their losses long and hard, and they were so distraught that they no longer knew what to do or where to go. But in the end they agreed that each one should go back to where he lived, and if the Saxons came to attack any of them, he should defend himself as best he could. With that, they got on their horses and went their own ways, weeping and bemoaning their loss. And when every one of them had got to his country, he supplied himself as best he could with men and food. But after the Saxons had defeated them, they were no longer afraid of them in any way, so they rode among their tents, and, as many as they met, they took them prisoner. There was none so bold as to stand up to them, and no one dared ride out from his stronghold to fight them. But with that the story falls silent about them and goes back to King Arthur, who is at sea on his way back from Brittany and the land of King Ban of Benoic. 37. The Tournament at Carhaix; the False Guenevere. ! Here the story says that when King Arthur and the high barons had boarded the boats, they sailed until they came to Great Britain. And as soon as they had come ashore, they got on their horses and rode until they came to Logres in Britain, where they were welcomed richly and joyfully; and they stayed there for three days [299] feasting and playing. And on the fourth day, King Arthur and Gawainet his 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 298~312. The Story of Merlin nephew and King Ban and Bors of Gaunes moved out with no more than three thousand men in iron armor, and they rode for as many days at it took them to come to the kingdom of Carmelide, three leagues from Carhaix, where King Leodagan was staying. And when he heard the news that King Arthur was coming, he went out to meet him with his whole household. And when they met, they were very glad to see each other, and they embraced and kissed each other because they were very fond of one another, and they went back to Carhaix. They found Carhaix covered with wall hangings and the floors strewn with sweet-smelling grass, and they saw ladies and maidens dancing, the fairest ever seen. Elsewhere the young men were jousting and breaking lances with each other. It was like that all the way to the hall, where Guenevere, King Leodagan’s daughter was. She came out to greet them, and she was happier to see them than the others had been, for as soon as she saw King Arthur she ran to meet him with open arms, and she told him that he and his companions were most welcome. She kissed him very softly on the mouth in plain sight of everyone who wanted to see it, then they took each other by the hand and went up into the great hall. After they had rested, they went to eat a most plentiful evening meal, for they had the time for it, and when they had eaten, they went to sleep, for they were tired and exhausted from the riding they had dene. In the morning King Arthur, King Ban, and King Bors got up—they liked more than anyone to rise early—along with Sir Gawainet and Sir Wonet, and they went to the church to hear Mass. And after they had heard Mass, they went back up to the great hall, where they found King Leodagan out of bed, for he had already heard Mass in his chapel. Then they all got their horses ready and mounted, just the six of them and no more, and they went out to enjoy themselves riding through the fields to see the meadows and the river, which was beautiful. After they had ridden about for a long while, King Leodagan spoke to King Arthur and asked him when he would wed his daughter, for it was the right time. King Arthur answered that it would be whenever King Leodagan wished, for he was ready. “But I need the best friend I have, and I will not be wed without him.” When King Leodagan heard this, he asked him who that friend was. He said that it was Merlin, for it was through him that he had won all the wealth and honor he had. When Sir Gawainet heard this, he said that he was right. “Indeed, every one of us should want to have him too. Rest assured that he will soon come, since you wish for him, and may God bring him to you quickly.” “In truth,” said the king, “he told me that he would be here soon.” “Then there is no reason not to name the day for the gathering,” said Sir Gawainet. Then they set the gathering for one week from that day. They went on talking of such things until they got to the great hall. The food was ready and the tables set, so they sat down and were served as kings and worthy gentlemen should be. After they had eaten, they went out again to enjoy themselves. And this is how their stay was for the whole eight days. 333 But now the story falls silent about them and goes back to the twelve princes from the Kingdom of Logres who had been routed before the city of Clarence. [300] Now the story says that after the twelve princes had been put to rout, no sooner had each one gone back to his abode than the news came to them that King Arthur had crossed the sea and that he had knighted King Lot’s young men; King Urien’s two sons; Galescalain, son of King Neutres of Garlot; Dodinel, son of King Balinant of South Wales; Kay of Estral, King Caradoc’s nephew; and Sagremor, grandson of the Emperor of Constantinople, and the companions he had brought with him. And they also heard that King Lot’s wife was in Logres, where her children had brought her, but the youths had sworn that King Lot would not have her back with him until he had sworn fealty to King Arthur, and he could be sure that he could never have worse enemies than they would be to him. And how King Arthur had fought against King Claudas of the Land Laid Waste before the city of Trebe and against Pontius Anthony, a counsellor of Rome, Frollo, a duke of Germany, and Randol, seneschal of Gaul, and he had put them to rout and driven them from the field; and he had given the two brother kings back their land. And how he had betrothed himself to the daughter of King Leodagan of Carmelide. And how he had routed King Rion before the city of Aneblayse.* And how he had gone to Carmelide to find a wife.> The princes said among themselves that it was a great sin that filled them with anger against King Arthur, and such a hurtful thing could come only from sin. So they prayed God most tenderly that He make peace between them for their happiness and for their honor. And the news spread until King Lot heard it all, and he learned that his wife was at Logres and his little son Mordred as well, and he was very happy in one way and sad in another—happy because she was notin the hands of the Saxons, who had taken her from him, and sad because the youths had her so that she would not be with him. Nor would he have their love, until he swore fealty to King Arthur. But he did not see how he could honorably make peace with him, unless Our Lord God helped. Then he brooded and thought of a very clever trick. He thought that King Arthur would send his wife to Logres, his chief city. And as soon as he could find out when she was coming, he would go to meet her with as many men as he could find, and he would fight until he had taken Arthur’s wife from him. For through her he would get his own wife back. This is what the king thought, but he could plot as much as he wanted, for things would go otherwise than what he believed, if God safeguarded King Arthur and Sir Gawainet. With that, King Lot sent his spies out far and wide to find out when King Arthur was coming from Carmelide to wed his wife and how many men would be with him. And he made ready to leave when he had to. But with that the story falls silent about him, and it speaks about Merlin, who was in the hermitage with Blaise, his master, and who told him all the things you have heard before now, and Blaise put everything into writing. And the 2The text reads cite de daneblaise (300, |. 16). 3The text reads por espouser sa feme (300, |. 17): “to wed his wife.” Bo4 story says that as soon as King Arthur had told Leodagan that he was waiting only for Merlin, Merlin knew it. And he knew King Lot’s thoughts and how he had sent his spies along all the roads, and he told it word for word to Blaise, who wrote it down. And after Merlin had told Blaise everything, he came straight to Carhaix, where the barons were waiting for him; it was the evening before the king was to wed his wife.4 [301] And when the barons saw him, they were joyful. But with that the story falls silent about them, and we will tell about Guenevere, stepdaughter of Cleodalis, seneschal of Carmelide, and about her kinsmen, who hated King Leodagan a great deal. Now the story says that Guenevere, Cleodalis’s stepdaughter, had very wealthy kinsmen on her mother’s side, and they were very good knights. They hated King Leodagan for the great shame he had brought to Cleodalis because of his wife, whom he had kept for so long in spite of them all. As it happened, they were gathered together on the same evening Merlin came, and there were sixteen of them in all, and they were talking together of many things; but Cleodalis was not at this meeting, and he knew nothing about it. And they asked one another what they could do to hurt the king more and annoy him. They agreed at last that they would speak to the nurse of King Arthur's betrothed, and they would be so generous toward her that, on the night when Guenevere? was to lie down with her husband, the old woman would put the seneschal’s daughter with the king instead of her;® and she would take Guenevere to play in the garden that evening,’ and “then we will seize her and take her to such a place that he will never hear news of her, nor will she be recognized, wherever she goes. Now let’s go and talk the nurse® into doing this, and when it is over we will be lords of the king and his kingdom.” Then they decided that seven of them would undertake the kidnapping, and they would have a boat ready where they would take her. After this planning, the traitors went their ways happy and cheerful because they thought that they had done very well, and they bought the boat and everything they needed. And they made the nurse such promises that she agreed to do what they wanted. But as soon as they had reached their agreement, Merlin knew it. He went straight to Ulfin and Bretel and drew them aside by themselves, and he explained to them the treachery word for word just as they had plotted it; and 4Sommer suggests, doubtless because espouser normally has a complement, that the text must have dropped sa feme (300, n. 2). 5Sommer’s text, which does not mention the serving woman, reads ele (301, |. 11): “she.” See the following note. 6Sommer gives the variant reading, found in two manuscripts, about the plan to bribe the old woman and substitute the other Guenevere (301, n. 3). Because the nurse is not mentioned in Sommer’s text, it appears at first that Guenevere was to be the agent of her own kidnapping. 7When the plot is executed, the old woman takes Guenevere into the garden to make water (308, I. 27). 8Where the variant lesson is maistresse (301, n. 4), Sommer’s text has marastre (301, |. 15): “stepmother.” The text repeats marastre in |. 20, but mazstresse occurs in }. 28 and thereafter. The Story of Merlin when they heard it, they crossed themselves in wonder. Then they asked Merlin what they should do about it. “I will gladly tell you this,” said Merlin. “Tomorrow evening, after you have eaten your meal, put your armor on over your clothing, and go hide under an apple tree in the garden. They will come unarmed but for their swords, and they'll go to their lookout where they'll hide until it is time for the nurse to bring the queen to play. And be careful that you are ready to rescue her as soon as they have taken hold of her, for you will lose her very fast if they can get her into the boat.” “Sir,” said the barons, “God willing, we will not lose her, since we know so much about it.” “Take care,” said Merlin, “not to tell anyone that I have said this to you, for I would never love you.” “In truth,” said the worthy gentlemen, “we would rather lose our birthright than say anything about it.” With that, the three friends went back into the hall, and they found that the knights wanted to leave, and they went straight to their lodgings to rest and sleep until daybreak the next morning. Then the barons and the knights got out of bed and gathered in the hall. And King Leodagan had his daughter dressed more richly than any king’s daughter ever was, and she was of such great beauty that everyone stared at her in wonder. And King Ban took her [302] on one side and King Bors on the other, and they led her to the church of St. Stephen. There was a great gathering of nobles there to walk along with her, and they all held hands and walked two by two. The first two were King Arthur and King Leodagan” the second two Sir Gawainet and Sir Wain, and after them went Galescalain and Agravain, and next Dodinel and Guerrehet, and next Sagremor and Gaheriet, and next Kay the Seneschal and Kay of Estral, and after them came King Ban and King Bors, who were leading the young lady. She wore flowing robes:!0 she had the richest cap that anyone had ever seen on her golden head, and she was dressed in a robe of beaten gold so long that it trailed more than a half-yard behind her, and it fit her so well that everyone was astounded by her great beauty. Next came Guenevere the stepdaughter of Cleodalis, who was wonderfully beautiful and comely, and she held Girflet and Lucan the Wine Steward by their hands. Next came the newly knighted two by two, and after them the companions of the Round Table, then the barons of the Kingdom of Carmelide, then the noble ladies of the country and the.burghers. This is how they came to the church. When they got there they found the archbishop of Brice, in the land of Logres, and Sir Amustan, Leodagan’s good chaplain, and it is he who married King Arthur and Guenevere and blessed them. And the archbishop sang Mass, and great were the offerings of kings and high 9The text reads bohors (302, 1. 4); however, Bors and Ban accompany Guenevere. As Sommer notes (302, n. 1), the Harley manuscript has Leodagan. 10The text reads si fu toute desafublee (302, 1. 7): “and she was all undressed,” which is clearly not the case. As the Merkin narrator does not characteristically engage in ironic descriptions, the meaning here must partake of conventional associations of desafublee with open, loose-fitting, or flowing dress. The Story of Merlin princes. And when the service was over, they went back to the great hall, where there was a great crowd of all kinds of singers.!! Why should I go on telling you about it? All the joyful merrymaking that could be done was done there. After this the tables were set and they went to eat, and they were served as befits a king’s wedding. And there is no man alive who could talk about the presents that were given. After eating, when the tablecloths were taken away, the barons got up and went into the meadows before the great hall. There the jousting dummy was set up, and the new knights went to tilt along with the forty knights that King Arthur had engaged to come with him to Carhaix. As it happened, the knights of the Round Table came out too, and they began hitting roughly, although they were playing, because they were good knights. At length the news about that reached Sir Gawainet, who was still sitting at table eating with his companions. When Sir Gawainet heard that his friends were jousting so hard, he asked for his arms, his shield, and his lance, as did all his companions, and they got on their horses not wearing armor, except that Sir Wain had on a short hauberk with double mail. That was always his custom—not because he would ever think of cheating or wrongdoing, but he dreaded that a fight might break out between his companions through the fault of some thoughuess or evil fellow, of whom there are many on the earth. But when Sir Gawainet and his companions came into the tourney, the newly knighted were being badly beaten, for the companions of the Round Table were doing with them what they would. When Sir Gawainet saw them getting the worst of it, he was not happy about it, so he and his companions went to their side. When they saw that they were being helped, they gathered about Sir Gawainet and his companions and asked them if they were on their side, and they said that they were. [303] When Sir Gawainet went in on the side of the knights Arthur had engaged, they were very glad and the others angry. Then they swore that they would never fail one another in life or death, and this showed clearly that day, for they fought so well that the knights of the Round Table bore them a grudge that was to prove most costly in the quarrel that arose at the tournament in Logres where Sir Gawainet was hailed lord and master for his valiant deeds there, as the story will reveal it to you later, after he had become the knight of Queen Guenevere. When Sir Gawainet had taken his companions’ oaths, they turned out in rank order; it was Sir Gawainet who set them in order, for he was a wise knight, the courtliest and the best taught there ever was in Great Britain. After he had set his companions in order, they rode out two by two, one after the other. King Arthur, Merlin, and many of the others were standing at the windows of the great hall to look at the tournament, and there were a great number of ladies and young women with them, and they all saw that they were turned out so well that they were sure to win the tournament together. And the companions of the Round Table were on the other side, a hundred and fifty all told, and Sir Gawainet sent forty jousters out against them: 11The word is menestreus (302, t. 21), which could apply to servants and artisans as well as singers and musicians. 39 Sagremor was the very first, and Nascien was on the other side. They all let their horses run against each other, but Sir Gawainet rushed in between them and separated them, and he called the companions of the Round Table and said to them, “My lords, you are all worthy gentlemen and the best knights anyone knows about. Now let us do the right thing. You go get your armor, and we'll do likewise, and then let us behave the same way on both sides and swear that if we take one of yours, it will count against you, and if your take one of ours, it will count in your favor and against us. And when we have caught one of yours, put another in his place, and we will do the same if you catch one of ours.” Then they swore to follow these rules and sent for their armor, and as soon as it was brought to them, they quickly put it on. The news had reached the city about how Sir Gawainet had undertaken the tournament against the companions of the Round Table, and they esteemed him and praised him, and more than any of the others King Bors esteemed him, and he said that never again would such a knight be seen in his lifetime, “and if he lives long, he will be the best knight there ever was and the one I would most like to be like.” This is what King Bors said about Sir Gawainet. When they were on their horses and ready, they rode against each other. The first to break ranks with the knights of the Round Table was Adragain the Dark, and Dodinel the Wildman came to meet him. They rode as fast as their horses could run and hit their shields with their lances so hard that they drove through the boards and broke them into pieces with the strength of their arms—and of the horses that carried them; the tips of the lances stopped against their hauberks, which were so strong that not a link was broken, but the lances could only shatter. Then they ran into each other so hard, shield against shield and body against body, that they took [304] each other to the ground. As soon as they had knocked each other down, they came running to the rescue from both sides, and they struck one another so stoutly on their shields that their lances flew into bits; some bore each other to the ground while others went by without falling. Then they drew their swords and began the fray on foot and on horseback. Then, as it happened, Sir Gawainet and Nascien met and struck each other with their lances on their shields with all their might. Nascien’s lance flew into bits, and Sir Gawainet hit him so hard that he drove his shield against his arm and his arm against his body, and he bore him from his saddle to the ground with his legs in the air. But he sprang back to his feet, for he was quick, as he was worthy and bold, and he drew his sword from its scabbard, covered himself with his shield, and prepared to defend himself. Sir Gawainet went through with his pass, then he turned back around, drew his sword, and came straight toward Nascien. And when Nascien saw him coming, he was hardly afraid of him at all, so he hurried to strike him. And he hit Sir Gawainet beneath his shield so that his blood began to flow down, but Sir Gawainet gave him back such a great blow on his helmet that the sparks flew up, and he sent him flying to the ground on his hands, but he was soon up again and made straight for Sir Gawainet with his sword raised high, and he dealt him such a strong blow on his 336 helmet that he made him lean over. When Sir Gawainet saw that Nascien was so worthy and such a good fighter against him, he loved him very well for it. Then he struck him so hard through the helmet that he made him stumble and fall to his knees. He who was of such great strength sprang back to his feet, but as he was getting up, Sir Gawainet took hold of him by the helmet and tore it from his head so hard that his nose and forehead hurt, and he threw it as far as he could into the press. Then he yelled to him, “Sir knight, surrender!” And he answered him that he had not reached the point where he should surrender for any man whom he could see. Then he covered himself with his shield, and Sir Gawainet struck his shield so hard that a great piece of it went flying into the field. Then he ran at him and hit him so stoutly with the hilt of his sword that he sent him sprawling to the ground. Then he came down from his horse and jumped on him, took his coif off of him. and told him to surrender to him or else he was dead. He answered that he could go ahead and kill him, but never, as long as he lived, would he be thought of as a coward. “What?” said Sir Gawainet. “Sir knight, is it then true that you would rather die than surrender or admit that you have been bested?” And he said yes. “I do not want to kill you,” said Sir Gawainet. “That would truly be a shame, for you are most worthy. But I'll have you stripped naked so that you won’t be getting on a horse for a while.” “I do not know what you'll do with me, but as long as I am alive I will not admit that I have been beaten.” When Sir Gawainet saw that he could get nothing more from him, he was convinced that he was of great heart. Then a most noble thought came to him that any other man would have been wary of, and he came straight to him and said, “Sir knight, take my sword, for I know that Ihave been bested.” And when Nascien saw such great nobility in him, he bowed low and said, “Ah! For God’s sake, sir knight, do not say that, but take my sword instead, for I hand it over to you. Many have seen how it is with me, and you should know that I could never pay back or deserve such a favor.” Then they embraced each other, and each was very happy with the [305] other, and after they had enjoyed each other for a while, they took up their arms and rode fast to the tourney, which had already begun, and Nascien took Sir Gawainet'’s side, for that was right and just. When Sir Gawainet and Nascien came to the tournament, Dodinel was already back on his horse and had taken Adragain prisoner by main force, and the fighting, which was underway again, was most wondrous. Sagremor had already struck down Hervi of Rivel and was holding onto his helmet with both hands trying to make him swear to become his prisoner; and Gaheriet, Sir Gawainet’s brother, had also taken Migloras. And when Sir Gawainet saw that, he began to fight so well that he made every one of them fall back and yield ground; and twelve of Sir Gawainet’s companions fought so well that they took by force twelve of the companions of the Round Table, who were so sorrowful over it that they nearly went out of their minds. Then forty companions from each side came in, and The Story of Merlin the fighting in the tournament grew heavy and awesome, for the companions of the Round Table had said that from then on everyone should take care, if he knew how, to do as much harm as he could: “For we cannot hold ourselves in very high esteem when such boys drive us back, and they have never fought in a tournament before. People will think we are cowards, and we would indeed be blameworthy.” Then they let their horses run together, and they rode in hard and fast, for they were grief-stricken about the companions who had been taken prisoner. But the others came out to meet them, and they very boldly welcomed them with the tips of their lances. There the fighting was fierce and hard, and it went on without letting up until after midday. Then Sir Gawainet left the tournament to change helmets, for his had been so badly treated that it was useless to anyone, for it had been dented and broken into pieces, so that it hung down over his shoulders. And while he was coming back, and he was putting another helmet on, he saw his men withdrawing on every side. Then he struck headlong into the fighting. He held a strong, stout lance, and he took down the first man he came to and sent him sprawling. And Sir Gawainet fought so well that his side won their ground back. And then, as it happened, he found Sir Yonet on foot, along with Kay, Griffonet, Lucan, Blioberis, Girflet, Oswain the Stouthearted, Lanval, and Agravain, and the whole tournament was around the nine of them,!@ for all the companions of the Round Table were striving to take them. When Sir Gawainet saw them, he headed toward them holding his lance, and he rode in so hard among them that he made them all shudder, and he sent the first man he came to sprawling to the ground. Then he lowered his lance and broke it, and with the stub he struck down another one so mercilessly that he did not know where he was. After this, Sir Gawainet drew his sword and began to fight so skillfully that everyone was struck dumb, for he cut up their shields and hauberks so that none of them dared make a stand against him, but even the best of them gave ground to him, and so he scattered them hither and thither. Meanwhile, his companions had got back on their horses, and they had the strength of heart to avenge the shame the others had brought them. And Sir Wain began to fight so boldly that one and all held him in great esteem, and all the companions fought so well that everyone who saw the tournament praised them highly. And the three kings!5 spoke about them a great deal; they were standing at the windows, and they said that the young men would be [306] most worthy gentlemen if they lived long. The deeds of prowess they did matched those of Sir Gawainet, for it was thanks to his prowess alone that the other side was driven back and chased as far as the town. There the companions of the Round Table stopped, for they were filled with sorrow and anger, and they said that they would be cowards to let themselves be treated in such a way, so 12The text has “eight” ces .viij. (305, 1. 30), resulting either from an error (for .vitij.) or from an attempt to distinguish the last eight from Yain. 13The text has li ty. roy (305, 1. 43): “the four kings.” The Story of Merlin they turned their horses around again to make a stand against the ones running after them. Then the hitting began, and it was wondrous, for none had been harder or more bitter all day. The fighting was very heavy and the battle was hard, before the gate to the city of Carhaix, between those of the Round Table and the newly knighted. Then Sir Gawainet began a brawl that was so great that it was spoken of for a long time afterwards. He had fought hard the whole day long, and when he saw that his companions had been stopped and that the companions of the Round Table were defending the gate against them so that they could not break through, he was so filled with wrath and anguish that he hardly knew what to do. Then he withdrew and put his sword back into its scabbard. This was not Excalibur, but a very hard sword made for tourneys. He went to a staff of oak and took it in his hands, and he threw his shield on the ground in order to move more freely; then he made straight for the press where he saw that the fighting was roughest. As he came in, he dealt one knight a heavy blow on top of his helmet; it was so hard that he sent him sprawling to the ground and almost knocked him senseless. Then he struck another one down all in a daze, so that blood flowed from his nose and mouth. He struck left and right and brought down as many as he met in his path, and he wounded and maimed many of them. And when the companions of the Round Table saw that he was trying only to hurt them, they ran upon him and his men with more than enough vigor, and they said that from that time on they would do the worst harm they could, for they no longer cared just for tourneying. So the fighting grew so heavy and so awesome that there would have been great losses on both sides if it had not been for Merlin, who called King Ban, King Bors his brother, and King Arthur and told them to go break it up, for it was high time to make peace between them. When the barons understood Merlin’s meaning, they asked for their armor and their horses, and the serving boys went out and brought armor and horses to them. They donned their armor, and when they were mounted, they rode out to the fray. And Merlin went along and rode ahead of everyone.!4 And the others were fighting very hard, one side hot with anger against the other. Sir Gawainet was hitting very hard with the staff he was wielding, but his foes!> defended themselves with all their might because they would not yield ground regardless of what was done to them. When Sir Gawainet saw that they were holding their own so well, he flew headlong into their midst, angry as a wild boar, and he worked until he broke through the whole of them, like it or not. Then he began to harm them in the worst way, for he meant to hurt them all if he could. As Merlin and the three kings rode up to separate them, Merlin, as it happened, was facing Minodales, who had 14gommer’s text reads & merlins uait auoec deuant tous les autres. Et chil se combatent . . . (306, ll. 31-32): “and Merlin went along before all the others. And those were fighting... . ” Sommer cites the variant in the Harley manuscript: Et merlins vint deuant tout premier a ceulx qui se combatent .. . (306, n. 1): “And Merlin came out front, the very first, to those who were fighting ....” 15The text has al (306, |. 34): “those/the [other] ones.” 337 struck him on the chest with a lance and almost brought him down with his horse,!® and he was very sore from the blow Minodales had given him. Sir Gawainet [307] made straight for him and raised his sword to strike him on the helmet, but when the latter saw him coming, he leaned forward to ward off the blow, but the staff landed lengthwise across his shoulders and knocked him head over heels to the ground. Then came King Arthur, who had clearly seen the young man’s stroke, and he shouted to him, “Dear nephew, put your staff down, for you have done enough with it.” But he was hot with anger and bent on inflicting pain. Merlin rode over to him and grabbed him with one of his hands and with the other took his staff away, and he said to him, smiling, “Hold still, sir knight, for you have been caught. Surrender to me, if you please, for you have done enough fighting.” When Sir Gawainet saw that it was Merlin, he told him with great courtesy that he was indeed his prisoner, since it pleased Merlin. With these words, King Arthur came to him and said, “Dear nephew, let the tournament be, for you have done enough fighting, and it would be a good thing to let it go with that.” And Sir Gawainet told him that it suited him, since that was his pleasure. With that the five of them rode away, and as soon as Sir Gawainet had left the tournament, the others stopped fighting, and they all went to their lodgings to take off their armor. But the companions of the Round Table were most distressed, because they had got the worse of the tournament, but they were quite sure that they would avenge themselves so that the newly knighted could not boast about it. These words were overheard by a young man who was riding near them, and he went to tell Sir Gawainet, whom the three kings and Merlin were leading away, along with Sir Yvain and Galescalain. And the boy came up to them and told them what the companions of the Round Table had said. And when Sir Gawainet heard their threat, he regarded it with great scorn, but he did not let the others see this, except to say that they could have their tourneying without stopping for as long as they wanted, “until I am at the point of sending!” ten unskilled knights!® out against them!” Sir Gawainet kept to the words he spoke, for it was very clear who the best knights were on the day they won together the tournament in the meadowlands outside Logres, when the new knights fought against those of the Round Table. There were many wounded and maimed 16The text adds the formulaic en .j. mont (306, Il. 41-42): “all in a heap.” The conjunction por .j. peu que (307, ll. 24-25) normally refers to a present or past action (modern French peu s’en faut que je{‘T almost... ”]) rather than, as here, to the future. 18The term is chevaliers daide (307, 1. 25), which can refer to knights whose duty it is to ride to others’ rescue (but laisse coure [ “I let run/send out”] suggests an attack, mock or serious), to knights who are to be used only in cases of urgency (auxiliary in one sense), or to knights who aid other knights (auxiliary in another sense). In any case, the term implies second-rate knights and, appropriately for Gawain’s scom, a sarcastic tone of voice. 338 then, just as the story will recount it for you later. And it will tell you how oaths were sworn on one and the other side. But right now the story stops speaking about this thing until it is the proper time and place, and it goes back to speaking about the knights of the Round Table, who went to their lodgings to take off their armor, just as I have told it earlier. Here the story says that as King Arthur was taking Sir Gawainet to the great hall, the common folk said to one another, about Sir Gawainet, “Look at the good knight here!” They asked Merlin who he was and what his name was, and he told them that he was named Gawainet and that he was the son of King Lot of Orkney. And when they heard this, they said, because they were most happy to hear it, that he was very bold and that he was indeed a man to imitate. Thus the townsfolk talked as they would. And after the companions of the Round Table had taken off their armor, they dressed themselves in their best robes and came straight to court. And as soon as they saw [308] Sir Gawainet, they drew to one side and grumbled to themselves about him loudly enough for him to hear, and they said that he had hurt them dreadfully in that first tournament; now he was certain to be lord and master of them all and a companion of the Round Table as well. Sir Gawainet indeed heard them, but he answered them not a word. And from that day on he could indeed be lord and master and a companion of the Round Table whenever he wanted,!9 and it was right, for there was in him the worthiness of a great gentleman; he was a good knight and faithful for as long as he lived and full of other good qualities, and he was more courtly than any other. Straightway the cloths were laid on the tables, and the knights within washed their hands. There were three halls full of knights, and they were very well served with all the good and fitting things a man’s body needs. When, after the meal, the tablecloths were taken away, the knights began to make merry and to play games with one another, which was the right thing to do. Then the vesper bells were rung at my lord St. Stephen’s Church, and all those knights went to hear vespers. Afterwards King Arthur’s bed was blessed, and the knights left and went to rest and sleep in their lodgings. . And Guenevere stayed behind in her room alone with her nurse. And that day the treachery was brought into play whereby she was to be taken prisoner and betrayed by the kinsmen of Guenevere, stepdaughter of Cleodalis the Seneschal; they had convinced the old woman, who was the nurse of Guenevere, King Arthur’s wife, to grant them what they wanted. They said that they would wait for her in the garden beneath the great hall, and they would have the other Guenevere with them. After they had made their case, they went into the garden and hid under the trees; there were ten of them, but they were armed only with swords. They had the false Guenevere with them, and they 19The text, which is not so forthrightly conditional, reads fu il sires & maistres & compains de la table roonde sil le vaut estre (308, Il. 5-6): “he was lord and master and a companion of the Round Table if he wanted to be.” The Story of Merlin stayed there for a long time until the barons had left and gone to their lodgings. And the queen was undressed as though to go to bed. Then the old woman took her into the garden to make water.29 The traitors were lying in wait in the garden hidden beneath a grafted pear tree;*! when they saw her coming, they kept very still and crept toward the wall little by little. But Bretel and Ulfin had not forgotten what Merlin had told them. They were well armed beneath their clothing, and they had hidden crouched under the steps the queen was to take to go outside. They kept very still and were seen by no man or woman, and they likewise had their ears cocked to listen. After they had been there quite a long time, they saw the old woman who held the queen by the hand and was going straight to where the traitors were on the lookout. And when they saw that the queen®* had gone far from her room, they laid hands on her from all sides and handed the other Guenevere over to the old woman. And when the queen?? saw her, she understood clearly that she had been betrayed, and she prepared to scream, but they told her that if she uttered a single word, they would kill her—even if she made any sound at all. Then they drew their bare swords and left along the river that ran below the garden, where a boat they had come in was tied up. The garden was quite high above the river, and the only way they could get there was by a little path which was very hard to go up and down because of the rocks that were heavily strewn all over it. And if they could [309] only have got into the boat, the queen would have been lost without hope of recovery. When Ulfin and Bretel saw the ones they were yearning so much to see, they jumped out of their hidingplace and shouted at them. They called them traitors and said that they would be sorry for what they had done, for they would die because of it. And when the traitors heard them yelling, they looked about and saw that there were only two of them, and they held them to be of little worth. So they took the queen and gave her over to five of their companions, and the other five stayed behind to fight the men who were coming for them with their swords drawn. When the queen saw how they were treating her, she became greatly frightened and let herself fall to the ground, onto the green grass, but they picked her up and carried her, whether she liked it or not. And when she saw the two men coming to rescue her, she twisted out of their hands so forcefully that she got away from them, and she turned in flight down through the garden until she came to a fruit tree, and she flung both arms around it and held on 20In the exposition of the plot, the old woman was to take her to esbatre (301, |. 13): “frolic.” 2lThe text reads une ente de sainrieule (308, 1. 28). The word ente is common for a grafted fruit tree. The Franzdsiches Etymologisches Worterbuch records the regional term sans-régle (‘ruleless”), cf. Old French reule attested since the fourteenth century, for “a kind of hardy pear tree” and its fruit (10: 222, col. 2), probably so named because the tree bears erratically (10: 224, col. 1, n. 28). 22The text has the ambiguous personal pronoun ele (3: 308, |. 36): “she.” 23A gain, the ambiguous personal pronoun (308, I. 37). The Story of Merlin tight. They came right to her and tried to pull her away, but they could not move her from it; however much they pulled and tugged, they could do no more with her. They were so angry they could have killed her. And Ulfin and Bretel ran until they came to the five who were waiting for them holding their naked swords. Bretel struck the first man he met so hard that he split him open down to his teeth, and Ulfin hit the second one and sent his head flying. The other three fell on them, but they could not harm them because they were wearing good armor; they lost heart and wanted to flee, but the two stayed right on them until they had killed all three. Then they went straight for the five others, who were trying so hard to get the queen away, but they could not pull her from the tree, and it was a wonder that they had not torn her arms from her body. When Ulfin and Bretel saw the distress the queen was in, they ran toward her and yelled at them, and they came out to meet them. They began hitting one another with their swords, and Ulfin and Bretel killed two of the five. And when the others saw that there were only three of them left, they turned in flight straight to the path that led down to the boat. And when the two companions saw them running away, they did not want to chase them. Instead, they came back to the spot where the dead men lay, picked them up, and threw them down the cliff, and the old woman along with them—they went rolling from rock to rock and did not stop until they came to the river. Then Ulfin and Bretel took the queen and led her away very frightened to her bedroom, and they told her not to be afraid anymore. Afterwards they took the false Guenevere and led her off to their lodging, for they did not want anyone to find out about their secret. Just as you have heard, the traitors were dealt with according to Merlin’s advice, and the queen was rescued by the two worthy men. And as soon as they had left, Merlin knew it, and he came straight to King Leodagan and told him to send three of his young ladies to the queen’s room to put her to bed. And the king asked him, “Why? Can’t her nurse do it?” And Merlin told him the whole truth just as it had happened. When the king heard it, he was deeply amazed [310] about it, and he said that he could never rest until he had spoken to her. Then King Leodagan left and came straight to the bedroom where his daughter Guenevere was, and he took three young ladies with him to get her ready for bed. When she saw him, she began to weep mightily, and the king took her by the hand, drew her to one side, and spoke to her all alone. And she told him the truth just as it had happened, from beginning to end, and the king told her that she had nothing to fear, for she need worry no more. And the king ordered the three ladies to get her ready for bed, and they did as they were told; nor did King Leodagan want to leave the room before they had put her to bed. After that, he came to his daughter’s bed, raised the cover, and turned it down until he saw the mark of the crown on her back. Then he knew indeed that she was his daughter, whom he had had by his wife. After that, he put the cover back over her and went out of the room without saying a word, and the ladies wondered why he had done that. BH) Just then King Arthur came back from reveling with his companions. When he came into the hall, Merlin and King Leodagan came to meet him, and they told him to go to bed with his wife, for it was high time; he said that he would do so very gladly. So he went into the room where the three maidens were who had helped her get ready for bed, and as soon as the king was in bed, the ladies left the room. No one was left there but the king and queen, and all night they spent a most happy time together,24 for they loved each other deeply, and they did not stop until daybreak, when they fell asleep arm in arm. Thus was Queen Guenevere to have been deceived by the traitors—by the ones because of whom she later had very great sorrow, which happened a long time afterwards, just as the story will relate it to you, if there is anyone to tell it to you.*° For the king lost?® her for a good three years, when he never had her with him. Galehaut, a wealthy prince in the kingdom of Sorelois, took her away for love of Lancelot. And the king kept the false Guenevere as his concubine?’ until one day when, as it happened, he was taken ill. And this was because of Bertelay,2° a traitor who brought it about that King Arthur was unwilling to give her up for anyone’s sake; in the end, everything on earth rotted. And the land and kingdom were under interdict for nearly three years, when no man’s or woman’s body was buried in consecrated ground except secretly and under threat of excommunication. And Our Lord allowed such hardship to befall them for the breech of faith in their sins, and they were sinful indeed. And all of this happened through a knight who afterwards died a dreadful death because of it, as the story will tell you later. But it is right and fitting that the story should tell you why this happened, for this is the place for it, and reason accords with this. It was true that King Leodagan, who was a good ruler and lawgiver, had a knight who was most worthy and shrewd; he was a good knight who had served him well, and he was of noble stock. This knight’s name was Bertelay, and he hated another knight with deadly hatred because the latter had slain one of his first cousins to have his wife because he loved her. When Bertelay found out that he {311} had killed his cousin, and knew that his wife had shamed him, he never bothered to complain to the king. Rather, he went to him, broke faith with him, and threatened him with death, and he kept watching him many a day and many a night. At last, on the night that 24The text reads menerent. .. moult boine ui ensamble (310, Il. 20-21): “let a very good life together.” The expression recurs (313, Il. 26-27). 25Sommer’s text has sil est qui le vous die (310, 1. 25), as translated. However, he also provides a variant from the Harley manuscript, stl est que ie le vous dye (310, n. 1): “if I have a mind to tell it to you.” 26sommer’s text has causa (310, 1. 26): “blamed, contested with.” He provides the variant from the Harley manuscript in a note (310,n. 2). 27Thus reads Sommer’s text, en soignantage (310, |. 28): “in concubinage.” He also provides a variant from the Harley manuscript, en Keu (310, n. 3): “in [her] place.” 281n Sommer’s text, the reference to Arthur’s illness is followed by & a bertolai (310, |. 29), with no apparent syntactical link with the preceding. 340 King Arthur wed his wife, when the knights left the court and went to their lodgings to rest, Bertelay happened to see his enemy. He ran him down and killed him with a short sword he had with him. As soon as he had killed him, he went straight to his lodging, and the two squires who had been with the slain knight raised the cry, and people came pouring out everywhere with lanterns and torches aflame and found the slain knight. They asked the two squires, who were mourning sorrowfully, who had killed him, and they said that it was Bertelay the Red. After the squires had wept and wailed over their lord for a long time, they picked him up and carried him to his lodging, and they did to him what was fitting for a dead knight. They watched over him until daybreak and carried him to the church, and they had the service said? and then buried him. And in the morning, Ulfin and Bretel together sent for Cleodalis the Seneschal, and they ordered him to come speak to them at their lodging. He came there very willingly, for he was well-bred and noble. When they saw him, they drew him aside and told him what had happened just as it had occurred and how his daughter had behaved. And when he heard the high treason*? she had done, he said that she could never be his daughter, “for if she were my daughter, she would never have done it no matter who might have begged her to.” While the three of them were talking in this way, King Leodagan had arisen very early, for he was very frightened by the strange things that had happened to his daughter that night. And Merlin was already out of bed, and he went straight to the king®! and bade him good day, and when the king saw him he turned a cheerful face to him and said God bless him. Then they took each other by the hand and came out of the hall talking of several things, and they walked until they came before the lodging of Ulfin and Bretel. Then went inside so stealthily that those within did not know they were there until they were almost on top of them, but when they caught sight of them they sprang up to greet them, for they were not awkward at honoring worthy gentlemen. Then all five of them*? went into a room by themselves, and Ulfin left and brought Guenevere in, and he told them what she and the traitors had done, although they already knew about it because Merlin had told the king. : Then King Leodagan spoke and said, “Seneschal, sir seneschal, I love you very much indeed, and I would gladly do anything for the sake of your honor; I would willingly increase that honor, and so I shall, if I live long enough, for you have served me faithfully and well. And I would do nothing or strive for nothing that could bring you shame or dishonor if I could shield you from them. Do you know why I say this? Look, this is your daughter, who has surely deserved to be condemned by the law. But you have been so faithful to me that, for love of you, I would have to 2°The text says, without reference to how the service was conducted, fsent le seruice faire (311, 1. 14): “had the service done.” 30The text has la grant desloiaute (311, 1. 19): “the great faithless/illegal/ criminal act.” 31The text has the ambiguous personal pronoun lui (311, 1. 23): “him.” 32That is, including Cleodalis. The Story of Merlin forgive her for an even greater misdeed than this. But, as it would nevertheless be fitting for me to take vengeance in some way, you must take her out of this kingdom so that no man or woman who sees her will know who she is; for that is my pleasure and my will.” But the seneschal answered that she was never his daughter, “but [312] because it is your will, I will do it. And God help me,” he went on, “I would rather she were burned, or buried alive, in sight of all the townsfolk, for she does not belong to me in any way.” “Now, right now,” said the king, “let it lie! Take care that everything is done so that I may never again hear tell of her—and take as much of what is mine as you will.” This is what the barons decided, and right away, without a break, Cleodalis got himself and his stepdaughter ready to ride, and they took to the road and made their way until in time they came into another kingdom,*> to an abbey that was in a wild, lonely place, where he put her. And there she stayed, so says the story, until Bertelay the Red found her; through his craft and trickery he set her free. Then many times he had his way with her and lay with her openly. But with that, the story falls silent from talking about them right here, and it will tell you about Cleodalis the Seneschal, who came back to Carhaix, where King Arthur was. 38. Bertelay Condemned; Arthur to Hold Court.! Here the story says that after King Leodagan had ordered his seneschal to take his daughter out of the kingdom of Carmelide, he left Ulfin’s and Bretel’s lodging with Merlin, and they came back to his hall hand in hand. There they found the barons all out of bed and dressed; the bells had already been rung for Mass, and they were going to the church, When Mass had been sung, they came back to the hall. There the kinsmen of the knight whom Bertelay had slain came to bring their suit to the king. King Leodagan sent for him at his lodging, and he came right away, wearing armor beneath his clothing and carrying hidden weapons. And he had with him a great many knights, for he was full of great courtliness; he had always had a good tongue in his head, and he was always beautifully dressed. And when King Leodagan saw him, he asked him why he had slain the knight unlawfully. He answered that he would indeed defend himself against anyone who called him a criminal: “I do not say that I did not kill him, but I did break faith with him first. And I did not kill him without reason, for many know for a fact that he had slain a first cousin of mine to have his wife, whom he was shaming. So, as I see it, a man should harm his deadly enemy in all the ways he can—after he has broken faith with him.” 33The text says “into the kingdom of Carmelide,” but this is clearly an error, since Cleodalis has been ordered to remove the false Guenevere from Carmelide. 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 312-315. The Story of Merlin And the king answered that he was mistaken, “but if you had come to me and brought suit against him, I would not have ruled against you; then you could have taken vengeance. But you did not find me worthy enough to seek justice from me.” “Sir,” he said, “say what you will, but I have never done you any wrong, nor will I ever, God willing.” “It is my will,” said the king, “that a rightful judgment will be pronounced.” “Sir,” said Bertelay the Red, “I see clearly that it must be as you will.” Then the king ordered the decision to be reached in full sight of his barons. At that trial were King Arthur, King Ban, King Bors, Sir Gawainet, Sir Yvain, Sagremor, Nascien, Adragain, [313] Hervi of Rivel, and Guiomar. These ten were to make the judgment, so they talked together about many things until at last they agreed that Bertelay should be stripped of his holdings and put out of King Leodagan’s land forever. And King Ban made the speech, for he was wonderfully well spoken, just as it had been entrusted to him: “Sir, these barons gathered here have judged that Bertelay the Red should be stripped of all the land he holds from you as his overlord, and then he must forsake the kingdom forever. The reason is that he took it upon himself to judge the knight he killed, and at night, but justice was not his to mete out. Moreover, you hold high court, which should guarantee that all who have ever been there may come and go freely.” With that, King Ban sat down and said no more. And when Bertelay saw that it could not be otherwise, that he had been forsaken, he turned around without saying a word. He did not dare argue against the judgment, for the highest men in the world—and the mightiest—had made it; but if any others had made it, he would have done all he could to dispute it. So Bertelay left, but he took along a most handsome following of knights to whom he had many times given fine gifts, for he had been a good and strong knight. And he made his way, little by little, hour by hour, until at last he came to the place where the false Guenevere was. There he lingered for quite a long time, and he brooded very darkly, like a man who had known every sorrow, about how he could take vengeance against King Leodagan and King Arthur, who had forsaken him. From this such great ordeals befell King Arthur, and such great strife arose between him and his wife, that he cast her aside for a long time, just as the story will relate it to you later. But now the story falls silent about them and talks no more about them, and it goes back to good King Arthur of Britain, who was with his wife in the city of Carhaix in Carmelide with King Leodagan. In this part the story says that King Arthur spent a most happy time together with his wife* for a week—eight days after he had wed her. On the ninth day, he called his barons aside and told them to prepare to ride, for he very 2The text reads moult demena li rois artus boine vie il & sa jeme (313, Il. 26-27): “King Arthur led a very good life together with his wife.” Cf. 310, Il. 20-21. 34] much wanted to go to the kingdom of Logres, and they said that they were all ready. And King Arthur drew Sir Gawainet aside and said to him, “Dear nephew, take enough of your companions with you so that no more than five hundred knights are left behind with me, for I want to ride as quietly as I can. And you will go straight to Logres, my chief city, and gather together as much food as you can find, and see to it that nothing is lacking. And send the word out far and wide, for I will hold court this mid-August as grandly as I can.” “Sir,” said Gawainet, “I am afraid that you may be fallen upon by some attackers.” “I’m not worried about that,” answered King Arthur. “But go quickly!” And Sir Gawainet left his uncle right then and went straight to his companions. He told them to go get ready, for they had to ride. They went to their lodgings and put their armor on, but before that, they had taken leave of King Leodagan and the barons of Carmelide, and they had very tenderly commended one another to God. [314] So Sir Gawainet left court along with his companions. And King Arthur stayed behind with five hundred men, for that was his pleasure; of them two hundred fifty were knights of the Round Table. And Sir Gawainet and his companions made their way and at last came to Logres. But Sir Gawainet’s heart was heavy for his uncle the king, whom he had left in the kingdom of Carmelide, lest something should happen to him on his way, for he had to go through a great land that bordered on his enemies, before he came into his own land. So he hurried to do what his uncle had ordered, and he sent word far and wide to all those who loved King Arthur that they should come to his court, which was to be as splendid as they could make it, and they were to be there at mid-August. And Sir Gawainet had foodstuffs brought in from everywhere in wagons and carts and on pack horses, and he stocked the court so well with all the things a man or woman needed that nothing was lacking. For he was, as the story says, the shrewdest knight in the world, the most learned, one of the most courtly, one of the least slanderous, and the least boastful. And when he had got everything ready, he set out to meet his uncle, for he was very much afraid that Arthur might be harmed along the way. But right now the story falls silent about him and his companions, who were riding hard, and we will tell you about King Arthur and those who were with him. Now the story says that on the third day after Sir Gawainet had left his uncle King Arthur, the latter, along with his wife, took to the road straight toward Bredigan, and with him were King Ban of Benoic and King Bors of Gaunes—they were brothers and the two best knights one would have hoped to find in any land—and the two hundred fifty companions of the Round Table, who were liegemen to King Leodagan. And the queen had begged Sir Amustan, who had been the chaplain of her father King Leodagan, to come with her to the kingdom of Logres; indeed, he was chaplain there for a long time thereafter. And she brought Guiomar, her cousin, who was a handsome, well-bred knight, and Sadoine, his elder brother, who was castellan of the good city Aneblayse. As soon as King Arthur had left the kingdom of Carmelide, B42 King Lot found out about it from his spies, and he took to the road with his knights and hid in the Forest of Sapinoie, and he said that he would wait for King Arthur there and take his wife from him if he ever could. But here we will stop talking to you about him for a while, and we will tell you about King Arthur, who had left the kingdom of Carmelide. And the story says that King Leodagan rode with him for three full days, and on the fourth he went back into his kingdom. And then Merlin came to King Arthur and took his leave, and he said that he would go to Blaise, his master, for he had not seen him for some time. “What?” said King Arthur. “Won’t you be at my court in Logres?” “Yes, indeed,” answered Merlin, “I'll be there before it is over.” He then commended him to God and left. But he had not gone far at all before they did not know what had become of him. [315] And Merlin came straight to Blaise that very evening, and Blaise welcomed him most joyfully when he saw him. And Merlin told him all the adventures that had happened since he had left him, just as you have heard, and he told him how King Lot was hiding in the Forest of Sapinoie. He also told him many other things that happened afterwards in the kingdom of Logres. And Blaise put everything into writing, and thanks to him we still know it. But with that the story falls silent now about Merlin and Blaise, and we will tell you about King Arthur. 39. Lot Surrenders to Arthur, and Gawain Becomes the Queen’s Knight; News of the Grail.’ The story says here that after King Arthur had left King Leodagan and Merlin, just as you have heard, he rode with five hundred well-armed men wearing iron mail, and he was taking Queen Guenevere his wife along with him. They rode in short stretches until they came within two leagues of the Forest of Sapinoie, where King Lot lay hidden with seven hundred men wearing iron mail. And the youths who were leading the packhorses knew nothing about them until they were right on top of them. As soon as they saw that they were men-at-arms, they knew that they were not there to help them; they stopped and did not go a step farther, but sent word to King Arthur that a great many men-at-arms were lying in wait in the woods. When King Arthur heard that he was about to fall into a trap, he dismounted and gathered his men about him and put them in order to fight. He put the queen in the care of forty knights and told them to take her to safety if they saw it was needed. Then he and his men climbed on their horses and rode hunched down beneath their helmets, burning to defend themselves and to attack others if they found anyone who wanted to block their way. So they rode until they came upon the place where King Lot’s men were lying in wait. King Arthur was riding out ahead 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 315-335. The Story of Merlin with King Ban, King Bors, and the companions of the Round Table. And King Lot sprang out of his hiding place with his men in armor, seven hundred by count, and they met them with raised lances under their arms, their shields before their chests, giving their horses free rein and riding as fast as their horses could run; and they screamed at them so loudly that the whole forest resounded with their yells. When King Arthur’s men saw them coming, they went out to meet them very boldly, and they welcomed them with the iron tips of their lances. They struck one another on their shields so that they drove through and split them; some there were who knocked one another from their horses, and others broke their lances and passed by without falling. And when their lances were gone, they drew their swords and began an uproar that was loud and awesome; no one had ever seen a greater one from so few men, for they were very good knights on both sides. And it lasted long enough for King Arthur and King Lot to run against each other with raised lances, and they let go at each other with as much speed as they could get from their horses and hit each other on their shields so hard with their lances that they broke through and split them, but the tips of their lances stopped against their finely mailed hauberks. They thrust at each other with all their might. King Lot broke his lance, and King Arthur struck him so hard that he bore him to the ground over his horse’s backside [316] with his legs flying, but he was quickly back on his feet, for he was very skillful. He drew his sword from its scabbard and covered himself with his shield, but it hurt him so much that he had been struck down by a single knight that he nearly went out of his mind, for he was not used to falling very often. King Arthur had turned about and was coming back toward King Lot. And when Lot saw him coming, he moved out of the way so that he missed him and passed by. And when he saw him going by, he struck King Arthur’s horse so hard in the gut underneath that he split it open from one end to the other. King Arthur went sprawling down in such a way that his thigh was pinned between his horse and the ground, and his horse held him fast so that he could not get up. King Lot jumped on top of him, grabbed him by his helmet, and twisted and pulled as hard as he could. He was trying his best to cut off his head, and he would soon have hurt him so badly that he could have never recovered, had not King Ban, King Bors, and the companions of the Round Table come spurring to his rescue. Meanwhile, King Lot’s men came riding in, and they flew into each other just as they had met before, and the fighting began all over again, very fierce and very heavy, and there was none so skilled that he did not feel the worse for it. Even so, they fought long enough on both sides that the two kings got back on horseback. And after they were back on, the fighting began again heavier and more awesome, but King Arthur’s men had suffered great harm, for King Lot had two hundred more knights than King Arthur. Just then, behold Sir Gawainet with eighty well-armed companions and Kay the Seneschal, who eagerly yearned to join the fighting—he was very skilled at arms, for he was a good knight, strong and bold, in his own right, but for a single flaw he had, which is that he wept too readily because of his great love of laughter. He was also a jokester, one of the greatest there ever was because he liked to poke fun, The Story of Merlin and many knights hated him for it—they had been shamed by things he said; and so he was unwelcome in many a place, for the knights he had laughed at gave him a great deal of trouble. But he was a faithful knight toward his overlord and toward the queen until his death. Nor in his life did he ever do but one unlawful thing, that is, against Loholt, King Arthur’s son, whom he killed in the Perilous Forest, and he was accused in court by Perceval the Welshman, who had been told about it by a hermit who saw him slay him. When King Arthur saw his nephew coming so fiercely, his whole heart rose within his chest from the joy he felt. Then he came to King Ban and said to him, “See what splendid help is coming to us. Do you know who the first man is riding that black warhorse? The one holding that ash lance with the shield of gold and blue with the lion rampant, its face turned sideways, with those silver crowns?” And King Ban stood upright and said, “Sir, who is it? Tell me, for I do not know him, except that to me it looks like your nephew Gawainet.” “Indeed,” he said, “it is he in truth! And beginning right now, I can say that those who have fallen upon us will be sorry they came. For if God keeps him and his companions from harm, they would not last until the noon hour even if there were as many more of them!” [317] “In God's name,” said King Ban, “it would be unwise of them to wait and fight them.” While they were talking there, Sir Gawainet and his companions rode up, and he was out ahead holding the thick lance. And as he drew near, he recognized his uncle and saw clearly that he needed help. So he charged headlong among them, crashing in hard, his banner flying, and it so happened that Gawainet met King Lot, his father, who had just got back on his horse, and he was holding a stout lance. He came upon him as fast as his horse could go, and they struck each other on their shields with all their might. King Lot broke his lance on the shield of Sir Gawainet, and Sir Gawainet hit him so hard that he drove through his shield and his hauberk and wounded him a little in the side, so that his blood spurted out, and ruthlessly he sent him spilling from his horse to the ground, so that he did not know whether it was night or day; and Gawainet passed by so fast that his armor made a great noise. And when he came back, he found his father still lying sprawled on the ground, and he rode over him three or four times with his horse and crushed and maimed him so dreadfully that Lot nearly went mad. Then Sir Gawainet dismounted, stuck his lance into the ground, and drew his sword Excalibur, which threw off a very bright light, and made straight for King Lot, who was still lying sprawled on the ground. And he grabbed him by his helmet and tore it off his head so hard that his nose and forehead hurt, and he badly wounded him. Then he pulled the coif of his hauberk down to his shoulders and told him that he was a dead man if he did not swear to become his prisoner. And he was so distraught and in such great pain that he could answer very little, but he tried with all his might and said at last, “Ah! noble knight, do not kill me, for in truth I have done you no wrong that you should kill me nn for. 42 “Yes, you have,” he answered. “You wronged me and everyone in this place when you attacked my uncle and blocked his way.” “What?” said King Lot. “Who are you that call him uncle?” “What does it matter to you who I am?” he answered. “I won't tell you. But do quickly what I tell you or you are dead and your men as well.” “Tell me,” said the king, “by the faith you owe to the thing you love most in the world, what is your name?” And he answered, “First I will know the name of you who ask me.” “In truth,” he said, “I am King Lot, the wretched king of Orkney and Loonois. Nothing but bad things happen to me, and this has been so for a long time. Now tell me your name and who you are.” When Sir Gawainet heard that it was his father, he named himself and said that he was Gawainet and that he was King Arthur’s nephew. And when King Lot heard him, he sprang to his feet and tried to throw his arms around him, saying, “Dear son, you are welcome indeed! I am your sorrowful, wretched father, whom you have struck down so improperly.” But Sir Gawainet told him to get away, for he would not be his father or his good friend until he had made peace with King Arthur and begged his forgiveness for his unlawful deeds, and then he would have to swear fealty to him openly and in full sight of all his barons: “Otherwise, you cannot trust me to do anything for you but kill you, and the only pledge you'll leave is your head!” When King Lot [318] heard him, he fainted and fell to the ground, and when he came out of his swoon he begged for his mercy and said to him, “Dear son, I'll do whatever you like. Take my sword, which I hand over to you.” And Sir Gawainet, who pitied him, took it, happy and joyful; tears fell from his eyes beneath his helmet, and he wept tenderly, for his heart was heavy with sorrow that he had wounded his father so badly, but he did his utmost to Tesist going to him. Then they both went back to their horses and mounted, and they came to their men and broke up the fighting. But King Lot’s companions were in a very bad way, for Sir Gawainet’s companions had done them such harm on their first strike that more than forty of them had been sent sprawling to the ground from their horses and did not have the strength to get back on horseback. And Sir Gawainet came in: he split them up and pulled them off one another. Then Sir Gawainet went straight to King Arthur, his uncle. As soon as King Arthur saw him coming, he came out to meet him and said to him, “Dear nephew, you are welcome indeed! How did you come here? Did you know anything about the ambush that was set up here?” And he said that the only reason he came was because his heart always yearned for him, “and I would never had been at ease until I had seen you.” And Sir Gawainet went on to say, “May the Lord God be praised for the battle that has befallen you today, for it is my father, King Lot, you have fought with. Now, thank God, it has happened that he comes to beg you for your forgiveness as his earthly lord for 344 the wrong and misdeeds he has done to you. So take his oath of fealty, as you should, for he is all ready to swear it.” When King Arthur heard this, he raised his hands to heaven and thanked God for the honor He had given him. Thereupon King Lot and his knights came down through the meadowlands on foot; they had taken their helmets from their heads and lowered their coifs down to their shoulders, and they came very meekly. And when Sir Gawainet saw his father walking out ahead, he said to his uncle, “Sir, look, here comes my father to swear fealty to you.” As soon as the king saw him, he got down from his horse, and all the barons did the same. And King Lot came forward and knelt before King Arthur. He held out to him his sword, fully bared as were his misdeeds, and he said, “Sir, take this. I surrender to you as one who has wronged you and should have served and exalted you and yours, yet I did nothing but give you trouble and sorrow. Now do with me and my land what you will.” . There King Lot became King Arthur’s liegeman in sight of all his barons, and he swore to him his oath to do as he ought whatever King Arthur willed.” Then King Arthur took him by the right hand, raised him up, and said to him, “Sir, stand up. You have too long been on your knees, for you are such a worthy gentleman that I would forgive you a greater misdeed than this. But even if I hated you to the death, you have children like these who have given me such service that I could not wish to do you harm. And so I entrust to you myself and everything I have, high and low, to do with as you will for the love of your dear son Gawainet, whom I love more than any other knight in the world. Yet there are two knights here whom I must love as much, and they are kings, for they have loved me [319] and helped me in all times of need.” And King Lot stood up and said, “My deepest thanks, sir. Thus was peace made between King Lot and King Arthur. Then they climbed on their horses, happy and joyful over what had happened to them, and they rode for as long as it took them to come to Logres, where everyone welcomed them joyfully. There were a great many people there, and the number was growing daily, for all the peasants were coming there because of the Saxons, who were laying waste the land all around, and there were so many people that they had to be encamped on the meadowlands. And when King Arthur saw the gathering, he was very glad, and he said that he would hold high court, so he sent word by his marshals that all should quickly come to court on the next day. As soon as the news had spread throughout the country, all came to court straightway, and the next morning King Lot swore his oath to King Arthur in the chief church in sight of the great crowd of people who were there. And King Arthur endowed him again with all the land he had held in his lifetime, and if anyone ever meant to do him wrong, he would safeguard him with all his might. King Lot accepted this happily and joyfully like a 2The text has the ambiguous personal pronoun il (318, 1. 35): “he.” The Story of Merlin worthy gentleman, and from that time forth they were good friends for the rest of their lives. After Mass had been sung, they all came to the high hall, where the meal was all ready and the tablecloths had been laid, and they all sat down to eat and were served most handsomely. After eating, the knights went to see the meadows and streams as well as the tents and pavilions that were set up outside the town, for there were very many rich and beautiful ones. And this is how they disported themselves for eight full days in comfort and delight. And the crowd of people kept growing, for the king had sent word to them that he and his wife would hold plenary court, where they would wear the crown, at mid-August. And when the day before the feast came, and they had all gathered, King Arthur bestowed gifts of his belongings— horses, armor, palfreys, gold, silver, and coins, for he had a great plenty of everything. And the queen gave out clothing and other gifts; she was well provided with them, for she knew all things fitting and honorable. All the knights welcomed her with very great love, and they said that they had won the lady of all ladies; and if the knights esteemed her, the ladies old and young, near and far, spoke even more highly of her. And as renown flies everywhere, hers ran through all lands and spread so far that the princes who were King Arthur’s enemies heard about the peace that had been made between King Arthur and King Lot, how he was to hold a lavish court at mid-August, and that all people were gathering there. And some said in their heart of hearts that they would very gladly have behaved as King Lot had done, and others prayed in their hearts that God not let them die before they had made peace with him, and still others said that all the troubles that had befallen them had happened only because of their sin against him. Thus spoke one and another of them. And King Arthur was in Logres, filled with joy and delight, just as you have heard. And when the day of mid-August came, all of the knights came to court dressed in their richest clothing, and the queen and her ladies were arrayed as handsomely as [320] befitted such a feast. And when the bells had rung for the high Mass, they went to the church and heard the service, which the archbishop of Brice sang for them. That day King Arthur and his wife, Queen Guenevere, wore crowns, and King Ban and King Bors wore crowns for love of them. And after Mass they came back to the hall, where tables had been set up and cloths laid, and the barons sat down as they should there, each at his own place. That day Sir Gawainet served at the high table, where the four kings sat with Kay the Seneschal, Lucan the Wine Steward, Sir Yain the Tall (son of King Urien), Girflet, Yvain the Bastard, Sagremor, Dodinel the Wildman, and enough others so that there were twenty-one at the high table. And forty young apprentices to knights served at the other tables there, and all were served as handsomely as anyone could be. And when the end of the meal came and all the food had been set out, King Arthur spoke loudly enough for all to hear up and down the hall, and he said, “Listen to me, my lords and all who have come to my court to gladden me. I thank you and God above all for the joy and honor you have given me. And you should know that I wish to found a custom in my court to gladden me every time I will wear my The Story of Merlin crown: I swear to God that I will not sit down to eat before news of some adventure comes from wherever it may have happened, provided that it is a fair adventure and one to make the knights of my court go after it—knights who would win glory and honor and be my friends, my companions, and my kinsmen.” And when the knights of the Round Table heard the oath King Arthur swore, they began to talk among themselves, and they said that, since the king had sworn an oath at court, it was fitting that they should swear an oath of their own. At last they agreed on one thing, and they chose Nascien to speak about it before the king, so that all the barons could hear. Then the companions of the Round Table went straight to the king, and Nascien began his speech, and he spoke loudly enough for all those in there could hear him. “Sir,” said Nascien, “the companions of the Round Table, who are here, swear to God, before you and all the barons who are here, that, as you have sworn an oath, they will swear another oath—that, henceforth, whenever a maiden in need comes to your court seeking help or assistance that can be carried out by one single knight fighting against another, one of them? will willingly go to help her out of trouble wherever she may wish to take him, and he will strive until he has righted all the wrongs that have been done to her.” And when King Arthur heard him, he asked his companions if they had agreed to what Nascien had said, and they answered yes, and they swore to him that they would keep their oath to the death. Then there was even greater rejoicing than there had been before. And when Sir Gawainet heard and saw the delight and gladness they were feeling in the hall because of the customs they had founded with their oaths, he came to his companions, [321] for he knew everything that was fitting, and said that if each one of them was willing to grant what he was about to say, he would offer them something from which great honor would come to them all the days of their lives. And they said that they would grant anything that came out of his mouth. “Then promise me,” he said, “that you will keep us all together.” They all promised, and there were eighty companions by count. When Sir Gawainet had taken his companions’ oath, he came straight to the queen and said to her, “My lady, my companions and I come to you and beseech you to retain us as your knights and members of your household so that, when we are in faraway countries to win glory and honor, and anyone asks us whom we belong to and what land we are from, we can say that we are from the land of Logres and we are knights of Queen Guenevere, King Arthur’s wife.” When the queen heard him, she stood up and said to him, “Dear nephew, many thanks to you and them, for I do retain you most gladly as my lords and friends. And just as you give yourselves to me, so do I give myself to you with a good and faithful heart. God give me the strength, and may 3The verb aillent (320, 1. 33) is in the plural, but other pronouns and verbs referring to the rescuer are in the singular. BaD He let me live so long, that I may reward you for the honor and the courtesy you have promised to bring me.” “My lady,” said Sir Gawainet, “thus we are your knights and you have retained us, and we thank you. Now we all swear an oath to you: that all who come among us seeking help or assistance in fighting against a knight will have it, one knight against another, man to man, and they will take him wherever they wish, no matter how far away. And if it should happen that he does not come back within the month, then we will all go looking for him, each one by himself, and the quest should last a year and a day without coming back to court, unless he brings back the truthful news that he is alive or dead. And when they are all back in court, they will each tell, one after the other, about the adventures that have happened to them, whether they are good or bad, and they will swear on the saints that they will lie about nothing in their going out or coming back. And this is the will of all of us.” When the queen heard the oath that Sir Gawainet swore, she was filled with gladness, and the king was happier than all the knights who were in his court. And because the king wanted the queen to be even more glad, he said to her, “My lady, since God has given you such fair company, yours must be even better than mine! And for love of them and yourself, do you know what I am going to bestow on you? I endow you with all my treasure, so that you are lady over it and have the power to hand it out to all you please.” And when the queen heard him, she knelt before the king and said to him, “Sir, many thanks!” Then the queen called Sir Gawainet over and said to him, “Dear nephew, I wish to set up four clerks here who will undertake to do nothing but put into writing all the adventures that happen to you and your companions, so that after our deaths the deeds of prowess by the worthy gentlemen from here will be remembered.” “My lady,” said Sir Gawainet, “I agree.” And then four clerks were chosen who put into writing all the stories of adventures‘ from then on. And afterwards Sir Gawainet said that he would never hear of an adventure [322] without going out to seek it, and he and his companions would strive to bring the right news about them to court, and his companions and the companions of the Round Table said the same. And from that time forth were Sir Gawainet and his companions called the knights of Queen Guenevere. With that, the tablecloths were taken away, as were the tables, and the happy reveling began here and there. But above all those who were there was heard Danguenes of Caerleon. He was having an amazingly good time, and he behaved so that they were all looking at him, but he was a 4In this context particularly, the word aventureapplies without clear distinction to an adventure as event and the account of the adventure. See esp. deuant que aucune auenture i sera auenue de quel part ke che soit (320, l!. 17-18): “before [news of] some adventure happens to come from wherever it may be”, si dira chascuns ... toutes les auentures qui auenues li seront (321, Il. 25-26): “and each one will tell... (the story of] all the adventures that have happened to him”, and qui mistrent en escrit toutes les auentures si com elles uenoient a court (321, |. 42): “who put into writing [the stories of] all the adventures just as they came to court.” 346 fool by nature and the most cowardly piece of flesh there ever was. He began to stamp his feet and to dance about, and he shouted in-a loud voice that in the morning he would go seeking adventures: “And you, Sir Gawainet, you will come, too. You are such a big, handsome knight! And you, my lord companions of the Round Table, in truth I do not believe that you have the heart or the boldness to dare follow me where I’m going tomorrow!” Thus spoke Danguenes the Craven, and the knights there laughed at him. Indeed, many times he put on his armor and rode into the woods. He would hang his shield from an oak tree and then hit it until all the paint had fallen off and the shield was split in several places. Then he would come back and say that he had slain a knight or two. And when he did happen to meet a knight in armor, he would turn in flight even if he had just shouted to him. And many times he happened to come upon a knight who was making his way lost in thought and saying not a word; he would take him by the bridle and lead him away as his prisoner. That is the way that Danguenes was; that is how he behaved. Yet he was quite a handsome knight from good stock; he did not seem a fool from the look of him, but when the words came out of his mouth, then people took note. Great were the joy and the merrymaking on that day of mid-August in Logres when the oaths were sworn. And when the serving men had eaten, Kay the Seneschal came and said, “What is this, sir knights? Shouldn't we be tilting to begin the revels at such a high feast as today?” When Sagremor heard him, he sprang forward and said that it would be cowardly of him if he did not go ulting. And when the knights heard themselves being challenged, they went straight to put on their armor. And when Sir Gawainet heard this, he asked how they would tourney, and Minoras answered that they would fight against the knights of Queen Guenevere, and they would take as many knights on one side as the other. Then Sir Gawainet asked how many knights they wanted to fight; Adragain answered that there would be five thousand on their side, and Sir Gawainet said that his <ide would also be five thousand strong. “Now there’s no reason to stay here,” said Pinados, “except to go put on our armor, for the day is going by.” Then they went to their lodgings and very quickly put on their armor, and they rode straight to the meadowlands outside the town; they kept coming until there were ten thousand of them from both sides. Then the order was shouted that each one should go where he belonged, so they parted and each went straight to his banner. Then Sir Gawainet came and took away his contingent, so that there were five thousand on each side. And the heralds began to cry, “This is for the honor of arms. Now we'll see who fights best!” And when it was time to gather the men in order, [323] a messenger came to Sir Gawainet and said to him, “Sir, King Arthur your uncle sends for you to come speak to him at those windows, where he awaits you.” And Sir Gawainet went there, and he took his cousin Yvain with him and Sagremor and Girflet, and the The Story of Merlin contingents were so close to each other that they were waiting only to spur their horses. The very first to break ranks was Pinados, one of the knights of the Round Table. And from the other side came one of the queen’s knights, who was Sir Gawainet’s brother, his name was Agravain the Proud. They were both riding wonderfully good horses, and they struck each other on their shields with their lances, and they both broke through them so that the tips of their lances stopped against their hauberks. They were both strong and proud, and their hauberks were strong and fast, so that not one link broke, but they made the lances fly into splinters. And as they passed by, they knocked against each other with their shields and horses so hard that they sent each other spilling to the ground with their horses coming down on top of them. Knights from both sides spurred to the rescue, and they hit one another with the sharp, cutting tips of their lances. And Sir Gawainet rode until] he came to the moat near the windows where King Arthur, Queen Guenevere, King Ban, King Bors, and a great many ladies and maidens were leaning out to watch the tournament. And when the king saw him coming, he said, “Dear nephew, I beseech you, by the faith you owe me, to watch over those men-at-arms so that no wrath or anger will rise among them and no wrong will be done.” “Sir,” he answered, “there will never be any wrongdoing because of me, but I cannot keep every one of them from their madness. But as for you, if you see that it is turning bad, you should try to break it up. For you should know that I could not bear for your companions, who are troublesome, to mistreat mine in front of me, and I would help them out with all my might.” “Sir,” said King Ban, “Sir Gawainet has spoken like a worthy man. What you need to do is take a part of your men and arm them well, so that, if they are needed, all they have to do is get on their horses.” “In God’s name,” said King Arthur, “it will be as you say. Then King Arthur ordered three thousand soldiers and squires to put on their armor, and he himself did likewise, as did the three kings who were with him. And Sir Gawainet went back to the tournament, which was already growing hot around the two men who had fallen, and they succeeded in getting back on horseback. Then the fighting began to get heavier, and the knights of the Round Table, who were two hundred fifty strong, did their best to defeat the eight companions of Sir Gawainet, who were in dire straits and were getting much the worst of it. They bore up very well because they willingly helped one another, but no good deed would have been useful to them if it had not been for King Lot’s knights, who supported them with great vigor. Many a joust was fought there, and many a knight was struck down whose horse fled through the fields. There the companions of the Round Table would have been mistreated had not a company of seven hundred knights come to help them, and then the knights of the Round Table had the best of it. For there were more of them, and they drove the others from the field, despite their efforts. And then the hue and cry rose so loud around them that no one could have heard God thundering. [324] The Story of Merlin When Sir Yain heard the din and the uproar around his companions, he looked that way and saw that they were in trouble, and he was filled with sorrow. And he said to Sir Gawainet, “Look! Dear cousin, we are tarrying here too long, for our companions are being routed!” “In God’s name,” said Sagremor, “may he never be called a knight who does not help them in this time of need!” “I don’t care a whit,” said Girflet, “for words without deeds! Now we’ll see who fights best!” At once they spurred their horses and rode away as noisily as the sparrow-hawk that means to catch prey when it is starving. And when they came into the tourney, they rushed headlong among them holding their lances straight out, and they bore to the ground the first four they met. Then the four companions began to fight so skillfully that they stopped the rout. They were recognized in little time even by those who had never seen them before. And when the queen’s knights saw Sir Gawainet, they drew up around him, and so did King Lot’s knights, who were very good and brave knights. And Sagremor began to fight so well that those who were at the windows of the great hall pointed their fingers at him and said, “That is Sir Sagremor. In truth he does not bear treason in him, for if he is a handsome knight in body and limb, he is yet a better knight in spirit. And she who has him can well boast that she has one of the best knights in the court; likewise, she would be uncourtly and unwise who refused the love of such a knight.” Meanwhile, Girflet was fighting very well in his own right, and so was Galescalain, who was highly esteemed by one and all. And these three were joined by the brothers of Sir Gawainet, who were very skilled and bold. These knights fought wondrously well, and Sir Yvain began to do so well again that none better than he was needed for the fighting. And when the companions of the Round Table saw that the pursuit had been stopped, they began to work all the harder to drive their opponents from the field, and they did many feats of arms. But whoever did well and who not, above all the others Sir Gawainet fought hard, for there was no company he came upon, no matter how tightly drawn together or how thick, that he did not get through by sheer strength, and he struck down knights and horses, he tore helmets from heads and shields from necks; and if the companions of the Round Table had the better of it before, now they had the worse, for Sir Gawainet and his companions kept fighting so close to them that they drove them back in a rout as far as the moat, and there they stopped. And the story says that their hardship was such that ten of their best were struck down to the ground: one was named Minoras, the second Mataly, the third Pinados, the fourth Blaharis, the fifth Carismal, the sixth Partreus, and Grandome, Ladinel, Ladinus, and Traelus. These ten were forcibly taken prisoner, and this was done by Sir Gawainet, Sir Yvain, Sagremor, and Kay the Seneschal; they sent them to the queen on behalf of Sir Gawainet, whom they took as their leader, and they were right to do so, for he was a most worthy gentlemen, and he was most helpful to them in every time of need. And the ten companions who had been taken came straight to the queen and handed themselves Ba / over to her [325] on behalf of Sir Gawainet, and she welcomed them most joyfully, and she gave each one of them some of her jewels. Then they went to lean out of the windows of the great hall to see the tournament, which was wondrously beautiful and fierce. When the knights of the Round Table saw that they had lost ten of their companions, no one could have been sorrier than they, for never before had they been driven from a field by force even if those against them were twice as strong. And then their opponents’ great battalion came from near the bridge, and they brought them vigorous help and succeeded in putting them back into the middle of the field. And the company that kept itself about Sir Gawainet came back against the ones who had come in fresh. They ran headlong upon one another, and they began such a wonderful combat that they all grew weary, and it was already near the hour of nones when Sir Gawainet and his companions began to fight so boldly that they drove the others to the edge of the moat. When the knights of the Round Table saw that they had been turned to rout, they said that from that time on they would try to fight as wickedly as they could. Then they took up their stout, straight lances, and put them into their holders. That was the most evil thing they could do, for tournaments ought to be fought without treachery. So they made ready to strike their opponents as if it were a deadly war. As soon as they had picked up their lances, they flew in among the queen’s knights, whom they greatly hated. On the first onslaught they struck down twenty of the worthiest; they were quickly back on their feet and drew their swords, but the others were on top of them to take them prisoner, and the clanging on them was loud and wondrous. They could have lost very quickly, but Sir Wain caught sight of them—he was in the thickest fighting along with Sir Gawainet and Sagremor. And when they saw the wicked things the others were doing to their companions, Sir Wain said, “My lords, look at that fine game the other side has started against us!” And when Sir Gawainet saw it, he said that they were not behaving like worthy knights and he would not stand for it. Then he called to Cuiret of Lambal and Guiomar and said to them, “My lords, go to the knights of the Round Table on my behalf and tell them that my companions and I send them word that they have wronged us at this time, and we beg them please to stop the mad things they have begun. We strongly protest what they have done to us, and we Call them to judgment for it before the king; and if here on our side there is anyone who has done them any wrong whatsoever, we will make it up to them in any way they like.” When they heard Sir Gawainet’s order, they turned about without saying a thing and went straight to the companions of the Round Table and gave them their message just as it had been entrusted to them. And the knights of the Round Table answered that they cared nothing for any word they might send them; they would continue doing as they were, “and if anyone wants to be angry over it, let him be angry, and we’ll do even more than we have done! And you can tell Gawainet and his companions that soon people will see who is the most skilled and who hits hardest in the fighting.” 348 When they heard such shocking insolence, they turned around and came straight to Sir Gawainet, [326] who had already got his companions back on their horses, and they told him what they had found out. And when Sir Gawainet heard it, he was filled with wrath. “What?” he said. “Is it certain that they will not do otherwise? Then let them know that, since we have come to defiance, we will soon know, in the onslaught, who the most skilled knights are.” Then Sir Gawainet left the tournament, along with Sagremor, his three brothers, Sir Yvain, Galescalain, Dodinel, Kay the Seneschal, Girflet, and Lucan, and he took them aside and said to them, “My lords, the companions of the Round Table have given us a most wicked challenge out of pride and treachery because it seems to them that they have been wronged by our people, and they think that they can win it all by showing their cruelty and wickedness. I want each one of us to go get his hauberk and the strongest armor he has and leave nothing out!” They did as he said, and they sent for their armor, went to the tourney, which was going strong, and put it on; they were most eager to get in where the fighting was heavy, for all ten thousand had thrown themselves into the battle. When Sir Gawainet and his companions were ready, they were eighty strong by count; they got on their horses and, drawn up tight together, they rode at a slow pace to their companions, who were already keeping up the fighting and running up and down looking for the companions of the Round Table, and they were so distraught that they could not find them that they nearly went out of their minds, for the companions of the Round Table were very badly mistreating them. Then came Sir Gawainet and his companions, and they rushed headlong in among them so hard that they struck down almost forty of the others in the onslaught. When Nascien and Adragain saw this, they stopped and said to their companions, “Dear lords, we have made a very bad mistake in the challenge we have undertaken against the queen’s knights out of envy, and it would avail us nothing to ask for the fighting to stop before anything worse happened. For King Arthur’s nephew and _ their companions will do us great harm, you can count on it, and it cannot end without great loss; perhaps there will be deaths, so it would be best if it stopped right now. You should know that there are twenty on their front line who will soon have sent forty of ours on their way, and they are highborn men and among the strongest in the kingdom of Logres.” And they answered that they had spoken too late: “Every man look out for himself, for now it cannot be otherwise.” Then they struck out into the fray, and the eighty companions came to meet them. Then they drew their swords, and the fighting on foot and on horseback grew fierce and wicked and treacherous. And when King Lot’s seven hundred knights recognized the folly and disorderliness the companions of the Round Table had started, they drew to one side, fitted on their armor very well, and came straight to Sir Gawainet and said to him, “Sir, now you can ride safely against the jealous ones. From The Story of Merlin now on we will never forsake you, neither you nor your companions, for any distress we may find ourselves in. We recognize very well the kind of fighting that is going on between us and the companions of the Round Table, but they have too few men to carry out what they have undertaken. We see clearly that they are two hundred fifty strong, and you [327] have only eighty, so it is no wonder that they have the best of it. But they have a right to boast that today they have made two hundred enemies who will show them whether or not they are wise to have undertaken such madness!” And Sir Gawainet thanked them most heartily, and he set them in order around him, for he was a man who knew how to get things done. Then Sir Gawainet called a young lord, a highborn man, whose right name was Galesconde, and he said to him, “Go quickly to my uncle, King Arthur, and tell him not to be sorry if my companions and I defend ourselves against those of the Round Table, who have begun doing mad things to us. And tell him how this has happened from beginning to end.” When Galesconde heard Sir Gawainet’s order, he turned about and left to deliver the message just as it had been entrusted to him. While Sir Gawainet was tending to this business, the queen’s knights were being beaten. The knights of the Round Table had rescued their companions and got them on horseback, and they drove the others from the field with their sheer strength. And when Sir Gawainet saw this, he rushed in against them so hard that everything around them shook and shuddered. And Sir Gawainet shouted, “Now at them, noble knights! They'll be sorry they began such madness!” When the queen’s knights heard Sir Gawainet saying that, and when they saw the handsome company of knights who were following night behind him, they turned about and were most grateful for the help, for now they could see plainly that they would not get the worst of it, and they knew it. Then they gathered tightly together, holding their shields in front of their chests, and Sir Gawainet rode before them in the front with his sword drawn, since he had broken his lance, and he struck Douglas so hard on his helmet that he cut through it and his iron coif too, and he made a great wound in his head and stunned him so badly that he sent him head over heels to the ground. Douglas’s® companions shouted that he was dead, and they ran upon Sir Gawainet® from every side, and he hit the first one he met, as he passed by, on his nose-guard and gave him a great wound, and he fell to the ground bleeding. Then he struck another one on the shield so hard that he maimed him dreadfully and sent him sprawling to the ground. Then he came to Nascien and meant to strike him on the helmet, but Nascien saw the blow coming and pulled back on his reins, and the blow fell in front on his saddlebow and cut all the way through the horse, and he brought horse and knight to the ground all in a heap. And when Nascien found himself on the ground, he leapt to his feet very swiftly, for he was a very good knight, and he drew his sword and thrust his shield over his head, because he was afraid 5The text has the ambiguous possessive st (327, |. 27): “his.” The text has B courent sus (327, |. 27): “ran upon him.” The Story of Merlin that Sir Gawainet might deal him another blow before he was ready. And when Sir Gawainet saw that he was indeed ready, he turned the sword he was holding toward him. And Nascien looked at him and said to him, “Look, Sir Gawainet! You are not so courtly or so worthy a gentleman as they say. You are bearing arms as if you were fighting a deadly war, for you have brought along your good sword. And you can be sure that you will yet be rebuked for that elsewhere more than here.” “I do not know what people will do,” said Sir Gawainet, “but [328] I know of no knight against whom I would not defend myself if he dared call me faithless—or against two such, if need be, one after the other. But you and your companions behaved faithlessly when you began your treachery; we sent messengers to you, and you would not hear them.” “Sir,” said Nascien, “things have gone madly up to now, and it is high time to stop, if you will, for the one who first talked about it and started it has won nothing from it, for I believe that he is dying from his wounds. But for God’s sake, I beg you to separate the two sides at once—that would be a good and courtly thing to do—before more harm comes from it.” “IT do not know what harm will come from it,” said Sir Gawainet, “but they will never be separated by me. If the companions of the Round Table ever undertake treachery against us, I will gladly start fighting them with my lance held high, and I'll be the very first in! That is why I want you to tell them, ‘Shouldn’t you beware of me now?’ And you'll also tell them that the king and queea may not interfere. For we companions will gladly meet them in battle, and sooner or later they won’t be able to help themselves.” “Sir,” said Nascien, “once before you behaved lovingly to me and did me a good deed, and I could never pay you back, nor did you need it. When you say that we have fought among ourselves enough, you are telling the truth, for you are a high and mighty man, and they are lower knights than your companions; they cannot overwhelm you when you seek to do them harm and injury.” Suddenly Sir Gawainet rode off and left Nascien standing there. He and his companions rushed headlong into the battle, and they crashed and hammered on helmets and shields, they cut apart and struck down knights and horses, and they handled them so fiercely that they drove them all from the field in a rout as far as the river, which was deep and wide; and many of them could not keep from being knocked down into the water. You would have seen lances and shields floating downstream in great numbers, and you would have seen horses without their masters, reins dragging behind them, drowning from one bank to the other. When Sir Gawainet saw that they were gone and did not have the strength to recover, and he saw it clearly, he wiped off Excalibur, his good sword, and put it back into its scabbard, because he was afraid for it, and as he was fastening it, he saw some of the companions of the Round Table sitting on horseback, blocking the road. He grabbed a piece of an appletree limb and threw his shield down to the ground; he held the stick in both hands and said that he would make them give way. Then he ran headlong upon 349 them as fast as his horse could carry him, and he hit the first one he came to on the shoulders and sent him sprawling to the ground, and then the second and the third, and every man he struck, no matter how strong he was, he hurled to the ground. And when they saw that he was treating them so badly, they grew very angry and rode after him with their swords drawn, for they bitterly hated him. They fell upon him from every side and struck where they could get at him, and they succeeded in killing his horse under him. So he sprang to his feet very swiftly, for he was skilled and nimble, and used his stick as a shield. He drew Excalibur from its scabbard [329] and damned to hell anyone who would think that they were the best knights in the world, for they had not shown themselves to be good knights when they had slain his horse. So he ran them down very swiftly and split their shields, their helmets, and their hauberks on their shoulders and arms, and he cut their legs and their horses’ heads with such great strength that he brought to the ground as many as he met. In a short time he had struck down more than twenty; they lay on the ground battered and wounded so badly that they needed a doctor if they wanted to get well, for otherwise they would die. With that, ninety companions and the seven hundred knights of King Lot came into the battle. They had been following it all day, and they charged in as roughly and as fast as they could go. They found Sir Gawainet on foot, holding his sword that was bloody from the horses he had killed. There they got Sir Gawainet back on his horse, and he put his sword back in its scabbard and picked up his stick again in both hands. He swiftly ran them down, and he struck out hither and thither, he did not care where, and he put them to rout in no time and sent them on their way through the town gates. And the other five thousand, who had stayed behind on the river bank, fought against all who were on the other side, those whom King Lot’s knights had left for them, and the queen’s ninety knights drove them utterly from the field. Then the tournament began all over again: it was wonderful, and there were many handsome jousts which the ladies and maidens, who stood on the town walls, were glad to watch. The tourney lasted for quite a long time, for the men were skilled on both sides, and they fought like good knights. But in the end the knights who were with Sir Gawainet could not hold out, for there were fewer of them than on the other side, and they began to drive forward one moment and fall back the next. Meanwhile, news about the fighting came to Sir Yain, who had stopped outside the town gate, and the twenty-four companions who were with him. And when he heard that his friends were having the worst of it, he called his companions together and set out to help them. As soon as he came to where they were, they all began to fight very well, better than they had done all day long, and, thanks to their skilled fighting, three or four times they broke through their opponents’ lines clear to the other side, and they routed them and sent them on their way, driving them back through the gates and into the streets of the town. There they brought them down and trampled them under their horses’ hooves, for they were unwilling to take any of them prisoner, so angry were they 350 about the outrageous deeds the companions of the Round Table had undertaken to do in their pride. Elsewhere were Sir Gawainet and the knights of Orkney, who had ridden hard and run fast after the knights of the Round Table; at last they came to the Church of St. Stephen. There the companions stopped, for they had kept pace as long as they could. But there were soon to be dead and wounded, when at last King Arthur, King Bors, and King Ban came there. As soon as Galesconde had given them his message, the squires, who were a good four thousand armed men strong,’ and the three kings rode toward St. Stephen’s, while some of the squires, a good three hundred of them, were riding down the high street. There [330] they met the knights of Orkney following Sir Gawainet, who was badly beating the companions of the Round Table, just as you have heard. And as soon as they saw the squires, they thought it was an ambush, so they fell upon them, and wondrous fighting broke out. Sir Gawainet’s companions were in great trouble, above all those fighting the squires in the narrowest part of the street, for there were many who had been struck down and wounded. Soon word came to Sir Gawainet that his companions were being badly taken to task: “I do not know who has attacked them in the gateway,” but they had beaten them senseless. As soon as Sir Gawainet heard the news that his companions had been attacked from the rear, he left the fighting to the companions where he was and came straight to where the others were. But beforehand he had set up good lookouts to guard the river bank, lest those of the Round Table should turn back around. Then he came to where they were fighting, and as soon as he saw who was there,® he swore that they would be sorry that they had come. And when the squires? saw him coming, they shouted to him to surrender, for otherwise his men would be killed. When Sir Gawainet heard them threatening him with death, he became very angry, and he called them whores’ sons, cowardly traitors, wicked oath-breakers, “for you set up an ambush. And you should know that if you get away from me, even the boldest would want no part of it for all of this kingdom!” Then he drew his bloody sword, and they ran hard at him with axes and swords, and he dived in among them and hit the first one he met and sent his head flying, then the second, the third, and the fourth, and he struck right and left and cut open feet, arms, heads, and sides, and he fought so hard that in a short time none dared make a stand against him, but they turned in flight, wailing and moaning, and they said, “Let’s flee, let’s flee. Look here, this is a devil that has come unleashed from hell!” After Sir Gawainet had freed his companions, he went back and took forty knights and sent them on the way to the river bank so that no one might fall upon them. ‘Earlier the soldiers and squires together are said to number three thousand (323, 1. 29). 8The text reads il les uit uenir (330, 1. 14): “he saw them coming”; note that the next sentence begins ail le uoent uenir (330, ll. 14-15): “they see him coming.” Logically Gawain cannot “see them coming,” for he is riding toward them. 9The text has the ambiguous demonstrative al (330, 1.14): “those/they.” The Story of Merlin “And if you are attacked,” he said, “come back and find me. Then he went the other way, toward St. Stephen’s, where the knights of the Round Table were, and they were fighting against the knights of Orkney. And when Sir Gawainet got there, he rushed in hard among them and called them traitors, for he was truly convinced that they had set up the ambush. And when they saw that they were hated so much, they did not know what to say, for they believed he was calling them that because they had been the first to behave defiantly when they were all tilting with lances. They would very gladly have set that right, if they could, for now their shame had doubled; thus the wise man says in a proverb that some thinking to revenge renew their shame,?° and this is why they were ashamed and downcast. And Sir Gawainet rode in headlong among them and struck Adragain so hard on his helmet that he cut through his iron coif and into his flesh, and he bore him to the ground so dazed that he did not know whether it was day or night. Then he struck Pindolus across his shoulders and cut the strap on which his shield hung and cut through his hauberk into his flesh, and he ran his sword through the shoulder bone so deeply that he nearly killed him, and the shield flew to the ground on one side and the knight on the other. Next he struck Ydonas above the cheekbone, and his sword went down to his teeth, and Ydonas fell to the ground in a faint. [331] When the companions of the Round Table saw that he was wreaking such havoc on them and that no weapon could stop him, they all rode back to the church together. And he and his men ran after them, for they did not want to let them go so soon. Then, as it happened, Sir Gawainet was on the heels of Hervi of Rivel, and he struck him on the head. And as he raised his sword again, the other one thrust his sword to meet the blow and said to him, “Sir knight, you have fought enough, and you should be glad to stop at once, for you truly deserve to be blamed for the cruelty there is in you. They used to say every good thing about you, and now they will say only bad things. For you should have helped them and safeguarded them against all in the world who would harm them; yet you have killed them and wounded them with all your might, although they have done you no wrong.” “Hervi,” answered Sir Gawainet, “did they not do wrong when they began this madness and this treachery against my companions to whom I must bear faith? And they were not satisfied with that, so they set up an ambush against us.” “Sir,” said Hervi, “if, in their foolishness, they did wrong this one time, they will make it up to you as grandly as you wish—not for anyone else’s sake, but for love of you, whom they will henceforth take as their friend and companion.” “They will not make amends to me,” said Sir Gawainet, “for I will never love them. And tell them indeed that whenever they treat my companions with hatred and envy, 10The proverb is attested by Morawski (#2351) and Cotgrave (under Honte), whose translation this is. The proverb occurs elsewhere (244, |. 7); see also ch. 32, n. 4. The Story of Merlin they do the same to me. Whenever they want to challenge the ninety of us to a tournament, we'll always fight them, if they are willing to undertake it with one hundred twenty of the best knights among them. They should know also that wherever I may be, in this country or in a foreign land, if I am ever challenged, and they have anything to do with it, I will do all I can to hurt them.” “Sir,” said Hervi, “what you are saying is wrong and a sin. Such may be your wish, but it will not soon be fulfilled, for it would be a dreadful shame if so many worthy knights were to come to grief for such little foolishness. And besides, they would utterly forsake your uncle’s court.” “I do not know what they’ll do,” said Sir Gawainet, “but they won’t leave it on my account, and if they do, whatever land they go to, they'll be found, for I and mine will go anywhere we hear it said that they are.” “Sir,” he answered, “cool your anger, calm your wrath, for, God help me, if they began the madness, they have paid dearly for it, for many of them are wounded and badly maimed, there are a good thirty of them who will never carry a shield, so I believe, and it is a great sorrow and a great shame, for they were very worthy gentlemen and good knights.” While they were talking thus, King Arthur rode up, and he heard some of the words they spoke, and he said to Sir Gawainet, “Dear nephew, is this what I bade you do this morning? In truth, you have shown clearly that you do not hold me dear, for against my will and against my orders, and to spite me, you have killed and wounded my men, and you have done the worst things you know how. And you should know that I am grieved by what you have done.” “Sir,” said Sir Gawainet, “the one who began the madness should pay dearly for it. I have done nothing to spite you, and if anyone accused me of such a thing, there is nO man against whom I would not defend myself, all the more so because, just as soon as the madness began to grow, I sent you word of it by Galesconde, one of our companions. And [332] they had very badly hurt us long before we stirred to move against them.” And King Lot, his father, came to him and took hold of his horse’s bridle, and he said, “Gawainet, dear son, stop this madness at once, for you have fought long enough; let the king say what he will. In due time the anger between you two will be healed, for we have seen clearly a part of what has happened.” And King Ban and King Bors came to him and spoke to him of many things, until at last they calmed him. This is how the fight was broken up between Sir Gawainet, and his companions, and those of the Round Table. And the four kings took him away with them, and they went to Galesconde, to the wondrous fighting within the gate to the town, where Sagremor, Sir Yain, and their companions were giving them the worst of it. And Galesconde broke them up, although it was very hard to do, for they were struggling hard with one another. Then each and every one went to his lodging; they took off their armor and washed in warm water; then they dressed in their tunics. As many as could went to the court, but the maimed and wounded stayed behind in their lodgings to have their wounds tended and taken care of. Meanwhile, Sir Gawainet and his companions went to take off their armor in one of 351 the queen’s rooms that had been set aside to house them. And when they had taken off their armor and bathed, they dressed most handsomely, and they were so well served that they could not ask for more, for none served them but maidens, of whom there were a great many. There Sagremor was often looked at and stolen sight of by many of them, for he was a most handsome, strong knight, and Dodinel too, for both of them were very handsome knights, and they were highly esteemed and praised by everyone who saw them. As soon as they were dressed, they came straight to the high hall two by two, holding one another by the hand, one pair after the other. Thus went the ninety knights, with Sir Gawainet and Sir Wain leading the way to the high hall before the king, who was very glad to see them. And when he saw them he rose to greet them; he took Sir Gawainet by one hand and the queen took him by the other, and they all three went to sit on a couch. And the other knights sat down and played and joked with one another; then they all began to engage one another in conversation, for they had a great deal to talk about. But above all those who were there, the queen was most joyful and happiest because of her knights, who had won the tourney. Little did it matter how happy she was, for the companions of the Round Table were not joyful or happy or cheerful; rather they were ashamed, downcast, and full of wrath because of their companions, many of whom were wounded. And they spoke of many things, until at last they talked about how they could become reconciled with Sir Gawainet and his companions, and they agreed to send Hervi of Rivel, who was a most worthy and learned gentleman, and Nascien, for no other two could serve as messengers better than they, and Minados as well, who was a most worthy knight and moderate in his speech. When these three companions saw that it was up to them to deliver the message, they took one another by the hand and came straight before King Arthur. And when the king saw them coming, he rose to meet them, for he knew better than any other how to honor worthy gentlemen. [333] He told them that they were very welcome. And Sir Gawainet rose as well. Then Hervi spoke to the king and said, “Sir, the companions of the Round Table have sent us to speak to Sir Gawainet, to my lady the queen, from whom he has a part of his holdings, and no less to you, who are our overlord. And they would like you to know, and they beg you that, if they have wronged Sir Gawainet in any way or his companions, however they may have done so, they are ready and willing to make up for it as you and my lady see fit, provided that all wrath and ill will are forgiven on both sides.” And the king looked at the queen and said, “Lady, they won’t ever refuse that.” And the queen answered that she would be very glad if Sir Gawainet did not. And Sir Gawainet kept quiet and did not say a word, but he fell into deep thought. When the king saw him brooding, he took him by the hand and said, “Gawainet, dear nephew, what are you brooding about? Try not to think about anything sad or distressful. For, as the worthiest men in the world bow down to you, only honor can come to you, and they offer to make up to you all their misdeeds.” Doe “Worthy men, sir?” said Sir Gawainet. “In truth, dear nephew,” answered the king, “they are indeed worthy.” “Then they must be,” said Sir Gawainet. At once he fell silent. And the king, who saw clearly that he was angry at them, looked at the queen and said to her, “Appeal to him, my lady, I beseech you, and it is my will.” “Gladly, sir,” she answered. Then the queen took him by the hand and said to him, “Dear nephew, do not be angry, for anger has blinded many a man and has made the wise seem foolish for as long as the wrath lasts. Now believe me and do as I beseech you, and the king as well, for it is for the sake of your honor and worth. How well you know that this land is in sorrow and has been scourged by the Saxons! Here there are but few of you, but I'll tell you what you should think about doing: you should be faithful and love one another and help one another against all others, and if your enemies come to fall upon you, you should be hard and fierce against them, but not against those who tomorrow might give themselves to be maimed or slain for the sake of my lord, who is here, and myself. And all for one mad thing they have done in their folly, would you deprive me of them? So forgive them, dear nephew, I beg you, as does the king your uncle, who is deeply distressed by it.” And Sir Gawainet looked at her and began to smile because of the speech she had given him, and he answered, “My lady, my lady, anyone who will learn from you can learn a great deal. And blessed be God for making such as you and for granting us the company of such a good and noble lady. And my lord the king may well boast that, if you live a full life, you will be the wisest lady alive—indeed, you already are, I believe! And do you know what you have won in this? You may do with me whatever you will, unless it bring shame to me or my lord the king.” “In truth,” said the queen, “any lady who sought that of you would be neither worthy nor wise, and I do not ask such a thing, nor will I ever, God willing.” This is how the queen soothed Sir Gawainet, and so peace was made. [334] And then Nascien, Hervi, and Minados went to fetch the companions of the Round Table, and they told them how they had done. Then they all came straight back to the king. And the queen had called Sir Wain, Sagremor, and some others aside, and she told them how peace had been sought with the companions of the Round Table. Sir Wain said that only good could come of it and that one should rather delight in love than in hatred. With that, the companions of the Round Table came before the king; and as soon as they had gathered there, they knelt before Sir Gawainet and folded back the hems on their cloaks;!! and Hervi of Rivel spoke and said, “Sir, we make amends to you, on behalf of ourselves and all our companions, for all the wrong, without saying more, we have done you. Forgive us everything, if you please.” And Sir Gawainet leapt to his feet and said that he forgave them everything, and he raised them up by their arms, and Sir Yvain, Sagremor, and Sir Gawainet’s three 114s a sign of their desire to make amends (Cotgrave, ployer). The Story of Merlin brothers raised the men nearest them,!* and they got all the others to their feet, and they all hugged and kissed one another, and each forgave the other their wrath and anger. And from that time forth Sir Gawainet was lord and master and a companion of the Round Table. And the queen freed the knights taken prisoner whom her own knights had sent her, and she gave new clothing to every one. Thus the knights of the Round Table and Queen Guenevere’s knights were reconciled, and they swore that they would never again turn against one another, except when knights by themselves wished to be tested and were in disguise and did not want to be recognized for who they were before they had won renown for deeds of great knightly skill and the knights of the Round Table let them into their company. And the story says that the queen’s knights that day were only ninety strong,!> but their numbers grew afterwards until, as the story will relate it to you, there were four hundred of them before the quest for the Holy Grail had ended. That is why they suffered much bitter hardship in order to achieve the quest, which lasted for a very long time. And many a day they tried hard to undertake many other quests, and I will tell you why they did it. It was true that news spread throughout the kingdom of Logres about the most holy Grail, in which Joseph of Arimathea had caught the blood that flowed from the side of Jesus Christ when he and Nicodemus took Him down from the glorious Cross; about the most holy vessel that came down from heaven onto the ark in the city of Sarras, in which He first sacrificed His holy body and His flesh through His bishop Josephus, whom He consecrated with His own hand; and about the most holy Lance with which Jesus Christ was wounded in His side. They had come to be kept in the land of Logres, for Joseph had brought them there, but no one knew where they were, [335] and they would never be found or seen, so the prophecy said, by anyone, nor would the wonders of the Holy Grail and the Lance that bled from its iron tip, until the best knight in the world came there. And by him would the wonders of the Holy Grail be discovered. This news had spread everywhere, but no one ever found out where it had come from or who was the first to utter it. And when the companions of the Round Table heard that all of these things would be brought to an end by the best knight in the world, they undertook a quest that lasted many a day in order to find out who the best knight was, and they looked for many a long day in many a land, and everyone sought to be thought of as the best. Whenever they heard it said that there was a good knight in a country, they undertook the quest for a year and a day without lying down in the same town more than one night. Whenever they happened to find him, they did what they could to bring him back to court, and when there were witnesses that he was worthy and skilled, they welcomed him into their company, and then his name was written down with the other companions’. And as soon as each one came back 12The text reads chascuns le sien (334, 1. 14: “each his own [man].” 13gommer’s text has . Lexx. (334, 1. 25), but this number is inconsistent with the count in the immediate context; in fact, other manuscripts give the number as ninety (334, n. 2). The Story of Merlin from his quest at the end of the year, he told about the adventures that had happened to him that year, and the clerks took them down in writing word for word just as he told them. Now you have heard why and how the quests were begun in the kingdom of Logres, and now, with that, the story falls silent about them, and it goes back to the matter it left off in order to tell about these things. I did not want to forget it because it belongs right here. 40. Arthur to Propose a Truce with the Remaining Rebellious Princes.’ Now the story says that the companions of the Round Table were very glad that they had been reconciled with Sir Gawainet, and they highly esteemed the prowess they had seen him display at the tournament. They said among themselves there in the hall that the ten best knights there could not have outlasted him fighting man to man. So spoke the knights there, and they said what they would, but the ladies and maidens, who were in the rooms, said even more about him. Soon the horn was blown for washing their hands, and the cloths were put on the tables, and the knights all sat down right where they ought. The queen’s knights sat next to the knights of the Round Table, just as they should have. And King Arthur, King Ban, King Bors, and King Lot sat at their own table, and no one else sat with them. That day Sir Gawainet served, along with Sir Yvain, Lucan the Wine Steward, Girflet, and up to forty others. And they were all served better than anyone could describe: I do not know how to tell you about the food they ate or the many kinds of drink. After eating, when the tablecloths had been taken off, the knights went here and there in the meadows and along the river bank, and the weather was fair and still. But although others went out to enjoy themselves, the four kings lingered. They went into a room by themselves to one of the windows through which they could see the meadows and river, and the view was wondrously beautiful and health-giving. The air was soft and sweet that blew in through the windows, and the ones who had stayed behind were more comfortable, for it was still very hot in the land. And they talked together about many things that came to their minds, [336] After they had been there for some time, King Ban spoke to King Arthur and said to him, “Sir, if you wanted to do something that I would praise highly, and I have thought about it in my heart, it seems to me that it would be good for you, and your land and your hospitality would be worth more because cf it; you would be feared more by friends and strangers alike, and the knights in your court would love you more.” “Tell me then,” said the king, “what this thing is, for, if I can do it without shame and dishonor, I will do it.” “Sir,” said King Ban, “you will not ever be ashamed of this, God willing, nor will you be rebuked for it. Take care—for as long as you wish to hold your lands—that your 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 335-339. 2PE} knights never fight against one another in a tournament, for much anger could come from it out of envy, for they are all good knights. But every time they want to tourney, send them to tilt with the noble men in your borderlands, for there are many of them who are wealthy and powerful.” And the king said that what King Ban had said was a good thing and that he would indeed do it. Then the queen, who had heard him talking, came in and said that he had spoken well and that he should be blessed by God for having said it, “for there are many throughout the countryside who would never have bothered to say that, and he wouldn’t have either, if he didn’t love you.” Afterwards King Lot spoke and said, “Sir, it would benefit Holy Christendom if the faithless Saxons were driven out. They have come into this country and, in their pride, have besieged two cities at the same time; but they have so many men that it will be very hard to drive them out if Our Lord is not mindful of it, and you know very well that we do not have enough men under our sway to drive them out of the land or to take a stand against them on the battlefield. But if only there were someone who could succeed in making a truce between you and the princes who still hate you, so that we might go all together against the Saxons and help one another until they have been run out of the country! It seems to me that would be the greatest good deed, and the most worthwhile, that anyone could do for this country! The truce should last as long as a year, and when the Saxons have been driven out, we can make peace between ourselves and the barons, if such is to be, or, if not, let each one do the best he can.” “In truth,” said King Arthur, “I would like that very much indeed, if only I had anyone to send there, for people would be needed whom the barons could believe in, for they are fearsome and full of pride.” “Sir,” said King Lot, “the Saxons have done them such dreadful harm that, when they hear about the truce and know that they'll have your help, I don’t believe they’ll thwart you.” “I don’t know what to say to you,” said King Arthur. “You know very well that I am needed in this land to do what I must do, and I am but one single man, just as all of you are. But look to yourselves and choose the one among you who could fulfill this mission.” “Sir,” said King Ban, “if I didn’t think that King Lot would hold it against me, I would say that he would be better for it than anyone else you could send, and he would tell them better than we what they want to hear, for he is friendly with them and behaves kindly toward them.” “In truth,” said King Arthur, “he is better suited for the undertaking than anyone we could send.” The queen said that no one would be more fit for the mission but for the Saxons, who would strip him of his belongings and [337] hold him prisoner, “but it would be less harmful if, instead of him, we lost a poor but wellspoken knight.” “My lady,” said King Arthur, “I know all of the princes to be so proud that they would not listen to any knight I might send to them.” When King Lot heard that they agreed he should go on that mission, he knew that they were right, so he said that he would go and take his four sons with him. 354 “Truly,” said King Bors, “if you take them, you needn't worry about any man born of a woman.” When King Arthur heard that they had agreed for King Lot to take his four sons with him, he heaved a great sigh, for he was afraid for Sir Gawainet, in whom he had wholeheartedly put his love, for there was not anyone or anything else in the world he loved so much. And when the queen saw him, she knew part of what he was thinking, so, wise and keen-witted as she was, she said, “Sir, grant King Lot leave to take his sons with him boldly (and he has nothing to fear, God willing), for, as they are your fastest friends, they will conclude peace all the more earnestly, and they will put their hearts into it more than others whose hearts are not touched by it.” “My lady,” said the king, “I will agree, since the barons have worked it out.” And then he told King Lot to get ready for the trip so quietly that no one would find out where he was going. Sir Gawainet and his brothers, who were reveling in the great hall with the others, were called straightway, and they came at once to meet King Arthur.” He told them that they were most welcome, and they returned his greeting most courteously. Then King Arthur told them, just as they had worked it out, that they had to go on the mission, and they answered that it was all to the good. Afterwards King Lot said to Sir Gawainet, “Dear son, you and your brothers, go get ready so that you'll have everything you need when we leave.” “What?” said Sir Gawainet. “What do we need besides our armor and our horses? We won't be taking packhorses or trunks or anything else but the good, swift, eager warhorses we’ll be riding—they’ll carry us to safety when the need arises! And we should not tarry here, for, if you’ll believe me, we should leave shortly after nightfall and ride in as long stretches as we can. No one should put off a mission such as this!” “Dear nephew,” said King Arthur, “you speak the truth. Now go rest and sleep a little.” Then Sir Gawainet turned toward the queen and said to her, “My lady, I beg you to think about my companions, who are yours forever, for my uncle’s companions do not love them wholeheartedly, but envy them, as you know yourself. And it may well happen, after my brothers and I have gone, that they'll want to do some jousting in order to build up a tournament among themselves. And I beseech you, for you are my lady, not to allow there to be a challenge.” “And I warrant you,” she said, “that there will not be. And if my husband the king believed me, no tournament would be planned for as long as they are in this country.” And the king answered that, by the faith he bore her, there would not be, if they wished to have his love. [338] At once they left and went to their rooms to rest and sleep. And those who had been left in the hall broke up and went to their lodgings. But whoever else may have left, Guiomar, the queen’s nephew, did not. Instead, he stayed behind talking to Morgan, King Arthur’s sister, in a bedroom under the great hall where she spun golden 2The text has the ambivalent personal pronoun & (337, 1. 19): “him.” The Story of Merlin thread, for she wished to make a headpiece for her sister, the wife of King Lot. This Morgan was a young lady, very cheerful and merry, but her face was somber; she had a rounded build, not too thin and not too plump. She was quite clever and comely in body and in features, she stood straight and was wonderfully pleasing and a good singer. But she was the most lustful woman in all Great Britain and the lewdest. Yet she was a woman of wondrous learning, and she knew much about astrology,® which Merlin had taught her. And later he taught her a great deal more about it, just as the story will recount it to you later, and she put her whole mind to it; and she learned it so well that afterwards she was called Morgan the Fay, sister of King Arthur, because of the wonders she worked throughout the country. She was the best worker with her hands that anyone knew about in any land, and she had the fairest head of any suited for a woman, the most beautiful hands, and wondrously well-made shoulders, and she was the cleverest of all. Her skin was softer than millet.4 And she had yet another quality that must not be skipped over, for she had a sweet, soft way of talking, and she was well spoken. And as long as she was in her right mind, she was more courteous than any, but when she was angry with anyone, there was no need in trying to reconcile them. This showed very clearly when to the man she ought to have loved best she brought the worst harm and such great guilt that people talked about it afterwards for as long as she lived. This had to do with the noble Guenevere, just as the story will later explain to you how and why. When Guiomar went into the room where Morgan was, he greeted her most kindly and bade her a good day from God, and she returned his greeting most courteously, for she was not mute, and he came straight to her and sat down beside her. He began to handle the golden thread she was working with and asked her what she meant to make. He was a handsome knight, slender, and well built; his hair was curly and blond, he was handsome, delightful to look at, smiling, and courteous above all other knights. He spoke to the maiden about many things, and she was glad to watch him, for she found him handsome, and she liked everything he did and said. They spoke and at last he asked for her love. The more she looked at him the more pleasing she found him until she welcomed him with such great love that she refused him nothing he asked of her. And when he understood and saw that she would willingly grant him what he was begging for, he took her in his arms and began to kiss her most sweetly until they began to heat up as hot as Nature demands, and they threw themselves onto a large, beautiful bed; they played the game everyone plays, as they yearned to do, and they were joined in very great love, for he loved her and she loved him more. So they stayed together all evening long and made love for quite a while, and no one [339] knew it. But Queen Guenevere found out about it later, just as the story will explain it to you later, which is why they were separated; Morgan began to hate her for it and afterwards did many 3As before (e.g., 23, 1. 15; 73, 1. 26; 102, 1. 28), the Old French word is astrenomie (338, |. 11). Here especially the meaning appears to spread into magic and necromancy. 4The word is millart (338, 1. 18). The Story of Merlin troublesome things to her, and she cast such blame on her that it was not forgotten for as long as she lived. But now the story falls silent about them, for it no longer speaks about that right here, but it goes back to talking about King Lot and his sons, who had gone to their lodgings to sleep. 41. Gawain and His Brothers Battle the Saxons.! Right here the story says that shortly after nightfall King Lot and his four sons got up and got themselves ready with their armor. They had chosen five of the best horses they could find in the whole court; they took them with them and five serving boys on foot, and they had five very good palfreys that they rode as they went. And when everything was ready, they mounted their horses by the Bricoune Gate, and the five boys who were leading the horses, all covered with iron, went out ahead, and they all went as stealthily as they could, for they wanted no one to catch sight of them and raise a warning. And when they had ridden enough to be half a Welsh league away, Sir Gawainet asked where they were going. And King Lot told him that he did not know, “for warfare,” he went on, “is so widespread in the countryside.” “Now I'll tell you what we are about to do. We are riding toward Arestel in Scotland. That’s the closest land, and it is the most densely shaded by trees of any in this country, and that makes for the best hunting* anywhere!” And King Lot answered, “Dear son, since that is what you want to do, Iam most willing, for what you say is best. And we'll go by way of the Castle of the Fir Forest, through the Plains of Roestoc and the Forest of Brambles beneath Caranges, and we’ll go along the Severn River through the meadowlands of Cambenic. From there we'll skirt the wealthy city of North Wales, which belongs to King Tradelmant, and from there on to Arestel, which is four leagues away from the Saxons.” And the young men all agreed to this. So the messengers rode along talking about this and that until dawn, and from the next day on they made their way through the most out-of-the-way places they knew of, they slept in forests and in hermitages, and they rode thus for eight full days. And they were never bothered until they came to the Plains of Roestoc. Then, at midday, they happened upon at least seven thousand Saxons who were taking away a great deal of plunder and a good seven hundred prisoners whose feet they had tied under their horses’ bellies, and they were driving them by beating them ruthlessly with sticks. Sorbares, Monaclin, Salibrun, Ysores, and Clarion were leading them, and Clarion was riding Gringalet, a horse so named because of its great worth, for the story says that it could run for ten leagues without heaving or panting, nor would there be any sweat on one hair of its ramp or shoulder. 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 339-346. 2The word is traire (339, |. 20): “shooting.” B55 When the Saxons saw them coming on horseback, they knew by their armor that they were not any of their own, so they stopped and waited. And when Sir Gawainet saw that, he stopped and ordered his father and brothers to get on their warhorses, and they did so. And [340] the boys went to the palfreys, mounted, and set off into the forest where the road had turned, but the knights went straight for the Saxons, because they did not want to meet them at the angle the road would have made them take. It was after midday and drawing near the hour of nones. King Lot rode out ahead and Sir Gawainet after him with his brothers alongside him, and they were going at a slow pace without breaking out of line. When they had gone far enough to be quite close to the Saxons, Gawainet said to his father that he yearned for nothing but to ride into them, and for his brothers to be with him, until they had gone through all of them. Then the Saxons shouted, “Knights, surrender and tell us who you are and what you are looking for.” And King Lot answered, “We are five messengers from King Arthur, who has sent us on a mission, and we will not tell you more.” “Stand still and don’t go on,” they ordered. “We are guarding the roads for King Hargadabran, for Orient, son of Bramangue, and for Arrant, son of Magaat.4 We are taking this plunder and these prisoners to them, and we'll make them a gift of you as well.” “Indeed,” said King Lot, “when you can do so.” They said that it would not be long, “so surrender, and you'll be doing the wise thing, before something worse happens to you.” And they answered that that would never happen. Then they let their horses run as fast as they could go, and the Saxons did likewise, for they feared them very little. But King Lot and his sons stormed in among them with their lances under their arms, and each one hit his man so that he knocked him down dead; then they struck five others and brought them down dead, and they did the same in four drives they made all the way through them, but they were not hurt. And then they began galloping away holding their bloody lances, and when the others saw them riding off, the shouting and the uproar grew loud after them, and they undertook a wondrous pursuit. The dust rose so thick that they could barely recognize one another. Right then the five? kings, who had heard the news, came spurring their horses. They shouted to their men, “Now after them! You’ll be sorry if they get away.” And they themselves took to the road after them. They were riding good horses, and they gave them a frenzied chase. The runaways rode at a full gallop, and they went until they came to a mill, where they had to cross a very wide and dreadful ford that was full of filth and mud, so they had to stop and go on at a slow gait. And the five kings, who were not afraid of the bad crossing, caught up with them there, and more than five hundred Saxons were behind them. They broke their lances on them as they 3The form here is airant (340, 1. 12); elsewhere in the Merkn occurs the form hertant (174, ll. 33, 42). 4The form here (340, |. 12) is maagart. 5The text reads .vj. (340, 1. 24): “six.” 356 came in, and King Ysores, who was riding out ahead, struck King Lot’s horse with his lance and brought it down dead under him. When King Lot saw that his horse had been killed, he sprang to his feet and drew his sword. He stood his ground beside a clump of rushes because of the mire, which was wide and deep. The Saxons ran upon him and attacked hard, but he defended himself so well that they did not have the strength to take him. Then Gawainet looked about and saw his father on foot, and he was so worried about him that he nearly went out of his mind. He struck his horse with his spurs so hard that the blood poured out of its sides, and he struck Monaclin so hard that he drove through his shield and hauberk, into his side, through his ribs, and out the other side, and he sent him to the ground dead. When he fell, Gawainet’s lance broke, so he drew his sword, which was named Excalibur, and looked at his father, who was defending himself against more than forty Saxons. [341] He ran upon them with his sword in his hand and struck right and left, and he cut off their heads, arms, and legs, and he did such wonders that they scattered everywhere, for they did not dare make a stand against him. And Sir Gawainet struck one Saxon who was striving to hold King Lot down, and he split him down to the chest; then he caught his horse and took it to his father. And a hue and cry rose for the man who had been slain. Meanwhile, King Lot got on the horse despite all those he was fighting with. Then Sir Gawainet’s three brothers came; they had been in such a slaughter that all of their armor was filthy with blood and brains. And when they had all drawn together, they began such hard fighting and such a slaughter that it was a wonder to see. And the Saxons came in from everywhere because they believed, for the great slaughter the brothers had done, that they were a huge army. When King Lot saw the great numbers that were coming against them from all sides, he called to his sons and told them it was high time to go, for it did not make sense to stay there any longer and take forty blows for every one they gave. “But let’s go,” he said, “and if they run after us, then we’ll rout them when it is the right time and place for us.” With that, they went their way, and they rodé right across the ford without any hindrance, and when they were on the other side, they took to the road. When the three kings saw them going off, they shouted after them, “We'll not let the traitors get away!” Then they crossed the ford and ran after them for quite a long time. King Clarion, who was sitting on Gringalet, went out ahead all the others more than an arrow-shot. And Sir Gawainet was behind his companions, holding his bloody sword, when the Saxon, who was striving hard to catch up with him, yelled out, “You worthless dog, surrender now, for all of you are dead!” And Sir Gawainet looked about and saw the horse hugging the ground and bursting to go, and he began very much to yearn for him in his heart, and he said that if he had such a horse, he would not give him away for the best city that King Arthur had. Then he began to slow his pace and run at an easy gallop. King Clarion was still giving him chase and would not let him get away. And when Sir The Story of Merlin Gawainet saw how close he was to him, he turned his shield against him. King Clarion struck him so hard that his lance flew into bits, and Sir Gawainet hit him so hard on his helmet that he split it down to his iron coif and cut to the bone; he dazed him so badly that he flew over his saddlebow onto the ground, and he hit so hard that he fainted from the agony he felt. And Sir Gawainet took Gringalet by the bridle and led him toward a stand of trees almost half a league away. His father was still going out ahead with his three sons, and he was thinking of nothing but riding and thought that all his sons were along with him (the dust had risen so thick on the road that no one could see very far); yet they had left Sir Gawainet two arrow-shots behind. And when Sir Gawainet came to the trees, he saw the five boys coming out of the forest, and they were riding the five palfreys. When he saw them he was wondrously happy, and he praised them and held them in high esteem because they had struggled so to keep up with them. Then he got down and mounted Gringalet, and he gave one of the boys his horse to lead [342] beside the one he was riding, and he ordered them to go after his brothers, who had ridden out ahead, “and tell them to keep their minds on making their way, and I will follow. But first I want to see what has become of those men.” But he stayed behind for nothing, for they had stopped running after them when they found King Clarion; instead, they gathered all around him, because they believed that he was dead, and they were weeping and wailing so loudly that Sir Gawainet heard the screams from where he was. So Sir Gawainet lingered for a long time in the trees to find out whether anyone was coming. Meanwhile, King Lot and his three sons rode until they came to a small woods. And after they had gone inside, King Lot looked about and did not see Sir Gawainet. Straightway he said, “Something dreadful has happened! I have lost everything!” The others looked about and said, “Sir, what is wrong with you?” And he answered, “My children, your brother is missing! In truth, if he is dead I'll kill myself, for I would not seek to live a single day after him.” “Sir,” said Agravain, “do not worry. God willing, he won't have anything to bother him.” While King Lot was wailing, the five serving boys came up. They were bringing along the five palfreys, and one of them was leading Sir Gawainet’s horse on the right side. When King Lot saw them, he knew well who they were. Very quickly they were drawing near, and Guerrehet yelled to them, “Where did you leave my brother?” “Sir,” they said, “in that stand of trees, where he is atop the best horse in the world, and he struck a king down from him. Those who were weeping and mourning for the king said that his name was King Clarion and the horse was called Gringalet. And he gave us this horse and sent us to tell you to keep riding and he will catch up with you when he wants to.” When King Lot heard that he was safe and sound, he was very gladdened and looked toward the trees. And when Sir Gawainet saw that they were no longer giving them chase, he said that he would show them the good horse before he left. Then he rode out from the trees and headed The Story of Merlin to where he saw the greatest number of men, who were still in the throes of their great sorrow. He saw one Saxon who was holding a wonderful spear with a short, thick shaft and an iron tip that was a foot and a half long, and it was bright and sharp. Then he put Excalibur back into its scabbard and dashed toward the Saxon as fast as the horse could run, and he tore the spear out of his hands so ruthlessly that he sent him to the ground; and on this same pass he ran the spear through another one’s body and hurled him down dead. He drove all the way through them and came back so fast that he was all flushed. But before he got all the way out, his shield knew it well, for it was split into pieces. But what did that matter to him? He had so badly hurt fourteen of them that never again, for their own well-being, did they get back on a horse. Then he rode away without slowing down. The hue and cry rose loud after him, and the chase was so hard that it was a wonder. When he saw that he had ridden some distance from them, he turned about holding his sword, and he struck the first one he met and sent him to the ground dead. Then he turned back and taunted them into following after him until they came to within less than an arrow-shot from the woods where King Lot and his three sons had stopped with the serving boys. [343] When King Lot saw the Saxons coming so fast after his son, whom he loved and longed for more than anything, he shouted, “My sons, what are you doing? There is Gawainet, your brother, and those unbelieving whoresons are running after him!” With that, King Lot tied his helmet back on and spurred his horse and rode out against the Saxons; his sons did likewise. And King Lot met Sir Gawainet and said to him, “Gawainet, dear son, you were wrong to leave us! Why the devil did you stay back with those Saxons? Are you trying to defeat them all? Even if you killed twenty of them in one stroke, you would not be done in a month.” “Sir,” said Sir Gawainet, “I have won such a horse that I would not give him away for the Castle of Glocedon. It was to try him out that I stayed behind, and I have found him to be such that no one need look for a better one in any land! Let’s go now, and I won't leave you anymore, no matter what happens.” “As long as we are here,” said Agravain, “damn anyone to hell who leaves before we have struck down and slain Saxons!” “Indeed,” said Sir Gawainet. They did not have any lances, so they drew their bare swords. The Saxons ran upon them, thinking they could take them, and broke their lances on their shields, while King Lot and his sons struck them on their helmets wherever they met them. And the fighting grew so fierce that never has anyone seen harder fighting from five knights, and they killed more than forty before they could get away. But the number of Saxons kept growing. When King Lot saw that it was time to go, he said to Gawainet, “Dear son, let’s leave with your brothers, for you can see plainly that we can do nothing here and we're wasting time. We'll come back to the fight soon enough when we have the right armor.” And Sir Gawainet came up to his brothers and told them that it was time to go. With that, the five of them left, but first they tore five lances from Saxons’ hands and put 357, their swords back in their scabbards. As they were riding away, seven Saxons came down with lances held straight and fell upon Gaheriet. Two of them struck him between the shoulders, another two on his sides, and another two on the sleeve of his hauberk, while the seventh struck his horse right in the mid-section and killed it, bringing man and horse to the ground. Then King Lot thought that Gaheriet had been killed. He turned around and said, “How dreadful! Now the four brothers are lost. Dear son Gawainet, this awful thing has happened because of you, for if you had come with us Gaheriet would not be in trouble now.” While King Lot was saying this, Gaheriet leapt to his feet, for he was very skilled and very bold, the best knight of all his brothers but Gawainet. He fixed his shield on his arm, drew his sword, and got ready to defend himself. The seven Saxons had turned about, and he ran them down. He struck the first one he met and sliced his right thigh all the way through beneath his saddle, and he fell to the ground. Next he struck another one on his helmet, but could not follow through; the sword came down by his shoulder and cut the strap of his shield and went through his right arm, and his shield flew to the ground with his arm. [344] And Sir Gawainet struck the first man he came to and hurled him dead to the ground. Then he took his horse and led it to his brother and said to him, “Climb on, noble companion.” And he got on straightway and took up his lance, which he did not want to leave behind. King Lot, Guerrehet, and Agravain had struck down three of them, and the seventh turned in flight. And when Gaheriet saw him leaving, he set out after him and followed him until they went down into a valley. There he struck him in the chest with his lance so hard that it went all the way through. Then he went galloping back to where he saw his brothers. It was nearly the hour of vespers when they took to the road. The Saxons commended them to all the devils alive, and they said that they would not be run after by them any more. They also said that if the Christians had no more than ten thousand men in the countryside, King Hargadabran could be sure that the Saxons could not have held out against them no matter how many there were. With that, the Saxons went back to where King Clarion lay, and they found that his wound had already stopped bleeding. And when he saw them, he asked them if they had caught the scoundrels who had done them so much harm. They answered that they had not, and they told him about all the damage they had done and said that they could not take them prisoner do what they might. And when he heard that, he was stricken with sorrow. Then the Saxons went back to the siege, which was mighty, that they were holding before the city of Clarence. And King Lot and his sons saw that the hour of vespers was drawing near, so they took to the road. But it would not have seemed to anyone who saw their armor that they had stayed to rest, for their shields were hacked up, their helmets smashed in, their armor broken, their horses filthy with blood and brains, and it was very plain that they had come out of a fearsome battle. Right away they went into SSommer’s text repeats que de que de forte bataille (344, Il. 2021): “that from that from [a] great battle.” 358 the woods where the serving boys were waiting for them. They dismounted from their warhorses and got on their palfreys, and the boys led their horses and carried their lances, their shields, and their helmets, and they went on at a walk through the thick woods; they rode quite far during the night, and the moon shone bright. They rode until they came to the house of a forester who was most worthy. He had four sons who were most handsome young men, and his wife was a most worthy lady. The vavasor’s house was well fortified with wide, deep moats all filled with water. Beyond these, it was surrounded by great, fully-grown oak trees, and the steep hillside” beyond grew so thick with brambles and thorn bushes that no one would have thought that there was a dwelling there. King Lot and his three sons came there at the cock’s first crow, for the road happened to lead them to a postern, which was the way in. They had one of the serving boys call out and knock until someone opened the gate to them. One of the forester’s sons asked them who they were, and they said that they were five knights errant “from this land, and we are going on a mission.” “Sir,” said the youth, “you are most welcome.” And he led them into the courtyard. They dismounted from their horses, which were well provided with hay and oats, for there was a great deal to eat there, and the youth took them to have their armor taken off in a most handsome hall at ground level. The vavasor and his wife and their three other sons® and two daughters stood up to greet them. And they lit torches inside there and put water on to heat, and they washed their hands and faces and then dried them with beautiful, white cloths, and they brought to each one a cloak with a collar. [345] And the vavasor had the tables set up and the cloths put on; and bread, a great abundance of wine, fresh venison, and salted meat, of which there was a great deal there, were laid out. The knights sat down to the meal, and they ate heartily, for they needed food. The vavasor’s two daughters looked hard at Sir Gawainet and his brothers, and they greatly wondered who they could be; and the vavasor’s four sons waited on the knights, and the maidens served wine. The lady from there sat facing Sir Gawainet and the host Agravain; Gaheriet and Guerrehet sat facing each other, while King Lot was beside his host, but a little higher. They were quite well served for such a late hour, for it was almost midnight. And when they had eaten and the tablecloths were taken away, the host asked King Lot, “Sir, if you and the others with you don’t object, I would like very much to know who you are, where you are heading and why, unless these are things to bring you shame.” “In truth,” said King Lot, “we will never be ashamed of it, God willing, but first tell us whose forest this is and the land all around.” The text has & rubis (344, 1. 30). This rare word undoubtedly relates to Old French robist (from Latin rupes “rock, cliff”), Middle French rubist, “steep hillside” (FEW 10:577), cf. the Old French derivative desrubé “steep.” 8The text reads tj. filg (344, |. 40): “four sons.” The woodsman is said earlier to have four sons (344, Il. 26, 31), one of whom is taking them into the hall and would not, therefore, get up to greet them. The Story of Merlin “Indeed, sir” said the worthy man, “the forest belongs to King Clarion of Northumberland, and I keep it for him—I am his forester and his liegeman, and these young men here are my sons and those maidens my daughters.” “Indeed,” said King Lot, “I know no worthier man of his age than King Clarion, and he could not better place the trust he has bestowed on you, it seems to me, for you have a most handsome, wel-bred household.” “In God’s name,” said the forester, “if they are worthy, they are rightly so,? for they have kinsmen who are good knights, now among the most honored and best loved at King Arthur’s court; I’ve been told that they have lately become knights of the queen and that this company has been founded by Sir Gawainet, King Lot’s son. And I've also been told that King Lot is reconciled with King Arthur.” “And who are the knights your children are kin to?” asked King Lot. “In truth,” answered the forester, “this lady is the sister of Meralgis of Portford (I don’t know if you know him), and she is first cousin, on her father’s side, to Aiglin of the Vales and Kehedin the Small, and Yain of Lionel is my cousin, !® for he is the son of my uncle Grandalis, castellan of Crenefort. And I myself would hold a great deal of land, were it not for the Saxons who have laid waste everything.” “And what is your name?” King Lot asked the forester. “Indeed,” answered the forester, “my name is Minoras, lord of the New Castle in Northumberland.” “In God’s name,” said King Lot, “I know very well all the ones you have named to me. You can truly say that they are good knights in every way! And if God would only grant that King Clarion were sitting here beside me just as you are!” “What?” said Minoras. “Are you then friends of his? Now I long all the more to know about you!” “Truly,” said King Lot, “I will not stop wandering until I have spoken to him. And I'll tell you,” the king went on, “who I am. You can tell everyone who asks you that the guests you sheltered were King Lot of Orkney and his four sons.” “Ah, sir!” said the forester. “We could die [346] for not having served you better!” Then he started to stand up beside him. “Keep your seat just as you are,” said the king, “and don’t move. For you have done so much for us that you have won us over, and you and yours will be rewarded.” “Ah, sir!” said Minoras. “What are you looking for in this country?” “We seek,” he answered, “to talk with the barons of this country, and we would gladly meet with all of them together on behalf of King Arthur, so that we might drive the Saxons out of this land and help one another like brothers.” “And where do you mean to have them gather?” “In Arestel, in Scotland,” answered King Lot, “which is in the nearest borderland. We'll gather them there if we bd can. °The text reads il ont bien a qui retratre (345, Il. 22-23): “they have many to attribute [this] to.” 10The word is nées (345, 1. 31), usually nephew or grandson. The Story of Merlin “Sir,” said Minoras, “I'll speak to my lord about it for you so that you will have less to do. When will he find you there?” “In truth, you have spoken very well, and I am very grateful to you. Tell him that he will find me there on Our Lady’s Day in September, and he must be sure to be there, for it is for his own good.” And Minoras told him that he would give him the message: “Now concern yourself with the others, for you needn’t worry about him.” They spoke at length about many things until the beds were set up and they went to lie down and sleep, for they were worn out and weary, and much of the night had already gone by. And they slept until daybreak. But now the story falls silent about them for a while and speaks about King Pelles of Listenois, the king’s brother Pellinor, and King Alan, who were full brothers by the same father and mother. 42. The Children of Pelles; Galahad Predicted.! Here the story says that King Pelles had a son who was not a knight, although he was a good twenty-five years old, but he was wondrously well built in body and limb, and he was wonderfully handsome. When his father asked him when he wanted to become a knight, he answered that he would never be a knight before the best knight known in the world should give him arms and hug him about the neck.” “Indeed, dear son,” said King Pelles, “you will then have to wait a long time.” “I don’t know what I'll do,” said the lad, “but I'll yet serve him three years before he makes me a knight, so that I can learn about arms and fighting while I am with him. And do you know why I want to get to know him and find out from which prince he comes?? He could very well be one to whom I'll show the way to come to these parts in order to fulfill the adventures of this country that will soon begin, so I’ve been told. I have said this to you yourself many times, for I would be most distraught not to see my uncle healed from the wounds he has through his thighs.” “Dear son,” said King Pelles, “he would never succeed in this if you showed him the way, for he must be of such knighthood and so given to adventure that he will come here by himself to ask about the Holy Grail, which my fair daughter has in her keeping. She is still only seven years old, but a child is to be fathered on her by the best knight known to anyone, and there must be three to fulfill the adventures; two must be virgins and the third chaste.” 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 346-349. 2That is, give him la colee (346, 1. 25), the ceremonial embrace. See 253, 1. 33. 3The text reads iou le voelle connoistre & veoir & de quel prinche tl sera (346, ll. 28-29). 4The text reads parmi ses cuisses (346, }. 33): “in the midst of his thighs.” The expression, which originates in Chrétien’s Li Contes del Graal in speaking of the Fisher King (ed. Hilka, 1. 3513), doubtless indicates a sexual wound “between his thighs.” 359 “Sir,” said the young man, “I very much want to go to King Arthur’s court, for I have heard it said that the best knights in the world are there, and one of his nephews is there whose name is Gawainet, son of King Lot of Orkney in Loonois. He is the best knight in the world, the one I want to serve, and [347] I will be his squire, if he deigns to engage me; and he is such a knight, as people bear witness to him, that I will take arms and the embrace from him.” “Dear son,” said King Pelles, “there are so many paths between here and there that it will not be an easy thing to go there, for the Saxons have spread out through the countryside, and they have laid waste the land; meanwhile, there is great strife between King Arthur and his barons throughout the land, and I could not rest easy until I knew that you were safe and sound.” “Dear father,” said the youth, “we are all subject to adventure, and no one can die but of such a death as Our Lord has destined for him. And you should know that, as for me, I will never stop making my way until I am there, and I'll ride out tomorrow morning.” “Dear son,” said the father, “I see clearly that you are bent on going and that nothing will keep you from it, for my sake or anyone else’s. Indeed, I’m glad about it, because I see that you yearn for prowess and worthiness, and this comes to you from your great nobility of heart; at the same time I am very sad, for I do not believe that I'll see you again. Now tell me whom you'd like to take with you.” “Sir,” he answered, “I'll go by myself and will take along only one squire to keep me company. But prepare whatever weapons and the kind of horse you know I need.” And the king said that he need not worry about a thing, for everything would be ready for him. Thus ended the talk between son and father. And when the next morning came, his father had made ready a horse, weapons, and whatever else he needed, and he entrusted to him a worthy and righteous squire who had served him well, and the squire loaded armor, clothing, and plenty of money onto a pack horse. And when all was ready, the young man got on a palfrey that walked at an easy gait, he left without any more ado, and he commended his father and friends to God; and they did likewise, so that God might keep the young man and his squire from evil and harm. With that, the young man left with his squire, and they made their way many a day and found no one to give them any but good news. And they rode day in and day out until they came, on the plains of Roestoc at the midday hour, into a valley that was very wide and deep, where a beautiful stream flowed from the spring at the pine tree where Pignoras the Saxon and King Monaquin had stopped with five hundred men dressed in iron who were coming from the land of the Saxons and going to the wealthy city of Clarence, to the great siege that the thirty kings were maintaining. And they were leading forty pack horses loaded with meat and salt pork and plenty of other things, and they had taken them beneath the pine tree, in the shade, right by the spring. And they let their horses graze down through the prairie for as long as the heat lasted, for it was in the middle of the day. Into that valley, which was wide and deep, came the young man and his squire, and they rode hard and did not stop making their way until they came to a high hill. And 360 from there they could clearly see the Saxons who were eating beneath the pine tree. And when the young man saw them, he was struck with great dread. He asked for his weapons and fitted himself out quite fast. Then he fixed his sword to his saddlebow, mounted his horse, and ordered his squire, who was named Lidonas, to ride out ahead. He did as he was told, and he went straight down the road until they ran up against the Saxons. And when Pignoras saw them, he sent someone over to ask who they were. And they said that they were [348] from another land and that they were going about their business. And when Pignoras heard that, he ordered his men to put on their armor and get on their horses, and he had more than forty Saxons ride out after them and ordered them to stay back by force or for love of him. And the youth, who was making his way behind his squire, held a most strong lance, but he had no shield. And he had gone but a little way when he heard the men riding after him, shouting at him very loudly. “Young men!” yelled the Saxons. “You must come back our way. Hand your horses and your weapons over to us and come to our lord, who is waiting for you under that pine tree.” The young man heard them very well and understood what they said, but he answered not a word, and he rode on after his squire at a little faster gait and then at a full gallop. And when the Saxons saw that he was riding away so fast, they spurred their horses after him and threatened him dreadfully. When the youth saw them coming, he turned his horse’s head toward them. And one of the Saxons was coming out ahead of the others. He was holding a strong, stout lance, but he was rushing so fast and so hard that he missed hitting the youth. But the youth rode against him as fast as he could get his horse to go, and he struck him so hard that he pierced his shield and hauberk and drove his lance® through his breastbone; he threw him to the ground so badly wounded that no doctor would have done him any good. Then he drew his lance out and went back on his way, following Lidonas his squire, who rode ahead at full speed because he wanted to get as far away as he could from the Saxons. And when the Saxons saw that the youth was riding off, they set out after him, because they did not want to let him get away. And the youth was going away at a full gallop, holding the lance, which had changed its color from white to red, for it was stained with the blood of the man he had killed. And as he rode he prayed God, by His tender mercy, to keep him from being killed or taken prisoner. The Saxons were hot on his heels, riding as fast as their horses could go, and they followed him long enough that more than ten could strike him on the shoulders and sides. And he turned about and wielded his lance, and he struck the first one he met so hard that he drove the sharp tip, and a great deal of the shaft, into his body, and he hurled him down dead head over heels. Then he pulled his lance out and turned toward another one; he drove the lance 5In this passage the words espiel (here, 348, 1. 17), lanche (348, 1. 28), and glaive (348, 1. 30) are used interchangeably for Eliezar’s lance. Elsewhere espiel is normally translated as spear and the other two as lance, The Story of Merlin through his throat and out the other side, and he knocked him from his horse into the middle of the road. And the Saxons, more than ten of them, struck him with their lances all at the same time, and they threw him back over his saddlebow, but they did not send him down from his horse, for they broke their lances and the bits flew down to the ground. And the youth sat back up, wielded his lance, and hit one of those who had struck him and drove his lance through his body so hard that he knocked him down dead right before his companions, who were greatly saddened and distraught. But then he broke his lance, which had held up so well, and straightway he took hold of his sword, which hung from his saddlebow, and pulled it out of the scabbard. The Saxons were running upon him from every side, and he struck the first one he came to and cut off his whole right shoulder, and he had split his side open so wide that his liver and lungs let loose and spilled out through the wound, and he stumbled down dead to the ground. Then he struck the next one and sent his head flying with his helmet, [349] and then he ran after the others. He struck the third one crosswise and sliced him more than halfway through and cut his heart in two; next he struck the fourth one on his helmet so that he split him down to the teeth. But the ones who were coming after him hit him so hard that they wounded him, and when he saw that he could not last against so many men without being killed or taken prisoner, he left them; he spurred his horse and rode after Lidonas his squire at breakneck speed. And when the Saxons saw him riding away, the uproar and the shouts rose loud after him. When the young man caught up with his squire, he rode up behind him and said that he would not take off his gear for as long as he could defend him. He was holding his sword in his right hand. And a Saxon fell upon him with his lance held out straight, and he struck the youth under his arm, twisted the mail of his hauberk, and made him hunch over his saddlebow; he would have brought him down, had he not held onto his horse’s neck. And when he had straightened up, he looked at the man who had struck him and then hit him so hard on the helmet with his sword that he split him down to the teeth. Then the Saxons surrounded him on all sides, and he defended himself, because he was of great heart; he began to slay knights and horses and to send to the ground everyone he met. But his defense did him no good against the great crowd of Saxons that was about him, and in as much as Pignoras and Monaquin were on horseback, he could not help but be killed or captured, and he had been worn down by those who were about him. So he rode off at full speed when he could get away, his naked sword in his hand. And Pignoras and Monaquin, who had not seen any of their men coming back, were on horseback, and they set out after the others at full speed down the road where the youth was going. They saw the dead men, whom the lad had slain, strewn all over the road, and asked who had done that. And the ones who were there answered that it was the young man who had just then come down the road. Then they asked which way he had gone, and they said that he had ridden down into a valley “where our men are fighting him but cannot take him.” The Story of Merlin And when Pignoras heard that, he shouted to his men, “Now after him fast. It will be a great shame if he gets away, for he has done us great harm.” And when they heard him, they ran down the paved road after the youth. Now may God lead him by His holy mercy, for if they could catch up with him, he would have no way of getting away without being killed. But He who helps in all times of need those who believe in Him, that is, Our Lord Jesus Christ, sent him a most fair adventure. And this is why the proverb says that whom God will help no one can harm.® Now the story falls silent for a while about him and goes back to speaking about King Lot and his four sons who were with him. 43. Agravain and Gaheriet Discuss Love; the Saxons Routed.' In this part the story says that the night when King Lot and his four sons were lodged in the house of Minoras the Forester of Northumberland, they slept like men who that day had undergone great struggles and suffered great hardship, and they rested until the next morning. And when it was daylight, they got up and took their armor, which had been laid out in their room, put it on, and got dressed very quickly. Then they climbed on their horses, which had been brought into the hall for them. [350] The host, his children, and his wife were there, and King Lot and his sons most kindly commended them to God; they thanked them heartily for the good lodging and for the hospitality they had shown them, and they were keen to offer them their service if they should need it. They thanked their hosts and rode out through the gate, and the forester and his four sons got on their horses and rode with them for quite a way, while the five serving boys were ahead of them leading the five palfreys and carrying their shields and lances, for the forester had given them strong, stout lances with gleaming, sharp tips. And after the forester had ridden with them for a while, King Lot asked him to turn back and not to fail to give his message to King Clarion just as he had promised. And he said that he would indeed do it, and there should be no doubt. So he took his leave forthwith and, with his sons, turned back toward his house. And as soon as they got there, he had two of his sons well fitted out and gave them two swift horses* to ride for fear of the Saxons, so that, should they happen to see them, they would be equipped to ride fast if they had to. When the two young men were on their horses and ready to go as quickly as they could, the forester said to them, “Dear children, you will go to King Clarion, who is our overlord, and you will tell him that King Lot of Orkney This proverb, not mentioned by Cotgrave, is recorded in Morawski, no. 440 (cf. nos. 261, 252, etc.). 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 349-357. “Despite the translation in Sommer’s marginal note, adopted here, the word in the text is ronchi[n]s (350, 1. 14; Sommer’s emendation) “worthless nag,” the opposite of the kind of horse described here. 361 bids him, just as you have heard, meet with him in Arestel in Scotland on Our Lady’s Day in September.” And they said that they would indeed deliver this message. So they rode away from the house straightway and set out on their way, and they rode until they came to King Clarion; they found him and his household in one of his strongholds. He was downcast and brooding about the Saxons, who were laying waste his lands and the whole countryside. And when he saw the two youths coming before him to tell him what King Lot was asking him to do, he was gladdened and joyful, and in his happiness he gave each of the youths a good horse, for he loved King Lot with all his heart. And he told them that he would be there without fail, if God kept him from mishap. And as soon as they had heard King Clarion’s answer, they went back to their father’s house very happy and joyful, and they handed over to him the horses the king had given them for the love of King Lot, to whom he had given shelter. So now the story falls silent from speaking about them and goes back to speaking about King Lot and his children. Now the story says that when King Lot and his children had left Minoras the Forester, they rode through the wild forest, which was very deep and high and quite delightful to ride in. The weather was quiet, and there had been much dew the night before. The birds were singing because of the softness of the sweet season, and they sang so sweetly and so forcefully in their language that the leafy woods rang with it; and they very gladly listened to them. And theking and his four sons, who were merry young men, rode along with their minds on the birds’ songs. And Gaheriet, who was very much under love’s sway, began to sing a new song, and he sang wonderfully well and pleasingly, and the woodlands resounded with it [351] for quite a way. And when the sun had risen, he looked about and saw that his brothers were far behind him, so he turned off the road to let his horse rest. And he waited until they came, and he said to Guerrehet and Agravain, “Let’s sing.” So all three of them began to sing, and after they had sung, Guerrehet asked Agravain and Gaheriet, “Now tell me, by the faith you owe our father King Lot, if you had one of our host’s two daughters with you now, what would you do with her?” And Gaheriet said that Agravain should answer first, for he was his elder. “God help me,” said Agravain, “if I felt like it, I would make love to her right now.” “God help me,” said Gaheriet, “I wouldn’t do that, but I'd take her to safety. And you, Guerrehet, what would you do with her?” “I would,” he answered, “make her my lady love, if she liked, and I would not do anything to her by force. For the game of love would not be sweet unless it pleased her as much as me.” As they were saying these things, they fell in with King Lot and Sir Gawainet, who had clearly heard everything they said, and they all laughed together and then asked which one had spoken best. The text reads sil me seit iou le fervie tout outreement (351, ll. 8 9): “if it suited me, I would do it right now.” 362 “Ask your brother Gawainet,” said King Lot, “for I have chosen him to be the judge.” “And I'll tell you right away,” said Sir Gawainet. “Gaheriet spoke best and Agravain worst. For if Agravain saw anyone hurting the women, he ought to help them, protect and defend them with all his strength. It seems to me that there need be no one other than he! Guerrehet spoke better still, for he said that he would not have wanted to do anything to them by force, and that can have come to him only from love and courtliness. But Gaheriet spoke like a worthy gentleman, and I would do what he said if it were up to me.” Then Agravain and King Lot himself laughed and joked about it more than any of the others, but King Lot attacked Agravain with his words when he said, smiling, “What, Agravain? Would you thus shame your host's daughter to satisfy your mad cravings? What a handsome reward you’d be giving him for the service he has done you! He truly put it to bad use.” “Sir,” answered Agravain, “the daughters would lose neither life nor limb.” “No,” said the king, “but they would lose their honor.” “I know of no man,” answered Agravain, “who would spare a woman when he has her alone with him, for if he lets her go free, he will never have her love at any time.” “He should resist temptation,” said the king, “for her honor and others’ honor more than for himself.” “Truly,” said Agravain, “even after he let her go free, he would just be the butt of jokes, and people would esteem him less because of it.” “I would not care a bit what people said to me,” answered King Lot, “for as long as my honor was saved, I could not be vilely rebuked for it.” “Then there is no other way out,” said Agravain, “than for my brother and me to become monks in a place where we do not see women.” “Ah, Agravain, dear son!” said King Lot. “If you behave as you are saying, you cannot fail to go wrong, and evil will befall you.” And it happened afterwards just as King Lot said, for there came a time when Agravain suffered a long time on this earth for his uncourtly behavior toward a maiden, who was riding with a sweetheart of hers against whom he fought until he wounded him in one of his arms. Then he wanted to lie with his lady love, but he found that one of her thighs was scabby; and he said such ugly, uncourtly things to her about it that she made one of his thighs and one of his arms [352] so that he would never have been healed if it had not been for the two best knights in the world, whom in the end she allowed to heal him, just as the story will recount it to you later—how he was healed by Sir Gawainet, his brother, and by Lancelot of the Lake, who was such a good knight, worthy and bold, and he was the best in the world. But the story now falls silent from speaking about this until it is the right place for it, and it goes back to King Lot, who went along talking to his sons Gaheriet and Agravain, who were so wicked. Now the story says that they made their way through the forest until after the hour of prime had passed. Then they left the forest and rode out onto a most beautiful The Story of Merlin heath that went along the edge of the forest as far as Roestoc. After they had ridden for a long time, they met Lidonas as they were coming down a hill. He was dreadfully afraid for his master, who was fighting in great distress, just as the story has told you. He was riding behind the packhorse that carried the clothing and was leading his master’s palfrey; he was shedding hot tears, and he kept saying, “Holy Lady Mary, please help us!” And he kept beating one fist against the other. King Lot and his four sons caught sight of him and felt deeply sorry for him. Agravain hurried to him as fast as his horse could go, and when he was near the boy he said to him, “Son, tell me why you are wailing so.” And the boy lifted his head and answered, weeping, “Sir, I mourn for a young lord, the most beautiful creature ever made on earth, whom the Saxons have attacked down in this valley. They have killed him by now, unless God looks out for him.” “And where did he mean to go?” asked Agravain. “Sir,” answered Lidonas, “he was going to King Arthur’s court to serve Sir Gawainet, who is, we are told, so worthy. And we have heard so much about him that my master wants no one but Sir Gawainet to make him a knight.” Then he went on: “Ah, I am so wretched! I have lost him and will never see him again.” He then began to grieve so deeply that he nearly killed himself. And Agravain asked him where he was from. “Sir,” answered Lidonas, “from the Kingdom of Listenois. He is the son of the rich Fisher King.” And Agravain looked at Sir Gawainet and said to him, “Dear brother, now you hear what worthwhile things await you!” And he answered that he had heard very well. Then they tied on their helmets, took up their shields, and climbed on their horses. And Gaheriet said to Agravain, “Keep in mind those maidens you knew so well what to do with this morning and see to it that you are as good a knight with your arms when you fight against those Saxons!” “Gaheriet,” said Agravain, “I entreat you, please spare the Saxons as you did the maidens, for you would not dare attack them or even let anyone see the Saxons, I think.” “Sir,” said Gaheriet, “you are my elder, so we’ll see how well you fight!” “God help me,” said Agravain, “I would have very little strength, and I’d be quite craven, if I didn’t fight better than you! The battle will not be put off because of your cowardice!” “Sir,” said Gaheriet, “it is not in the least courtly to brag about oneself, but when you come into the fray, just fight the best you can.” And when Agravain heard that, he became angry, and he said that he meant to go where Gaheriet [353] would not follow him even if he lost one of his limbs by not going. And Gaheriet began to laugh without getting angry, and he smiled and said, “Go on ahead. You can’t go anywhere I won't follow you.” And Gawainet laughed at what they said, for he knew very well that Gaheriet was making fun and joking, and he told Guerrehet and his father the things they had said to The Story of Merlin each other. And the king said, “Dear son, let's go after them so they won’t do anything foolish, for I am sure that Agravain is angry.” And when Lidonas saw them riding away, he asked them who they were, and they answered that they were of King Arthur's household, “and the man you are seeking is here with us.” “Ah, God!” said Lidonas. “Then I won't go any farther until I find out what this is all about.” “No,” said the king, “but turn off the main road and ride until you see what happens, and then go to a hiding place in that forest.” And the young man said he would. While they were speaking, they saw his master’ come racing, holding his sword all dripping with blood, with a good two hundred Saxons after him as fast as their horses could run. Many times and very swiftly he turned about to face them, and he would strike anyone he met with such strength that his armor could not protect him; and after he delivered his blow, he started out again on his way. This is how the young man fought with them until he came upon the ones who were heading out to meet him. And when he saw that there were five of them, he shouted aloud, “For God's sake, noble knights, come help me! Take pity on me, for you see how much I need it!” And Agravain said to him, “Hold on, friend, for you have nothing to worry about.” Then Agravain spurred his horse and wielded his lance with the sharp, cutting tip, and he struck the first man he met so hard that neither shield nor hauberk could keep him from driving the tip of his lance through his body, and he took him dead to the ground. And Gaheriet, who came after him, hit his man so hard that he sent the sharp tip through his shield and hauberk and into his chest, and he bore him sprawling to the ground, where he died. He broke his lance then, so he put his hand on his sword straightway and drew it from its scabbard and said to Agravain, “Where are you now, dear brother? Now we'll see how you fight, for I’ll strive on behalf of ladies and what is fitting for them, while you seek to do to them what is unseemly!” Sir Gawainet and Guerrehet burst out laughing at those words, but when King Lot saw them idle and laughing, he said to them, “What are you doing, my sons? Don't you see your brothers in the midst of the enemy?” When the young heard that the three knights were brothers and this man’s sons, and that he was warning them to behave well, he asked him who he was. And he answered that his name was King Lot of Orkney. “And those knights,” he said, “are my sons. Look there and you’ll see the one you seek with the red shield.” And he showed him Sir Gawainet. When the young man heard what the king told him, he was filled with joy at the news, and he raised his hands to God and thanked Our Lord that he had found them so quickly. Then he said to the king, “Sir, how do you know that I am looking for him?” 4The text repeats, somewhat ambiguously, le vallet (353, |. 12): “the youth.” 363 “I know for a fact,” he answered, “that you are seeking Gawainet. See him there!” With that, they all charged headlong among the Saxons, and the youth was with them, and they struck down dead the first ones they met, then they spurred on and hit four others, so that they brought them down dead and their lances flew into pieces. Then they set [354] their hands to their swords, and they began to strike right and left. And the youth left the king and the others and rode after Sir Gawainet wherever he went. And Sir Gawainet had drawn Excalibur out of its scabbard, and he began a great slaughter of the Saxons, and there was such killing that all who saw him fled before him and did not dare take a stand against him. And he had gone so far ahead that he did not know what was happening to his father and brothers. Agravain and Gaheriet® had pursued twenty Saxons until they ran into Pignoras, who had with him about a hundred Saxons. And when Pignoras saw who was giving chase and that there were only two of them, he shouted to his men, and they fell upon them. Agravain and Gaheriet struck two of them so hard that they brought them down dead, but then ten Saxons broke ranks and attacked Agravain so fiercely from all sides that they took him to the ground. Another ten attacked Gaheriet and bore him backwards over his saddlebow, but when his lance was broken, he quickly sat up straight again and flew back into the fray and did wonders on every side. And Agravain, who had fallen, sprang back to his feet with his sword in his right hand and held his shield against his chest. And they attacked him fiercely, but he defended himself as well as anyone could wish, for he had great heart and strength. And Gaheriet spurred his horse to where he saw his brother, and he put himself between him and the Saxons® who were attacking him most fiercely, and he defended himself with such strength that they did not dare get near him, so much did they fear the mighty blows he dealt them. They fought hard like this for quite a long while, for the Saxons yearned to take them prisoner, but they were fighting to stay alive. King Lot and Guerrehet were fighting very hard elsewhere, and they went through the press looking for their companions. At last they saw Agravain on foot among the Saxons, wielding his naked sword with which he dealt them great blows, and Gaheriet was beside him striving his hardest to free him and get him back on horseback. Then King Lot and Guerrehet charged headlong among them. The four of them gave them a good battle, and they fought hard against them, but they were worn out from killing and cutting up Saxons. Sir Gawainet fought his way to the top of a hill, holding his sword dripping with blood, and he looked back and saw that he had driven all the way through them, and the youth was still beside him at his spur. And he said to him, “Sir, I am following you so that, if my service pleases you, you will make me a knight when I ask you to.” 5Here the text reads guerrehes (354, 1. 7). 6The text reads ou il vit ses freres & se met entre eus et les sesnes (354, ll. 17-18): “where he saw his brothers and he put himself between them and the Saxons.” 364 And he answered that he was most welcome and said no more, but he kept him with him. Then he told him to stay close to him so that the Saxons would not wound him or strike him down. “I must,” he went on, “look for my father and brothers, for I do not know what has become of them.” And the young man said to him, “Sir, I believe that they are in that crowd, for I see swords raised high and flashing.” Sir Gawainet looked and recognized his father by his helmet. Then he said to the youth, “That is my father. Follow me. With that Sir Gawainet spurred his horse on both sides, and he jumped a full eighteen feet, and he and the youth flew into the Saxons more fiercely than they had done before all that day, and they struck down before them as many as they came to. But the young man could not spur his horse fast enough to catch up with him, and he found his path strewn with the dead. [355] Then the young man said, “Holy Lady Mary, I am afraid that I may lose him among these unbelievers! The man spoke the truth who told me that there wasn’t such a knight in the world. Not one word he spoke was a lie, for he is even worthier than he said. The knight is good, and he has just the horse he needs. I truly believe that if he wanted to do his utmost, he could put as many as there are here to rout, for he cannot be taken out of his saddle, however many fall upon him. Now please God, who was born of the Virgin Mary, that the king my father could see him just one time, for I know in truth that he would hold him wondrously dear!” Still he followed Sir Gawainet as closely as he could. And Sir Gawainet fought his way through until he found his brother Agravain, who was so tired and worn out that he was leaning on his shield holding his bloody sword, but he was so beleaguered that he could scarcely help himself. And they kept dealing him hard, weighty blows with lances and swords whenever they could get near him. He saw that, elsewhere, Guerrehet had been struck on each side from behind by two lances, and he went sprawling to the ground over his horse’s neck; somewhere else Gawainet saw that twelve Saxons were holding King Lot his father by his helmet and beating him hard with the hilts of their swords. Gaheriet had thrown his shield to the ground and was holding his sword in both hands, and he was making his blows hurt deeply, for he was striking their shields so hard that he cut off arms, hands, and heads, and he split Saxons down to their teeth; he was fighting so well in his prowess that the Saxons did not dare make a stand against him, but yielded King Lot to him against their will. And King Lot looked about and saw that it was his son Gaheriet who had rescued him, and he said to him, “Ah, dear son Gaheriet! If we had your brother Gawainet and the others with us, we could not lose any more.” “Where are they?” asked Gaheriet. “Look, there they are under the feet of our enemies, who will soon kill them if God does not mind them.” With these words Sir Gawainet came storming in, bursting in like a shot from a crossbow, striking and wounding as many as he found before him, thanks to his The Story of Merlin horse’s great strength. He wielded his sword and struck right and left such mighty and unworldly blows that he made the ground shake. And the youth was right there beside him, for he would not leave him, and he dealt many a fair blow with his hands, for which the brothers greatly loved him afterwards. And then, as it happened, Sir Gawainet met Monaquin, who was one of the best knights in the world, and he had ridden down Guerrehet to take him prisoner. And Sir Gawainet struck him so hard with Excalibur as he passed by him that he split him down to his saddle. And when the lad saw that, he crossed himself in wonder, and he blessed the arm that could strike such a blow. Then Sir Gawainet took Monaquin’s horse by the reins and led it to Agravain, and he said to him, “Brother, climb on this horse.” And he did so, for he sorely needed a horse, and the youth held the stirrup until he had mounted. Agravain thanked him and told him that he had fought well. When Pignoras saw that his brother was dead, he was greatly upset. He held an axe in both hands, and he rode toward King Lot and struck him so hard [356] on his helmet that he knocked him to the ground; he was not hurt, but was dazed from the blow. Then Pignoras hit Gaheriet and sent him sprawling to the ground. And when Sir Gawainet saw that, he was filled with such sorrow that he nearly went out of his mind. He spurred Gringalet toward him, holding his naked sword, and when Pignoras saw him coming he covered himself with his shield and axe. But Sir Gawainet hit him so hard that he cut right through the handle of the axe, and the blow fell on his shield and across his right shoulder and split him down to the navel; and the youth took his horse and led it to Gaheriet, who climbed on straightway. And when he had remounted, the young man took the horse Gaheriet’s father had fallen from and led it to him by the bridle and had him get on. And when he was back on horseback, he rode against those who had pressed in around him, but the Saxons were so bewildered and frightened because of their two lords who had been killed that they fled and did not even try to defend themselves. And Vandalis, their seneschal, shouted to them, “Ah, you cowards, what are you doing? Avenge your two lords against the scum that have killed them! You can see that there are only six of them and you are four hundred strong! You should be ashamed that they have lasted so long!” And they turned back against the six. Sir Gawainet went out ahead of the others and met them, for he knew their mettle. He was holding Excalibur, and he struck the first one and killed him, then the second and the third and the fourth. He then struck Vandalis the Seneschal so hard that he sent his head flying. And the youth took his horse and led it to Guerrehet and had him get on. And when the Saxons saw the seneschal slain, they took flight straightway, every man for himself. And the six rode after them, for they hated them above all things, and they killed and struck down as many as they came to. Sir Gawainet sat on Gringalet, who bore him away swiftly, and he did wonders and slew many, and he stuck right to their heels so that none could get away anywhere, for no matter which way they turned, he was there to head The Story of Merlin them off. And when they saw that they could not get away, they ran for safety in the depths of the forest, and they rode off here and there, not waiting for friend or companion, and cursed the hour and the day they ever met the six, “for they are not men like any other, but ghosts and devils who have ridden out of hell. There are only six of them, and it has never happened that so few have beaten as many as we were. This is why we can say that they were not sired by mortal men, for no mortal man could do what they have done!” This is what the Saxons were prone to say, but they were beaten and routed by the prowess of Sir Gawainet. And the survivors who got away did not stop until they had come to the horde before the city of Clarence, and they told King Hargadabran about the great harm the six had done them: “for they killed our two kings and also our seneschal Vandalis.” When Hargadabran heard this he was so upset that he nearly went out of his mind, for the two kings were his first cousins, and he cursed the hour when they ever invaded that land, for much evil had befallen them, and they had suffered great harm. [357] But here the story now falls silent about the Saxons and speaks about King Lot and his children. 44. Agravain Quarrels with his Brothers; Gawain and Eliezer Rescue a Lady.’ In this part the story says that when the Saxons were routed in the Valley of Roestoc, King Lot was most happy, and his sons as well, about the adventure when they rescued the youth. Then they went to the place where they had left the packhorses, which they were to have taken to the siege of Clarence, and they gathered them up and tied them together. And when the horses were all together, they looked at them. Then Gaheriet made a speech that was well heeded: “Ah, dear Lord God, why are there so many poor young noblemen in this country who win nothing? In truth, they lose only out of laziness and cowardice. They ought never lie abed when they should be watching over the borderlands.” “Dear son,” said King Lot, “there are indeed many cowards here. If anyone embraces something one time so that good will come to him alone, evil will befall him four times over.” “And then,” said Gaheriet to his father, “dear sir, now ask my brother Agravain if he wouldn’t long to befoul maidens if he had them here in these woods.” And Agravain gave him a sidelong glance full of great pride and said to him spitefully, “Gaheriet, it hasn't been such a long time since you wanted to boast, but just then that Saxon struck you down with his axe, and if it hadn’t been for Sir Gawainet, my brother, you would have been very badly hurt.” “If I fell,” answered Gaheriet, “I couldn't help it, but I was not so badly off that I couldn’t defend myself against them. You could just as well have kept quiet about that, for 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 357-364. 365 I saw you today in such straits that, even if the fairest woman in the world had begged for your love, you couldn’t have said one word to her for the whole world. For a fiveyear-old child could have taken your sword away from you.” When Agravain heard that, he was filled with such wrath that he was a wonder to behold, for Gaheriet had called him a weakling; he turned red with anger and shame, and he stared at him straight on. If there had been only the two of them, they would have started fighting. But King Lot turned the talk to other matters, for he did not want them to quarrel, and he asked what they should do with the packhorses. And Gaheriet answered, “Sir, ask Agravain.” Then Agravain grew angrier still, and he said that, as God was his helper, he would not take any more. He was holding the shaft of a lance, and he hit Gaheriet on his helmet with it so hard that it flew into pieces. And Gaheriet did not move, but forgave him most kindly. And Agravain recovered and hit and hit again until nothing was left of the shaft but the stub he held in his hand, and neither his brother Guerrehet nor his father could take it from him or stop him from running Gaheriet down when he could get away from them. Just then Sir Gawainet came back from the pursuit and asked them what was happening. The king told him everything word for word, and when Sir Gawainet heard it, he went straight to Agravain and rebuked him harshly for what he had done. And Agravain swore that he would never forgive Gaheriet for it. When Sir Gawainet heard such wickedness, he told him that he could be sure that if Agravain laid a hand on him again, he would pay for it with life or limb, and he would put down no other wager. “I will not abide that!” said Agravain. “Even if the worst were to befall me, [358] I would not stop for you!” “Now we'll see,” answered Sir Gawainet, “what you'll do about it.” Then Agravain kicked his horse with his spurs and ran upon Gaheriet with his sword drawn, and he dealt him such a blow on his helmet that fire and sparks flew out. But Gaheriet moved not a bit, whatever he did to him. And when Sir Gawainet saw that, he drew out Excalibur and sped toward him, and he swore on his father’s soul that Agravain would be sorry for it. And when his father saw him going, he said to him, “Dear son, go kill that worthless scoundrel for me, for he is too wicked and too full of pride.” But Sir Gawainet knew what he meant. So he came to Agravain and gave him such a blow with the butt of his sword beside his ear that he knocked him from his horse to the ground, and he was so dazed that he did not know where he was. And Gaheriet ran over to him, for he saw how angry Sir Gawainet was, and he said to him, “Dear brother, don’t be angry for anything he has done to me.” “Get out of here, you wicked traitor!” said Sir Gawainet. “I will never love you if you ever spare him.” “Sir, he is my elder, and I must bear him honor. I was only joking when I said those things to him.” “You stirred all this up, and it was bound to come out badly!” And Gaheriet answered, “In God’s name, dear brother, if I could not play with you or with him, it would be bad if I 366 played with someone I didn’t know. But you can be sure,” he went on, “that will be the first and the last time I will ever play with you or with him. And if we had not started out on this mission all together, I would go back right now and no longer be in your company.” And Guerrehet said in his turn, “May Agravain be damned if he does not pay you back for the blow he got because of you!” “As God is my very helper,” said Sir Gawainet, “if you or Agravain do anything to Gaheriet you shouldn’t, I'll put both of you where you can’t see your feet for seven whole months! And I forbid you, as you hold yourselves dear, ever to harm him, so take care!” “Sir,” said Guerrehet, “we will take care, since you command us to, for we would never want to go against your orders, but I am very sorry that you have got stirred up in this on his account and that you have hurt Agravain for nothing.” “It was not for nothing,” said Sir Gawainet, “since he attacked Gaheriet against my orders and in spite of me right before our father’s eyes. And Gaheriet did not get angry about any of the blows he dealt him. It is a great shame that he is so proud, and his pride will yet bring harm to you and to him.” “God help me,” said King Lot to Guerrehet, “for a little I would take all the armor you have away from you and Agravain too, and I would leave you in these fields like worthless dogs.” “Sir,” said Guerrehet, “you would not have the strength or the will to do what you say if others were not here.” “Ah, traitorous knave! You are now truly puffed up! Are you his brother? Then be kind to him now. And I order my son Gawainet, if you or Agravain should do anything to Gaheriet, to mete out justice to you as one ought to worthless, shiftless scoundrels.” When the youth saw that Sir Gawainet had struck Agravain to the ground and made his blood spurt out of his nose and mouth, he ran to catch his horse, and he brought it back to him by the reins and helped him get back on. Then Sir Gawainet came to Agravain and said to him, “Worthless good-for-nothing,? flee from here, for I'll have nothing to do with you, [359] and take care that I never see you again! Go wherever else you want, for you won’t come any farther with me. And take with you all who love you more than me, and the ones who love me more than you will go with me.” With that, Sir Gawainet and Gaheriet took to the road, but King Lot asked what should be done with the packhorses. “In God’s name,” answered Sir Gawainet, “send them to Minoras the Forester, if you'd like, the one who lodged us so well, for he served us handsomely in his house. They would be put to good use there, and it would be better for him to have them than for them to be lost here, for we cannot take them with us, and even if we could, we could still go where we might lose everything.” “Indeed,” said King Lot, “you have spoken very well. And who will take them there?” 2The text reads biaus noiens (358, 1. 43): “dear/fair nothing.” The Story of Merlin “Sir,” he answered, “that young man’s squire and one of our serving boys.” “Let them go with God’s blessing,” said the king. They sent for the youth, and he was found at once. They told him about who the messenger would be and the gift he would give, and that he should then come back after them all the way to Roestoc. The lad’s squire said that he would do it. He chose a serving boy to go with him, and they set out with the packhorses; they also took with them forty warhorses tied together by their reins. And they made their way straight to Minoras’s stronghold. He was very glad to see them, and he served them as well and as handsomely as could be. And the next morning they took to the road again as soon as they saw daylight to go back after their masters just as they had been ordered. But now the story falls silent about them and goes back to King Lot and his children. Now the story says that after King Lot had sent the packhorses to Minoras the Forester, all six of them set out together on the road to Roestoc. They had stopped jibing at one another when they saw how angry Sir Gawainet was getting, and they no longer wanted to carry on with their bickering. King Lot, Sir Gawainet, and Gaheriet were then riding alongside one another, and they asked the youth where he came from and what his name was. And he said that his name was Eliezer, and he was the son of King Pelles of Listenois and nephew of King Alan of the Land Beyond and King Pellinor of the High Wild Forest; King Pellinor had eleven sons, all older than seventeen years of age, and another one, his twelfth, newly come to King Arthur’s court to learn to be a knight, and their mother was pregnant with the thirteenth. “These are all my first cousins. And I was going away to King Arthur's court, to Sir Gawainet, to serve him. And thank God, I have found him close by, and he has taken me and will make me a knight when I ask him to.” “And so I grant you, dear sir,” said Sir Gawainet, “and you are most welcome.” And they rode thus until nightfall, and they found no dwelling where they might take shelter. The forests were thick and shadowy, and the weather was warm and still. But after it was dark they happened upon a hermitage that was surrounded by moats and brambles. They knocked at the gate and shouted until it was opened to them. They dismounted from their horses, took off their harness and saddles, and gave them green grass, for there was nothing else there. [360] And they ate such food as the holy man gave them, which was bread and water; then they lay down on the green grass, of which they had a great plenty, for there was no other bed or pillow, and they slept quite happily. But Sir Gawainet and Eliezer did not sleep, but stayed awake, for they were on the lookout for wicked people, of whom there were a great many thereabouts. And after midnight the young men® heard a lady and a knight wailing quite loudly as they went by there. Sir Gawainet heard them and felt deeply sorry for them. He ordered Gringalet to be saddled and bridled, and Eliezer jumped up at once and Here the word is garchon (360, |. 6), which normally designates boys, serving boys of low station, such as the servants who accompany King Lot and his sons. The Story of Merlin brought the horse to him all ready. Sir Gawainet took his weapons and very swiftly got on his horse and rode fast after the men who were taking the lady with them. And Eliezer also mounted, for he did not want to miss anything, and they rode until they came to a clearing in a deep valley that went on for a good half league. Then Sir Gawainet listened and heard most pitiful wailing from time to time, and the lament went this way: “Oh, dear Lord God! What can I do? Have I deserved this hardship and the anguish they are giving me?” And he tenderly prayed God to give him a quick death, for he would rather die than suffer as he was doing. It was a knight stripped to his breeches, whom five boorish fellows were beating with knotted whips, so that the blood was running down over his body. Elsewhere Sir Gawainet heard the loud, pitiful screams of a woman, and it was plain that she was in great pain and needed help; and she said aloud, so that Sir Gawainet heard her clearly, “Holy Lady Mary, what is this woeful, wretched woman to do? For you can well kill me before I give in to you!” When Sir Gawainet heard her voice, he was certain that she was in great need, but he wondered about where to go first, for he was deeply sorry for the highborn man whom he heard moaning so loudly, and he felt deeply for the woman who would be shamed if she did not get help soon. So he thought in his heart that it would be better if he left the knight in his agony than if the young lady were shamed. With that, he kicked his horse with his spurs and rode through the whole valley to where he heard the wailing, and he heard her screaming, “Holy Lady Mary, please help me!” And when Sir Gawainet heard her voice, he looked under a tree and saw seven loutish oafs, one of whom was holding a young lady down on the ground and hitting her hard on the face with his mailed hand. She was twisting and turning, and she screamed, “You can kill me, but you will have nothing else from me!” And as she was talking, he dragged her after him by her locks, which were so beautiful that they looked like fine gold. And when Sir Gawainet saw that, he spurred over there and shouted to the man who was holding the maiden, “Sir knight,’ let the maiden go!” And the fellow looked about in the moonlight and shouted to the ones who were with him to go out to meet Gawainet, and they did and asked him, “Sir knight, need we worry abcut you?” And Sir Gawainet told them that he could assure them of nothing, “for I have come to help the lady whom that scoundrel is dragging about in such a loathsome way. Beware of me, I defy you all!” With that, he kicked [361] Gringalet with his spurs and rode through the six whom he had met and came straight to the one who was still holding the young lady by her locks. He struck him so hard on the chest with his lance that he drove the tip through his body and out the other side, and he sent him sprawling dead to the ground. And 4Gawain uses the expression dant cheualiers (360, |. 38), where dant may be an ironic title of respect. The attackers address Gawain with the same words (360, I. 41). 367 the six others came toward him with their lances under their arms, and they hit him so hard from behind between his shoulders and on his shield that they sent him hunching over his horse’s neck, and the shafts flew into bits. And after the lances had broken, Sir Gawainet sat up straight in his saddle and stood so tall in his stirrups that the iron bent. He drew his sword from its scabbard and struck the first one he came to so hard on his helmet that he sent him down dead. Then he hit the second one on the shoulder and cut it off from his body. Then he struck the third one so hard on the head that he sent it flying to the middle of the field. Then he struck the fourth and sliced him down to his teeth. And when the last two saw that their companions were dead and that he had slain one with each stroke, they turned in flight and did not dare make a stand against him. And Sir Gawainet came straight to the young lady and put her on his horse in front of him. And the two knights who had fled came to their other companions who had dismounted beneath two olive trees to rest, and the latter had lain down on the green grass to sleep. And as soon as they were close to them, they shouted to them in a loud voice, “Noble knights, what are you doing here? A knight has just killed our Sortibran and four of our companions, and he has rescued the lady! Ride after him, for he is taking her away!” And when they heard this, they were deeply upset, and they climbed on their horses and let them run at full speed after Sir Gawainet, who was taking the lady to safety. But now the story falls silent for a while from speaking about them and goes back to speaking about the youth whose name was Eliezer. The story says here that, as soon as Sir Gawainet had turned away to go help the young lady, Eliezer rode straight to where he heard the knight moaning. And when he came there, he saw that six boorish fellows were holding him prisoner, and they had beaten him so much that he could no longer stand up, but had fallen to the ground; he did not have the strength to say a single word, and he was barely holding out. And when Eliezer saw him in such a state, he felt deeply sorry for him. Then the noble squire shouted out, “Ah, you wanton whoresons! What do you want of that worthy knight you are treating so badly? Has he done you such wrong that you should slaughter him like that?” When they heard him speaking thus, they looked at him and asked, “What does it mean to you, sir vassal? We wouldn’t stop what we’re doing for anything you might say. And when Eliezer heard that, he became very angry and said that they would have no more trouble that day “but from me!” And he was holding a strong, straight lance with a sharp tip, and he rode at full speed straight for the ones who were holding the knight. He hit one of the six so hard that he struck him down dead, and he pulled a second to himself, hit him, and killed him; then he drew up, let his horse run, and came back at breakneck speed, and when the others saw him coming they gave way and scattered everywhere, but he struck one of them so stoutly in the ribs that he drove iron and wood through him. And when he turned about to face the others, [362] he did not know 368 what had become of them, for they had set out into the thick of the forest to save their skins. It was well after midnight and he could not see far, but when he saw that he had lost them, he made straight for the knight and told him to climb on the horse behind him. And when he heard him, he forgot his anguish and got on behind him in very great distress, Then Eliezer headed straight to where he thought he would find Sir Gawainet, but he had not gone far before he found him fighting against twenty knights, who were doing their utmost to hurt him. And he had put the young lady under a medlar tree at the edge of the wood. And when Eliezer saw this, he ordered the knight to get off the horse, and he did. And Eliezer took his lance, which was still whole, and he kicked his horse with his spurs and struck the first man he came to, knocked him out of his saddle, and sent him to the ground dead. And then he hit a second on the chest and drove the tip of his lance into him. Meanwhile, Sir Gawainet wielded Excalibur, his good sword, until he had struck down and killed seven of the twenty, not counting the five whom he had slain as he rescued the young lady. But Eliezer had broken his lance, so he drew his sword, struck the first man he met, and split him down to the teeth. And when Sir Gawainet saw Eliezer helping him, he kicked his horse with his spurs, blessing the time when he had been brought into that country and the body that had sired him, “for he can’t fail to be a worthy man if he lives.” With that, he rode to where Eliezer was fighting, and he struck heavy and wonderful blows in his attack, and he killed and wounded all of them but three, who fled into the forest to save themselves. And the night was so dark and the sky so cloudy that they did not know where they had fled. Then Eliezer took two horses, for he was most worthy and bold in every time of need, and brought them to the knight and the young lady, and he had them get on. But first he had the knight dress in the clothing of one of the dead men, for he had lost his own. Then they put their swords back into their scabbards and set out all together on the road back to the hermitage that Sir Gawainet and Eliezer had left. Sir Gawainet rode alongside the young lady, and he asked her where she was from. And she said that she was the sister of the lady of Roestoc and that the knight was her first cousin. “And how were you taken prisoner?” asked Sir Gawainet. “Sir,” she answered, “last night my cousin and I were coming back from a forest we own near Taningues toward Roestoc. As it happened, our companions had ridden out ahead of us, and we turned down a path we shouldn’t have taken, for my cousin and I were so intent on talking about our doings that we became lost and left the right road. And we went into a great woods, where those traitors had stopped to eat, and they fell upon us and took us prisoner; we couldn't hold out against them, for my cousin was not wearing his armor. Even so, he pulled off his horse’s bridle and struck one of them on the head with it and killed him, and that is why they were about to beat him to death. And they took hold of him and stripped him, and they beat him until he was almost dead. And [363] when they wanted to rape me, he defended me and did not, for any fear of The Story of Merlin death, stop dealing them strong and wondrous blows with his fists wherever he could get to them, for he had no other weapons. Then six of the knaves grabbed him and took him away, beating him most dreadfully, as you have seen. “Now I beg you, tell me who you are and why you have come here.” And Sir Gawainet told her that they were five knights from the kingdom of Logres, “and we are going on a mission that bears more heavily on our honor than we can say. / In this way they talked of these goings-on until they came to the hermitage, where they found their companions still sleeping. They dismounted from their horses, took off their harness, and gave them a great deal of green grass to eat. And they all lay down beside them and slept until morning, when King Lot got up. He called to Guerrehet and Gaheriet, who were beside him, and showed them Sir Gawainet, the maiden, the knight, and Eliezer, who were lying next to the horses; and Sir Gawainet was holding Gringalet with a halter, for he was unsettled around the other horses. And when the brothers saw the maiden lying there, they wondered where she could have come from. So King Lot called Sir Gawainet and said to him, “Dear son, get up now, for you have slept long enough. See, it is broad daylight.” And the knight woke up; he was so badly wounded that he did not sleep soundly, nor did the young lady, so they sat up. And the king asked them what direction they had come from, and they answered that they did not know, but two worthy gentlemen, whom they prayed God to keep from harm, had brought them there. “One of them rescued this maiden,” said the knight, “and the other rescued me: may God make him a worthy man and grant him honor and wealth.” “Which ones are these?” asked King Lot. And he showed him Sir Gawainet and Eliezer. When Agravain heard that, he was more distressed than ever, and he could not stop himself from saying that they had kept very bad company, since he had not gone with them. And Gaheriet answered, for he was quite clever and was glad to poke fun at him, “He did not dare wake us up, because you were brooding about your girlfriend.” And the king asked the maiden how she had been taken prisoner, and she told him word for word how it had happened to them, and she left nothing out. Then they got on their horses and set out on the road to go to Roestoc, and they did not stop riding from morning until the hour of vespers, and they found nothing all day to bother them or give them trouble until they got to Roestoc. They looked at the town, which was most fair and well laid out in a beautiful place, for all around, on every side, were woods and rivers, and the town’s walls sparkled in the sun that shone down on them and seemed to set fire to them. And the town and its castle were wonderfully handsome, and King Lot and his sons esteemed them greatly when they saw them. And when they came to the gate, they found it shut and locked. And the knight who had been rescued called the gatekeeper in a loud voice, and the young lady did too. And the lady of Roestoc was standing on the walls and recognized them, The Story of Merlin and as soon as she had seen them, she ordered the gate to be opened straightway, and it was, so they rode in without lingering. And when the maiden saw her sister, [364] she spoke to her privately, and the others did not know about what. But when their talk was over, the lady went out to the knights and welcomed them very joyfully. She had them dismount before the great hall, which was most handsome, and the castellan himself came out to greet them—he was the lady’s husband® —and he had their armor taken off. Then they washed their faces and mouths with warm water, and after that they sat on a bed and spoke together of many things while the meal was being made ready. And when the food was ready, the tablecloths were laid, and they washed and sat down to eat, and they were well served with everything a man likes and needs. And when it came time after the meal, the lord asked his sister-in-law where she was going and where she had come from in such a state, and she told him her whole adventure just as it had happened. And when the lord heard it, he was most gladdened and began to celebrate as he had never done before. And King Lot asked whom the castle belonged to, and the lord answered that it was a fief from King Arthur. Then the castellan asked him who he was, and he answered that his name was Lot, that he was king of Orkney, and that those four knights were his sons. And then the castellan jumped up and greeted him most joyfully, and he asked him what they were seeking. And the king answered that they were riding in search of adventures and truces with the princes and barons on behalf of King Arthur, so that at last the Saxons might be driven from the land. And when the castellan heard this, he gave thanks to Our Lord. “And where will you go first?” he asked. And the king said that he would like to be in Arestel in Scotland; then he said that he would be most grateful if the host would please send a messenger to the King of the Hundred Knights and tell him on his behalf to be in Arestel in Scotland on Our Lady’s Day in September and not to miss it, for all the princes were to be there. And the castellan answered that he would send word to him no later than the next morning. “And I am very sure,” the castellan went on, “that he is in the city of Malehaut.” That evening King Lot and the castellan of Roestoc spoke at length until the hour to go to bed. And Sir Gawainet did not want to make himself known that evening to anyone, because he was bent on seeking adventures in secret so that no one would know who he was wherever he went. And when it was time to go to bed, they went to sleep and took their ease for the whole night until the next day. And when it was daylight, they got themselves ready and took leave of the castellan, the lady, the maiden who had been rescued, and the knights from there, who rode along with them for a long way, then turned back to Roestoc. 5The text reads sire... a la damoisele (364, 1. 4): “the young lady’s (i.e., the maiden’s) husband”; however, it is her sister who is the dame de rohestoc (362, |. 31): “the lady of Roestoc.” Below the maiden is in fact referred to the castellan’s serorge (364, |. 10): “sister-in-law.” 369 And when the castellan saw that they had left, he chose a messenger and sent him to the King of the Hundred Knights on behalf of King Lot of Orkney, and the messenger delivered his message as he had been ordered to say it. And the King of the Hundred Knights was filled with great joy for love of King Lot, whom he loved with his whole heart, and for love as well of the messenger, who was a good knight, and he gave him a strong, swift horse, as befitted a worthy gentleman. But now the story falls silent about the King of the Hundred Knights and speaks of King Lot and his children. [365} 45. The Saxons Again Routed; The Rebellious Princes Agree to a Truce.’ Now the story says that after King Lot had left the castle of Roestoc, he headed straight to Cambenic by way of Leverserp, where he took shelter for one night, and afterwards he took to the road and made his way untl he came to within two leagues of Cambenic. There he heard such loud screaming and shouting that he thought the whole countryside must have caught fire, and it was no wonder that there was a great uproar and that the people were frightened, for all around there ten thousand Saxons had taken plunder and stripped the land, and they were taking away a great crowd of prisoners. Duke Escant had ridden out of the city with three thousand men and fought for quite a long time, but in the end he was routed and driven from the field, and he was so upset that he nearly went mad. So the uproar and screaming were so loud that it was a wonder to hear: all were bewailing their losses and the harm done to them, all of which had been overwhelming that day. When King Lot and his sons drew nearer to those people, they tied on their helmets, got down from their palfreys, and climbed on their great warhorses, with their helmets on tight and their shields about their necks, and they rode straight to the bridge where the fighting was— and it had been very heavy, but as they came in, the forces were beginning to withdraw toward the city. And Duke Escant was at the rear, going about stopping the withdrawal and defending his men most wonderfully, he tried hard and did his utmost, for he dreaded that he might lose his city in this attack. And King Lot, who was deeply sorry and most upset at seeing the duke and his men in such dire straits, drove forward and crossed the bridge to join with the duke, and his four sons were following him lustily. He went all the way across without being recognized, as did his sons, and he and his sons rode hunched down, their shields on their arms, holding their lances midway up the shaft,’ their feet set in their stirrups. They spurred their horses to a full gallop, for they could hardly wait to take on the Saxons. And when the duke saw them coming, he stopped short, for he did not know who they were, and he said, as befitted a man beleaguered and at his wits’ end: “Oh, dear Corresponds to Sommer, 365-374. 2That is, not fixed in the holders ready to attack. 370 Lord God, please show me what to do, for I am at a loss if You do not give me true guidance. What is worse, we have lost all the belongings we had left.” Then he looked at the five knights he saw coming and did not recognize them, for their shields were all chipped from the blows they had taken (if it had not been for that, he would indeed have known it was King Lot), but as they drew nearer he saw clearly that they were not from that country; still, he went straight to them and said, for he was very well raised, “Dear sirs, you are most welcome, wherever you mean to go. It seems to me that you are knights errant.” “Sir,” said King Lot, “we wish to be in Arestel in Scotland.” “In truth,” said the duke, “you have a hard way to go, for between here and there is a most treacherous pass. But if you would like to stay with us in this land, we would be most glad. You could go nowhere better for profit, for the Saxons have been fighting us for a few days.” “Sir,” said King Lot, “how far can it be to Arestel?” [366] “Sir,” he answered, “it’s a full two days.” “Who are you, sir,” asked King Lot, “that you ask us to stay?” “Sir,” he answered, “that will not be hidden from you. I am the duke of Cambenic and lord of this land for as long as it pleases God. But those faithless people challenge me for it day in and day out, and just now I have ridden out against them. They are ruthless and proud, as you can see.” While the king and the duke were talking together, the duke looked and saw his men coming in flight and the Saxons after them riding hot on their heels. And when King Lot saw them coming so, he said to the duke, “Sir, since we have happened upon you, and since you have invited us to stay, we will help you from now on with all our might.” “Many thanks, dear sir,” said the duke. And then Gaheriet said to Sir Gawainet, “Let’s go out against them, for it is high time—here they come!” At once the duke’s men picked up new helmets, for theirs were all bashed in, and after they had put them on their heads and fastened them well with silk laces, they turned back toward the ones who were fleeing. And when these men saw the duke, their lord, coming, they stopped and made a stand, for they had great faith in him because he was a good and stalwart knight. And when the Saxons saw them stop, they ran upon them because they believed that they could take them and hold them prisoner. And Sir Gawainet, who saw them coming in broken ranks, went out against them, and he struck the first one he met so that he drove his lance through his body and knocked him down dead to the ground. And when Gaheriet saw his brother fighting the Saxons, he said that he would hold himself a coward if right then he did not do the same. Then he kicked his horse with his spurs and wielded his lance with a sharp tip, and he hit the first one he came to so hard that he drove through his shield and hauberk, and the tip of his lance and part of the shaft showed through his side; he was dead, and he sent him down sprawling. And the lance broke, because it could not bear the great weight, so he put his hand to his sword and set out after Sir Gawainet, in the tracks he made, and he did such wonders in his fighting The Story of Merlin that all who saw him were amazed. He hit no man whom he did not kill or cut down with his horse, and Sir Gawainet esteemed him greatly and praised him in his heart. He had never seen him fight so skillfully anywhere, and he was struck with wonder; he was glad in his heart, and he wondered at how he could stand up under so much fighting. Elsewhere King Lot and Guerrehet were in the fray, and each one had struck down a Saxon so hard that he could only be dead. And when their lances had broken, they drew their swords and began wondrous fighting such as no one had ever seen even five knights do. And when the duke saw it, he went after them and began to fight as boldly, both to keep them near him and to behave as he ought in the undertaking, and he saw them fight so well before he left them that he was awestruck that any earthly man could give and take so much. But when it was after midday, Sir Gawainet did all the wonders in the world. He was astride Gringalet, a horse that was so good and so handsome that he did not have to seek one fairer anywhere, and he who sat on it was wonderfully worthy [367] and quick. He held Excalibur in his hand all bare, and he cut up helmets, shields, knights, horses, and everything else he went after. He drove into the ranks roaring like a thunderstorm, and he left, slaughtering everything, as if it had been agreed to beforehand. And he was so furious, as the hour of terce drew near, that nothing could stand against him. And it truly seemed that, when he raised his sword high to strike, it fell like a lightning bolt, so fast did it come down, for it sounded like thunder. And when the Saxons caught sight of him, they said, “Look at that devil that has just now come from hell. Let someone go tell Moydas, Brandalis, Oriance, and Dodalis!”3 (Those four kings were the chief leaders of the army.) When the four kings heard the wonders that the six companions were doing, they asked where they were. And the ones who had seen them pointed out the end of the bridge to them, just at the bank. At once the four kings bestirred themselves and came straight to where Sir Gawainet was, and he was doing the greatest wonders ever done by one man alone. Duke Escant had come to them with as many of his three thousand men as he could, and they were a good two thousand seven hundred strong. They had been dreadfully beaten, but King Lot and his sons joined them and quickly saved them from being taken by more than eight thousand men. These were led by Ydonas, a very proud Saxon who had inflicted great damage on Duke Escant’s men with his army; nevertheless, the Christians drove them from the field and ran after them as far as the four kings, who were coming to help them. And as soon as the four kings began fighting the Christians, the battle was very heavy and the damage fearful, for the Christians were only three thousand strong, but there were a good sixteen thousand Saxons who did with them as they pleased, despite the Christians’ efforts. 5The list appears as a boydas & a mandalis & a oriance © a dorilas (367, 1. 11). Sommer notes other forms in the Harley manuscript: moydas, brandalus, onientes, dodalis (367, n. 1). In fact, forms closer to the latter occur later in Sommer’s text (367, 1. 39), and it is these that are adapted here when they differ from the ones given here by Sommer. The Story of Merlin And they would have been utterly routed if it had not been for the six knights, for they would not yield their ground. There Sir Gawainet did all the wonders any earthly man could do, and Gaheriet followed so close behind him that he could not get away from him, but had him at his side all day long, so that Sir Gawainet wondered in awe how he could stand up under so much, and he loved him in his heart all the more for it. Never was there another day all the rest of his life when he loved any of his brothers more, for they were all such good knights that none better could be found at that time. The battle was very hard and the fighting deadly in the meadowlands of Cambenic, at the head of the Severn bridge, with two thousand seven hundred Christians against sixteen thousand Saxons, but the Christians would not have lasted long had it not been for the five knights from the kingdom of Logres, and Duke Escant of Cambenic fought very skillfully too, for he was a good and stalwart knight. As they were striving to break the press and drive through, Dodalis, Moydas, Oriance, and Brandalis came, their shields about their necks, their lances in their hands, riding swift, freshly-watered horses. They met Duke Escant in the ranks; he had fought boldly all day, and had undergone so much that he had to be tired and worn out, and indeed he was, for he had undergone such hardship all day long that it was a wonder how [368] he could keep sitting on horseback. As it happened, Moydas and Brandalis met him together, and they both hit him so hard on his shield that they sent him sprawling against his horse’s neck, and Oriance and Dodalis struck his horse through the sides with their lances and killed it cut from under him, and he and the horse fell to the ground in a heap. When the duke was on the ground, they stopped atop him, wielding their naked swords, and they were about to slay him right then, when his household knights came spurring to help him, while the Saxons came in from the other side to hinder his rescue. There the brawling came together from both sides, and many men were wounded, and the duke was in great agony, because his horse had fallen over on top of him. There were so many Saxons that the duke’s men did not have the strength to get him back up, yet his enemies did not have the might to take him. Even so, there were so many Saxons that the Christians could not withstand them, but they had to withdraw, like it or not, and the Saxons had indeed succeeded in taking the duke prisoner, and they led him away, beating him, despite all the Christians. When King Lot and his sons came spurring, wielding their bare swords, they came upon a great crowd of men taking him away. There many blows were given and taken, but if it had not been for Sir Gawainet’s prowess, they could not have lasted, for he was out ahead of them all, and he held Excalibur bare in his right hand, and he struck to the right and left, and he slaughtered so many men and horses that all who saw him fled, and he did not stop breaking through the press until he came to Duke Escant, whom the Saxons were taking away. There the battle was harsh and the fighting ruthless, and Agravain and Guerrehet were struck down from their horses, and Sir Gawainet and Gaheriet did not realize it, for they were bent only on saving the duke from those taking 371 him away; they did their utmost and at last rescued him and put him back on horseback. When King Lot, who was fighting elsewhere, saw his two sons on the ground beneath the horses’ hooves and in danger of losing their lives, he saw that he did not have the strength to rescue them or get them away from those who were attacking them. So he shouted in a loud voice, “Gawainet, dear son, where have you gone? Now your brother Agravain is on the ground and in very great trouble, and he will soon be killed if he does not get help!” And when Sir Gawainet heard his father’s voice, he turned his horse’s head at once to that side, and he broke through the press with Excalibur, his good sword that no armor could withstand if hit in a deft stroke. He had not gone far when he found Agravain and Guerrehet on foot in the midst of the throng, defending themselves mightily, and King Lot was beside them, striving hard to defend them and get them away. And when Sir Gawainet saw their great distress, he threw to the ground what shield he had left and took Excalibur in both hands, and he charged into the press so hard that everyone who saw him thought it a wonder. He hit Moydas, whom he met first, on his helmet and split him open to the shoulders. With the second blow he dealt he cut off Brandalis’s right arm and sent it flying into the middle of the field with his shield. And when the Saxon felt that he had been wounded, he turned about and fled, [369] screaming and roaring like a bull. Gaheriet had hurled his shield to the ground and was fighting with his sword in both hands, and he struck Oriance on his helmet and knocked off a fourth of it, and the sword glanced off and fell between his body and his shield, so that it cut the straps that held it on and sent it flying out into the field, while the sword went down into his right thigh so deeply that it cut entirely through it, and he fell down backwards. And Gaheriet took his horse by the bridle and took it to Guerrehet, his brother, and he helped him get on. Then he turned and hit a Saxon who was wearing wonderful armor, and he struck him so hard that he sent his head flying; and he took his horse and led it to Agravain, saying, “Climb up, dear brother.” And he did so, for he had great need of a horse. And then they charged into the fray and drew toward where their father and Sir Gawainet were, and Agravain, who burned with wrath against Dodalis, struck him so hard that he sent his head flying. When the Saxons saw that their noble men had been killed, they turned in flight at once, for they had lost their leaders; they did not stop before they came to Ydonas’s banner, and the Christians rode after them that far without letting up. But Sir Gawainet was out ahead of all the others with two hundred knights from the household of the duke of Cambenic who were all bent on serving Sir Gawainet. Eliezer was right beside him, and he was holding a cudgel covered with iron spikes, and he saved his master from everything he needed to be saved from. In that chase Duke Escant was knocked from his horse, for a Saxon had hit him hard from behind, and he was badly hurt in the fall. King Lot, who was riding on the nght side with his son Guerrehet, saw that blow, and he was deeply sorry about it. He was holding a strong, thick lance that he had taken from a Saxon, so he spurred his horse Le and hit the Saxon who had struck Duke Escant down; he hit him so hard on his side that he drove through his liver and lung, and he bore him sprawling to the ground. Then he took his horse by its reins and gave it to the duke, who got on and thanked him most dearly for the service he had done him. And Sir Gawainet and Eliezer, who were hot on the Saxons’ heels elsewhere, pursued them? until they saw the banner of Ydonas. There the Saxons stopped and made a stand for a while. And Sir Gawainet ran after them and rushed in among them, wielding his sword, and he began to strike and cut down as many as he came to. And when Ydonas saw him, he turned that way, and Sir Gawainet struck him so hard on his helmet with Excalibur that he sliced him all the way down, so that his liver and lungs could be clearly seen and recognized for what they were; and just as soon as the Saxon had thus been laid open, he fell with his banner. And when Duke Escant saw the banner falling down, he was sure that they had been routed. Then in a loud voice he yelled his battlecry and gathered his men about him, and he quickly fell upon the Saxons. When the Saxons saw that their banner had fallen and that their enemies were coming against them so fast, they did not dare stand against them, but yielded the field and turned in flight, leaving all of their equipment. They did not wait for one another, but fled over the flatlands disheartened and defeated. And the uproar rose so loud and the [370] dust so high that it was a wonder to hear and see. And the Christians ran after them and slaughtered so many it was astonishing. But Sir Gawainet was ahead of all those giving chase, for he was riding Gringalet and none could run with him, and Sir Gawainet killed so many Saxons in that pursuit that he was dripping with blood, as though he had been dragged through a river of blood, and his horse was too. King Lot turned back, and so did all the others except Sir Gawainet and Eliezer, his squire, and this is why no one knew a word about what had become of them. But they had run after the Saxons until, with their sheer strength, they drove them into the ford of the Severn River, and there they cut down so many that the water ran red. And when they saw that those who were left had gone across to the other side, they turned back and rode at a slow gait.‘Duke Escant had stopped at the booty, which he had his men take back. And Sir Gawainet went by him and said nothing to him, but when King Lot saw him coming, he was wondrously glad to see him. He asked him how he had fought. He answered, “Badly,” since some had got away and he was coming back a coward for not daring to cross the ford the enemy had gone through. But King Lot said that that would not have been easy for a man to do by himself. The duke of Cambenic heard what Sir Gawainet had said, and he told him that he had fought very boldly, for he and his companions had brought the battle to an end. But Sir Gawainet went right away and did not say a word to him. Yet, it was plain to see from his armor that he had not been sitting down all day, so King Lot asked him where he had 4The text has the singular le for les (369, 1. 29): “him” for “them.” The Story of Merlin left his shield. He said that the Saxons had cut it all to bits, and he needed to look for another one; and the duke said that he would have a good, strong one given to him, and he answered, “Many thanks, sir.” Then the duke went over to King Lot, because he had called him “my son” during the battle, and he entreated him most kindly to tell him his name. He answered that his name would be hidden from no one, and he would not hide it from him. So he said to him, “You ought to know me well, for we have been through much bad and much good together.” And he told him that he was King Lot of Orkney. and “those four knights,” he went on, “are my sons.” And when the duke heard him, he told him that he was most welcome. “God help me,” he went. on, “for not recognizing you before, and blessed be God for bringing you here. For we would all have been killed and our land laid waste if it hadn’t been for you. And you indeed speak the truth when you say that we have been through much bad and much good together.” And he asked him, “Sir, will you swear by God that these four knights are your sons?” And he said that they truly were. “God help me,” said the duke, “they are very worthy men and good knights, and today they have showed it well indeed!” So the six of them went on talking as far as the city of Cambenic. And they went straight to the high hall and dismounted from their horses. And Eliezer did his utmost to serve Sir Gawainet; he stabled Gringalet and helped Sir Gawainet and King Lot take off their armor. And while they were disarming, they saw Eliezer’s squire coming and the serving boys who had taken the gift to Minoras the Forester. They greeted King Lot on behalf of Minoras, his wife, and all their children. Then Gaheriet looked at Agravain and burst out laughing, and he asked Lidonas how Minoras’s daughters were doing. He answered that they sent them all their greetings, [371] and Gaheriet said that they were right to, “if they knew what my brother Agravain has in mind.” Sir Gawainet and Guerrehet laughed heartily at these words, but Agravain himself flushed and grew hot, although he did not say anything, because he knew that Gaheriet was joking. So they laughed and played unti] the meal was ready, when they sat down and ate and drank as much as they wished to. No one need ask if they were well served, for the duke and all the people there did their utmost. After eating, the duke asked King Lot his children’s names. And the king answered that the eldest was called Gawainet, the second Agravain, the third Guerrehet, and the fourth Gaheriet. “And this handsome young man who is so worthy and gifted and well built in body and limb, who is he?” And King Lot answered that he in no way belonged to him, but he was a king’s son and a most noble man, “and in his high nobility he has come to serve Gawainet in order to learn to bear arms like a knight.” “God help me,” said Duke Escant, “he has the heart of a highborn, well-bred man, and he bears himself like a noble gentleman. God grant him a better life, for he is worthy and bold, and he cannot fail to achieve the greatest prowess if he lives so long.” The Story of Merlin Then the duke asked the king what mission was taking him so fast to Arestel. And the king answered, “You are well aware that the Saxons have overrun this land and have laid it waste and stripped it. For two years they have not stopped plundering our land, so, it seems to me, it would be of great profit to the country and to the whole land if we got together to decide how they can be driven out. You can see that they are four times stronger than we are, so I have called King Clarion of Northumberland and the King of a Hundred Knights for talks at Arestel, and King Arthur himself will be there on the Day of the Feast of Our Lady in September, and you and all the other noble worthies will be there. We will make a truce, and each will swear to assemble as mighty a force as he can, and all will gather on the appointed day, and then together we will go fight the Saxons.” And the duke responded that it was the greatest good that had ever been wrought; it would be good to make peace between King Arthur and the princes of the land, for it would be a hard thing to unseat him, since the people and the clergy had chosen him, “and we could not henceforth wage a war against him. So it would be good,” the duke went on, “if peace were made between you and him.” “In truth, sir,” said the king, “I know of no one who has made peace with him who has not also made peace with me.” “What?” said the duke. “Have you then come to terms with him?” “Yes, without the slightest doubt,” answered King Lot. Then he told him how peace had been made, and he told him all his mistakes, just as they had been, and how his children had forsaken him. And King Lot and the duke talked together until at last the duke swore that he would be at Arestel on the appointed day, and he said that if peace failed to be made it would not be because of him. With that, they went to bed to rest, for they were tired and worn out from the hard fighting they had taken part in. And when morning came, the king got up to hear Mass at daybreak, and his sons and Duke Escant did likewise, and they heard Mass in a church. And when it had been sung, King Lot came to the duke and said to him, [372] “Sir, it would be a good thing if you chose four messengers, one to go to King Yder of Cornwall, the second to King Urien, the third to King Aguisant, and the fourth to King Neutres of Garlot. And they should tell them on your behalf to be in Arestel on the Feast of Our Lady in September. And then send others® to King Tradelmant of North Wales, to his brother King Belinant, to King Caradoc, and to King Brandegorre, and have them tell them to be at the talks at Arestel on the appointed day.” And the duke said that it would be well taken care of. So they sent out the messengers, and they made their ways until they came to the princes, and they gave their messages just as they had been ordered to. And the princes got ready to travel as soon as they heard the order. 5The text reads j. (372, |. 4): “one.” But the plural is clearly intended, as the text substantiates in & lor dient (372, 1. 6): “and have them tell them.” 373 But with that the story falls silent now about all of them, and it goes back to King Lot and his children. Here the story says that as soon as the messengers had left Cambenic to take their messages to the princes, King Lot and his sons set out on their way to Arestel. And Duke Escant rode a long way with them, and he gave to each one a painted shield just as they were used to carrying, weapons, and fresh, new helmets. And after the duke had ridden with them for quite a way, he turned back and got his baggage ready so that he could follow King Lot. And King Lot and his sons kept to the road straight to North Wales, a city that belonged to King Tradelmant. And in the city they found the king, who was happy and pleased that they had come, for he loved King Lot very much. And he asked him where he was headed, and King Lot told him about the whole undertaking. “A messenger coming on behalf of the duke of Cambenic told me the same thing,” said King Tradelmant. “And I’ll be there,” he went on, “God willing, and if God grants me life and health.” And King Lot was filled with great happiness and joy. That day he and his sons were most lavishly served. And the next morning, as soon as it was daylight, they set out on their way and rode until they came to Arestel in Scotland, where they stayed four days before any of the princes came. And they had quite a good life there for as long as they stayed. And they awaited the princes until King Clarion came, and he was the first to get there; he was one of the highest-born men in the world and a good knight. And King Lot was very happy when he came, and he was glad to greet him and Sir Gawainet and his brothers, for he had never seen them. The next morning came the King of the Hundred Knights, because of whom everyone grew more joyful still. And afterwards came King Tradelmant of North Wales, then came his brother King Belinant, then came King Caradoc of Estrangorre, then came King Urien and King Aguisant of Scotland, then came King Yder of Cornwall, then King Neutres of Garlot, and then came King Brandegorre and the Lord of the Narrow Borderland. And when they had all gathered, King Lot began to speak to them, and he said that the next day he would tell them why they had gathered there. It was the eve of Our Lady’s Day in September, and the kings were most glad to see one another; then they rested that night. The next morning the princes gathered along with Sir Gawainet and his three brothers, and after they had come together and sat down on a lush silken cloth that had been spread out on the green grass, [373] Sir Gawainet spoke to them on the orders of his father, King Lot, and he said to them, “Dear lords, we have come here to speak to you on behalf of my lord King Arthur, whose men we are. And my lord the king sends you word and beseeches you to make a truce with him, in faith and by oath, for safe conduct for him and for yourselves until Christmas, so that you may come and go freely where he holds sway and he may do likewise in your lands—and this in order, should it happen to please you, that we may all go together to fight the Saxons, who have overrun this land, until we have driven them out. And should God grant that they are defeated, then make a lasting peace among yourselves, if such can ever be. By Forgiveness is granted to all who will join the battle against the Saxons, and they will be free from all sins just as they were on the day they were born.” When the princes heard the plea that Sir Gawainet brought before them, they asked King Lot straightway what his mind was, and he said that it would be the greatest good that had ever been said or done, “and you can indeed be sure that I do not say this just because I am his sworn liegeman, but rather because whenever you have been against him evil has befallen you. Those people, so it seems to me, would never have invaded this land if we had come to terms beforehand. I tell you, this has happened to us because of our sins.” “What?” said King Urien. “Have you then sworn fealty to him? You have not acted lawfully, and I’ll tell you why. If for any reason we should happen to move against him or he against us after we drove the Saxons out, we would have to fight against you, and that would not be fitting.” “Yes, that is indeed the truth,” said King Lot. “And you may be sure,” he went on, “that whoever wages war against him fights against me.” “By my faith,” said King Urien, “that would not be lawful, for you are our sworn ally, and you could not forsake us.” “Sir,” said King Lot, “I did it against my will and in spite of myself. I’ll tell you for a fact that the day I thought I could harm him the most and hurt him the worst, I swore fealty to him. Gawainet, whom you see here, made me do it all.” And then he told them how it had happened to him, and not one word of it was a lie. And when the other princes heard it, they said that it could not be otherwise, since that is what had been done, and he should not be blamed, and there were some there, and many of the best, who would have given anything to have had that happen to them. And they spoke of many things, until at last they agreed to make the truce, and they swore to keep it on the hand of Sir Gawainet. And he set the day when they should do all within their power to gather on the Plain of Salisbury with as many men as they could find, but they all said openly that after the Saxons had been beaten, King Arthur should beware of them. And Sir Gawainet told them that, when the day came that they might want to harm him, they should agree to have no alliance or wish to do so, for anyone who threatened him might yet have his arms bound and his neck weighted down. When the princes heard Sir Gawainet’s speech, some smiled at it and others wagged their heads. But the King of the Hundred Knights, who was not given to boast or threaten others, said that he would be [374] on the Plain of Salisbury on All Saints’ Day, if God kept him from death, and the others all said the same. And King Lot said that he would not move out until he had brought all of his forces together. Then they all took leave of one another and left at once, and each one went into his own country, and their lands were® absolved by the papal legate. They showed themselves in public and gathered as many men as they ©The text bears the singular: & lor terre fu absause (374, ll. 4— 5): “and their land was absolved.” Sommer suggests la (“the”) for lor (“their”), but the Harley variant supports the adopted reading. The Story of Merlin could, and they sent for their kinsmen and friends, and throughout all Christendom they spread the news about the pardon that would come from it. And those who had gathered their men the most quickly went straight to the Plain of Salisbury, and they took shelter in tents and pavilions, and in that way they waited for the others. And the story says that footsoldiers and crossbowmen came there both from the other side of King Clamadeu’s land and from the land of King Aguigneron, a rich baron from the land of Sorelois, and King Brandegorre came there, and there were great armies from the land of King Lot of Orkney the Great, from the land of King Alan, from the land of Pellinor of Listenois, and from the land of the Duke of the Rocky Crags. So now the story falls silent for a while about them and goes back to speaking about King Arthur and his wife, Queen Guenevere. 46. Merlin Visits Blaise; the Queen’s Knights Battle Knights of the Round Table.’ Now the story says that King Arthur led a most happy life with Queen Guenevere his wife after King Lot and his sons had left them. And King Lot sent word to King Arthur that the truce had been granted, and King Arthur was very happy, as were all the companions of the Round Table, the Queen’s Knights, and the two brother kings. The next morning after the news had come, Sagremor, Galescalain, and Dodinel the Wildman got up very early, put on all their best armor, and went to romp in the forest, which was wide and deep. The evening before, they had decided to go play, and when they had come into the woods, they were delighted, for they heard the birds’ songs, and then they said for the sport of it that they would go looking through the forest and countryside to see if they could find some adventure for which they might be esteemed and loved and praised. Meanwhile, three companions of the Round Table had left King Arthur’s court, and they had taken armor that was not theirs, for they did not wish to be recognized, for they yearned to find any of the Queen’s Knights to test themselves against them. One of these three knights was Agravadain, the brother of Belias, the Red Knight of Estremores who afterwards often waged war against King Arthur; the second was Moneval and the third Minoras the Wicked. All of them were good knights, and all of their armor was of the best. And when they were in the open fields, they let their horses run against one another without hitting. Then Minoras said to his companions, “Let’s go wander through this forest to see if we can find adventure.” And his companions agreed and said that, some time before, they had heard it said that the forest was full of adventure, so at once they set out for the Forest of the Thornbush, for it offered greater adventure than all the others. They all three went straight into the forest and rode until they found three roadways that split them up, for each one went off by himself [375] as adventure led him. 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 374-3853, The Story of Merlin So the story falls silent for a while about them and speaks awhile about Merlin. Here the story says that at the time when Merlin left King Arthur at Carhaix in Carmelide, he went straight to Northumberland, to Blaise his master, who greeted him most joyfully when he saw him, for it had been a long time since he had seen him, and furthermore, he greatly loved to be with him. After Merlin had been there for a very long while, he told him how King Arthur had wed his wife, how she was to have been stolen from him, how Ulfin and Bretel had rescued her, how the false Guenevere and Bertelay, who killed the knight, had been banished, about the tournament the knights fought before Carhaix, how King Arthur had sent Sir Gawainet his cousin to Logres to call his court together, how King Lot tried to steal his wife from him, how Sir Gawainet came to help her and took his father and held him, how the knights tourneyed with one another and the wonders that Sir Gawainet did there, how King Ban advised King Arthur not to allow the companions to tilt together any longer, the advice to send messengers to the princes and what happened to King Lot and his sons along their way, how the princes had gathered at Arestel, and how the truce was made in order to fight the Saxons. And Blaise put it all down in writing in his book and left nothing out, and this is how we still know about it. And then Blaise asked him if there could be enough men to fight against the Saxons, and Merlin said not before the ones from Little Brittany had come or those from the kingdom of Logres and from Lambal, which had belonged to King Amant and which Gosengos had under his sway: “And as soon as I leave here I'll go get the men of King Ban and King Bors in the two kingdoms, and I'll take them there. And you should know,” he went on, “that people will come there from many lands to save their souls and to defend Holy Christendom. And there is not the slightest doubt that we greatly need Our Lord to help us in this fight, for never has there been such a battle as there will be, and the Saxons cannot be driven from this land before the princes have all made peace with King Arthur.” And Blaise told him that it seemed certain to him that King Arthur loved a lady, and the prophecy that had been foretold of her was about to be fulfilled. And so he entreated him most kindly and said: “Merlin, dear friend, I beg you for God’s sake to tell me who is to father the Lion of the Two Messengers and when that will be.” And Merlin told him that the time was very near when that would happen. Blaise said that it would be a very great shame, “and if I knew the place, I would gladly do my utmost to get him away from there.” Merlin said to him, “Write down for me what I tell you, and then you’ll know how much help you can bring.” And he wrote it down, and this is what the story was: “This is the beginning. It is the story of the adventures in the country whereby the wondrous Lion, whom the son of a king and queen will hold, was taken prisoner. He must be chaste and the best knight in the world.” [376] And the things that Blaise wrote down Merlin scattered along the roads where the others were, and these things could not be brought about except by the ones who would fulfill them, and this is why the knights were all the more EYE) willing to ride out. And this was the only way the Great Lion would ever be destroyed. Blaise said, “What? Can’t I do anything else to help?” And Merlin said no. “Will I live long enough to know about it?” asked Blaise. And Merlin answered, “Dear friend, don’t worry. Yes, and you'll see many other wonders after that one.” Then Merlin had Blaise write down such things as he © told him, and he took them where he wanted, then he went to Little Brittany. But before that, he most tenderly commended Blaise to God. When he took leave, it was no later in the day than the hour of prime, and he came to Little Brittany on the hour of nones. And there he found the Lord of Payerne and Pharian, who greeted him very joyfully, and they took him in with them most courteously and had a good time for four full days. And when the fifth day came, they asked Merlin why he had come, “for we are certain that it was not for nothing.” And he told them that they had to cross the sea with as many men from the land as they could engage by oath.” “Sir,” said Leonce, “what place shall we go to?” And Merlin answered, “To La Rochelle-in-theTidewater.? And from there to the Plain of Salisbury, where you will find men of many languages who'll have come for the same undertaking as you. And you will encamp to one side with your men, and do not move until you see me back there. Take care to make a white banner with a red cross and nothing more, and all the princes who come there will have the same. None of them will know a word about why they'll have done this, and yet it will have a great meaning.” And Leonce and Pharian said that it would be done as he said. “Now take care to take the most men you can with you,” said Merlin, “for you should know that there will be a great many against us.” “And who'll keep this land?” asked Leonce. “Don’t worry about that,” answered Merlin. “Leave behind here Lambegue, Pharian’s nephew, and Banin, son of Gratian of Trebe, and the Lord of the High Wall.4 You lead the armies of your two kingdoms and Gratian will lead the army of Orkney. The seneschal Alelme of Benoic will be with you, and Pharian and Dionas will lead the men from Gaul, but you must be careful not to give up leading the ones whom you'll have engaged to serve you.” And Leonce said that it would all be done just as he had said. With that, Merlin commended them to God and entreated them to go quickly, for they could not linger. 2The verb is arembre (376, 1. 16), which Sommer apparently finds baffling (cf. n. 1). Perhaps it is to be connected with aramir. “to commit by oath, to swear an oath,” etc. 3sommer’s text reads a la roche flodemer (376, |. 17), to which he compares the lesson in the Harley manuscript, which is adopted: a la rochelle au flot de mer (n. 2), the version approved by West (263, under “Roche Flodemer, la”). Elsewhere La Rochelle is taken to be a port in Brittany used for communication with Great Britain (256, ll. 13, 38; 281, 1. 22). 4The variant here is de la haute more (376, |. 28): “of the High Heath.” 376 “And I am leaving,” he said. “Sir,” said Leonce, “Go then, for I would not beseech you to stay, for you know better than I what is needed.” Then Merlin went away, and he came to Viviane, his lady love, who greeted him most joyfully when she saw him. And his love for her grew and became stronger, so that he found it hard to leave her, so he taught her a great deal of what he knew. But then he did go away to the kingdom of Lambal, which had been the land of King Amant, whose head King Bors cut off. And he told Gosengos not to fail for any reason to be, along with all his men, on the Plain of Salisbury at the Feast of [377] All Saints, and he said that he would be there without fail. Afterwards, Merlin went straight to the kingdom of Carmelide and delivered his message on behalf of King Arthur to the barons of the land, and they said that they would go very gladly; and they mustered some twenty thousand men who were bold® and skilled at fighting. And Leonce, Pharian, Gratian, and Dyonas fulfilled their mission so well that they gathered in little time forty thousand men in the flatlands below Gaunes, and when it was time to move out, the companions took to the road and made their way over land and sea until they came to the Plain of Salisbury. And when they had all got there, they found the twelve princes who had already come with as many men as they could gather, and each one had his army about him. And Nabunal, who had been King Amant’s seneschal, called his men together, and he entreated King Amant’s sons to go with him, and they did so. They were most handsome young squires. And one of them had been in love with Queen Guenevere and would gladly have taken her as his wife if he had been a knight, but the fact that there had been warfare between their two fathers took her away from him. Queen Guenevere had always wanted him more than any other for as long as she was a maiden; they still very much longed to see each other, and they sent each other love messages. When the youth came to Nabunal, who guarded the kingdom, he told him how King Arthur wanted to fight the Saxons. “And he sends me word,” Nabunal went on, “to bring him all who can bear arms, big or small, and I would very much like to know whether you would be willing to come. And he answered that he would indeed go. Nabunal was very happy about that and told him that he would come there with as many men as he could find, and he gathered them until he had twenty thousand. And they took to the road and made their way until they came to the Plain of Salisbury. And Merlin came to King Bademagu as soon as he had left Nabunal, and he told him to send to the army as many men as he could, and King Bademagu sent word and called his men together, and he had at least twenty thousand. And they took to the road and made their way until the came to the Plain of Salisbury. 5Sommer inserts [boin] before uassal (377, |. 4), turning the adjective “courageous, bold” into the nominal expression “good vassals.” The Story of Merlin With that, Merlin went away, taking leave of King Bademagu, and came straight to Logres the very same day that the six knights went riding in the Forest of Adventures® to seek adventures. When Merlin came to court, he found King Ban, King Bors, King Arthur, and the queen leaning out the windows of the great hall. They were watching the meadowlands and the three knights who had set out into the forest; these were the companions of the Round Table about whom the story has spoken before, but the barons did not know anything about them until Merlin happened upon them. And as soon as they saw him, they came straight to him and greeted him most joyfully. And after they had celebrated for a time, they sat down and spoke together of many things. Then Merlin came to King Arthur and told him to send for as many men as he had the power to summon, for there was no time to waste, and he should know for a fact that King Lot had fared very well, for people from various foreign parts were riding and coming together on foot from different countries to gather on the Plain of Salisbury. He asked what people were coming, and Merlin answered that King Lot was riding there as fast as he could. [378] “You would be well advised,” Merlin went on, “to accept the truce. And do you know what people are coming on your behalf? You have the men of King Ban of Benoic and those of King Bors of Gaunes, and they are a good forty thousand strong.” And when King Ban and King Bors heard that, they sprang to their feet and asked how that could be. Merlin answered at once that he had taken the message to them, “and they believed me, for which I am thankful.” And the two brothers said that he had done very well indeed and that nothing could have made them happier. Then Merlin resumed what he had been telling the king: “Sir,” he said to King Arthur, “do you know who is coming this way? Nabunal of Tharmandaise’ is coming from the kingdom of King Amant, whom King Bors, who is here, killed in battle, and a young man who is his son and not yet a knight. And all the might of Carmelide is coming, and it is led by Cleodalis the Seneschal, but King Leodagan is not coming. I have achieved all this for you, so I should have my reward for it.” And the king said to him, “Merlin, I don’t know what to offer you, but I make you lord of myself and my land, which I hold because of you.” “Sir,” said Merlin, “when I happened in on you, what were you looking at so keenly over in the meadowlands?” “We were watching three knights whom we had seen go into that forest.” “Don’t you know who they are?” asked Merlin. “No,” said the king. “You should know for a fact that they are knights of the Round Table who are very worthy and bold, but they are unwise, thoughtless, and envious, and I tell you truly that SHere the text reads forest auentureuse (377, ll. 30-31). Earlier it is called la forest de lespine (374, 1. 38): “the Forest of the Thornbush,” which was characterized as auentureuse (Il. 38-39). 7Here camadaise (378, ll. 9-10), but the reference is clearly to the character identified earlier as being from Tharmandaise. The Story of Merlin they have never needed help as badly as they will before they come back, and it will all be because of their madness.” “Merlin,” said the king, “tell me who they are, if you will.” And Merlin said to him, “Sir, one is Agravadain of the Vales of Galore, the second Moneval, and the third Minoras the Wicked.® And I tell you that they won't have gone far before they find three of the Queen’s Knights, with whom they will fight. Please send someone after them, if you believe me, for there is no one to break up the fight. Men will be killed, and it will be a great shame.” “Ah, God!” said the king. “And who will go keep them apart?” “Sir,” said the queen, “Sir Wain, Kay the Seneschal, and Girflet.” “Sir,” said Merlin, “the queen has spoken very well. Send them out right away.” He did so. And Merlin told them where they would find them. But they did not come in time to keep blows from being dealt. But now the story falls silent for a while about them, and we will tell you about the six knights and how they fared. Here the story says that the three Queen’s Knights made their way through the forest until they found a most beautiful heath, where they dismounted and rested. And Galescalain said tc his companions, “Would to God that Sir Gawainet and his brothers had come here; if they were here, we would go see the Saxons.” And Dodinel the Wildman said that it would be a bad thing to go there because they would not find shelter in the forest, and their horses would starve to death. While they were talking, the companions of the Round Table came upon them. Their arms were disguised, for they wanted very much to be pursued by Queen Guenevere’s knights. And Sagremor asked his companions whether they knew who the others were, [379] and they said they did not. And they drew nearer all the while. Then Agravadain said to his companions, “I see over there three companions who would make me very sorry if they took their horses with them when they left.” “Yes, indeed,” said Moneval. “There are only three of them, the same as we are.” While they were talking, the other three knights tied on their helmets, which they had taken off their heads to get some air. And they got on their horses, and they wanted to ride away to show that they meant no harm, since no one had asked anything of them. And when the companions of the Round Table saw them going, they shouted to them in loud voices, “You must joust or you will hand your horses over to us and then be free to go.” And when Sagremor heard them, he turned his horse’s head and said, “What? Are you then robbers who make your living this way? You should know for a fact that when you go home tonight, you will have little to eat from the winnings you take from us, for we challenge you.” 8Sommer’s manuscript reads sienandes laigre (378, |. 24 and n. 4): “Sienandes the Rough” (in his text Sommer corrected laigre to lengres); but elsewhere he is named minoras (374, 1. 35) and minoras E engres (374, |. 33). 377 Just then the companions of the Round Table kicked their horses with their spurs so hard that their blood spattered down their sides, and they put their lances under their arms and their shields before their chests. And when Sagremor and his companions saw them, they did likewise and rode out to meet them. As it happened, Sagremor and Agravadain hit each other on their shields with their lances so hard that they drove right through, and their hauberks split, and the links broke on their left sides. And Agravadain felt the iron of Sagremor’s lance so deep in him that his blood gushed out in a great stream, and he broke his lance on Sagremor’s hauberk. Sagremor had much heart and strength, and he thrust him so hard that he bore him and his horse to the ground in a heap. But Agravadain, who was quite skilled, nimble, and full of great boldness, sprang to his feet very fast, and he drew his sword from its scabbard and got ready to defend himself. And after Sagremor had made his pass, he came back a little way, jumped down, and tied his horse to his lance, but Agravadain’s horse had fled into the woods at a gallop. And Sagremor put his shield on his arm, drew his sword out of its scabbard, and ran in great strides toward Agravadain, who was coming at him very strongly, and they dealt each other powerful, measured blows on their helmets wherever they could reach. And the battering lasted for quite a long while, when Sagremor said to him, “Sir knight, you are dead if you do not surrender alive.” And Agravadain answered that he had not yet come to that. Sagremor told him that he would, a great deal sooner than he thought. Agravadain said that he was not very frightened of him, and he asked him whether he was good at making threats. And Sagremor told him that it had been a threat made to a fool, “and this is why, even today, the proverb says that the fool is not afraid until he is slapped,® and this is just what has happened to you.” Then he ran upon him and they fought for a very long time, but Agravadain had the worst of it in the battle, for he was wounded dreadfully. Elsewhere, Galescalain and Minoras came back, spurring toward each other, holding out their lances under their arms. As it happened, Minoras broke his lance on [380] Galescalain’s shield, while Galescalain struck him with such strength under the bottom of his shield that he drove his lance through his thigh, so that the tip could be seen out the other side of his horse’s flank, and both of them fell to the ground. Minoras’s horse flew into them with all four hooves and dashed away, but Galescalain was quick to get to his feet, and Minoras got up as well. They drew their swords from their scabbards, and the two of them started to fight and dealt each other hard, dreadful blows with all their might. Elsewhere, Dodinel and Moneval let their horses run at each other, and they struck each other so hard with their 9Agravadain’s question is manechieres est il moult boins (379, Il. 34-35): “Is he a good threatener?” It is an implied reference to the idea in the proverb Tel menace qui a grant poor (Morawski, 2363): ‘The one who threatens is very much afraid.” Sagremor replies with another proverb, fols ne crient deuant quil prent la colee (379, Il. 36-37): “The fool is not afraid until he takes the slap.” The latter is recorded by Morawski (788) as Fous ne crient devant qu'il prent. 378 sharp-tipped lances that their shields were driven through and splintered and the lance’s tips stopped against their hauberks, but in such a way that the mail was not broken, for they were wondrously strong and tough, and there was no way to keep both of their lances from breaking. But as they passed by each other, Dodinel thrust against him with his body and his shield so hard that he knocked him sprawling to the ground; but Moneval was quickly back on his feet, for he was swift and nimble. And when Dodinel had finished his pass and come back with his sword drawn, he saw that he was all ready to defend himself: he then drew his sword and thrust his shield over his head, and the hard fighting began. That is how the six knights fought very hard from the hour of prime until after midday, and the Queen’s Knights began to take ground from the knights of the Round Table, and the Queen’s Knights could do with them as they wished. And when they saw that the knights of the Round Table were flagging, they shouted to them, “Surrender!” But they answered that they would rather die. And when the Queen’s Knights heard this—for they could not get another word out of them—and when Sagremor saw that they would not yield, they ran upon them very swiftly. Sagremor!® struck Agravadain on his helmet so hard that he split it in two as well as his coif, and he drove his sword into his scalp and wounded him dreadfully. And he was so dazed that he flew sprawling to the ground, but he did not stay there for long; he sprang to his feet, for he was very much afraid of taking another blow, and he covered his head as best he could. And Dodinel dealt Moneval a blow with his sword and hit him so hard on the arn holding his shield that the shield fell to the ground. And Galescalain struck Minoras on his helmet and knocked him to the ground head over heels so ruthlessly that blood spurted from his nose and mouth, and as he staggered to get back up Galescalain hit him with the hilt of his sword and sent him sprawling. Then he jumped at once onto his body and tore his coif from his head, and he threatened to cut his head off if he did not admit that he was beaten; but he said that he would not do it, and Galescalain answered that he would die without redemption. While they were thus going on, there came Sir Yain, Kay the Seneschal, and Girflet son of Doon, whom’ King Arthur had sent, but they had taken too much time. For Sagremor had so beaten Agravadain that he was all bathed in blood and was in great agony, and he staggered back and forth from one place to another. And Sagremor set out after him at once, for he wanted to land a sound blow. And Dodinel had so thrashed his man that he no longer had a shield about his neck or a helmet on his head, and it was all he could do to keep from dying. And Galescalain had drubbed Minoras so badly that he was holding him to the ground by his visor with one hand and had his sword raised in the other, [381] and Minoras would not have lasted for 10Sommer’s text, apparently somewhat garbled, reads Et quant il oent ce & que autre cose nen trairont si lor courent sus. & quant saigremor voit ce quil ne se uoelent rendre st lor courent sus mout uistement ©& feri (380, ll. 21-23): “And when they hear this and that they will not drag anything else out of them, they run upon them. And when Sagremor sees that they do not want to surrender, they run upon them, and he struck. ...” The Story of Merlin long, and all three of them would have met their end, had Sir Wain not come there riding very fast. And he shouted in a loud voice, “Enough, enough! I am coming to stand as their pledge. Please hand them over to me and those two other gentlemen who have come here, for we will guarantee whatever you ask of them.” And Sagremor turned toward them, looked at them, and knew at once who they were, so he answered Sir Yain: ‘Very gladly, sir, and I would do more for you than this amounts to.” Galescalain and Dodinel said the same thing, and they handed them over at once. And they rode over to the Queen’s Knights, got down from their horses, and began to rebuke them quite harshly for having begun such foolishness. And Sagremor answered straightway, “What, Sir Yain? Did we do such wrong when we saved our horses from these three ruffians who meant to take them away from us? In God’s name, we would have suffered worse shame if they had taken them by force without our defending them, and we would never again have had honor wherever we might have gone. Anyone who does not defend what is his own would badly defend what belongs to his companion.” “Ah, sir,” said Sir Yvain. “They did not do it out of wickedness, for they meant it only as a game.” “A game?” said Galescalain. “And so did we.” And Sagremor began to smile behind his helmet, for he recognized from what Sir Yvain was saying that they were companions of the Round Table. And Dodinel said, “Blessed be the game and the man who began it, for that way we can learn!” “Leave these matters where they are,” said Sir Yain, “and let’s get on our horses and go back, for there is no man so strong and mighty that he won’t be fighting soon.” With that, the knights mounted, but three of them were very sad and downcast. Then Sagremor asked Sir Yvain who those three were. “What?” said Sir Yain. “Don’t you know them? Then there could have been greater harm. You ought to know,” he went on, “that the one you were fighting against is Agravadain of the Vales of Galore, a companion of the Round Table.” But Sagremor answered that he did not know him, but since things had happened as they did, “I can’t do anything about it.” “Now let it lie,” said Kay the Seneschal. “For the knights of the Round Table will go out one more time to avenge Forré!”!! Then they all began to laugh, except for the three who were wounded, but doubtless they did not feel like laughing, for they were ashamed and downcast from what had happened to them. So they took to the road and rode together two by two until they came to the court at Logres. The three knights of the Round Table went to their lodgings to take off their armor, for all they needed was rest. And the other six went to court, and they found the three kings and the queen, lWest notes (119b) that the expression was proverbial in Old French for making an empty boast. Forré is a pagan king mentioned in chansons de geste. The Story of Merlin who were still at the windows of the great hall, and Merlin along with them, and they spoke of many things because they had not seen him for a long time. Then the six knights went to take off their armor in a room, and when they had done so, Sir Ywain came to the king. And as soon as the queen had seen him, she said, “Sir, tell us your news.” “Lady,” said Sir Yain, “there is a great deal to say about it.” Then he began to tell them how he had found the six knights fighting. And the king asked him which ones had the worst of it, and he told them [382] about their ride back and the joking, and they laughed a great deal; but soon they stopped talking about it, because the king was upset. And Merlin came forward and said to them, “Do you know why there is strife between the knights of the Round Table and the Queen’s Knights?” “Not at all,” answered the king. “You should know,” said Merlin, “that their jealousy has done that, and they want to test their prowess against one another.” And they asked Merlin which one could be the best knight among the Queen’s Knights. (King Arthur had said that they belonged to the queen, for the Round Table was mainly his business.) Then King Ban said that he could indeed name the best, for it was Sir Gawainet, and the others said that he was right. And the king said that he would make him one of the companions of the Round Table just as soon as he came back, but Merlin said that it would not be before the Saxons had been driven from the country. So they stopped talking about it and went to eat. And as soon as they had eaten, the king chose his messengers and sent them throughout his land, and he called for all who were his men and could bear arms to come as if their lives depended upon it, and meet him in the Plain of Salisbury; they should not waste time or lag behind, but take to the road and hurry there. Just as you have heard, King Arthur sent his messengers throughout his land, and as soon as they had left, King Arthur took King Ban, his brother King Bors, and Merlin aside, and said to them, “Let us go see our companions who are ill.” And they went to see them, along with many other knights. And when they heard that the king was coming, they wanted to get up to greet him, but the king did not let them. And he rebuked them harshly for the foolishness all three of them had done, but they answered that they could not resist it, and they did not know where the urge came from. Then the king gave them physicians to tend to their wounds, and one of the physicians told the king not to worry, for within a week’s time he would bring them back to health, so that they could surely ride and bear arms. Then the king commended them to God and told them to follow him to the Plain of Salisbury as soon as they were healed, “for I am going there,” he went on, “and there will be a great gathering of men.” With that, the king left them and commended them to God, and they went straight to the hall and found many knights who wanted to hold a tournament with the Queen’s Knights, because Sir Gawainet was not there and they wished to avenge their companions. But the queen forbade them to and said that it would do them no good to speak of 379 it, for never would they tilt against one another. “And I entreat you by the faith you owe to my husband the king and to me never to speak of it.” And they said that they would not ever speak of it, since that was her wish. And when the hour of vespers came, King Arthur told everyone who would bear arms to get ready to go on foot and on horseback, for he wanted to ride out early the next morning for the Plain of Salisbury, where the common folk were to gather. And as soon as the king had given his order, they went to work and made ready as best they could. And then there was such noise and such an uproar in the town that it could be heard half a league away. In the morning King Arthur set out with [383] King Ban, King Bors, the queen, and all who had come and gathered there, and they rode five whole days before they came to the Plain of Salisbury, for they did it in short stages. And after they had come there and encamped beneath the laurel trees, Kay the Seneschal brought out the great ensign with the red cross against a field that was whiter than snow, with the dragon under the cross, just as Merlin had ordered it. And when King Arthur was encamped, he was most glad and began to celebrate, and so did all who were with him. And there he awaited the princes and men who were coming from all parts. Renown, who runs and flies everywhere, went out through the countryside until the Saxons at the siege of Clarence found out from the spies they had scattered about the country that men from all over the land were gathering in the Plain of Salisbury, but they did not know where they would be riding to get there. And Hargadabran sent for his nineteen kings, and they came to him. He told them that their spies had reported that the Christians had called for a gathering in the Plain of Salisbury, and he asked them what advice they had to give him. And they answered that the best thing would be to set up watches, so that they would not be surprised in their sleep, for in daylight they did not have to worry about any men in the land: “There are too many of us, and they could not hold out against us, but just the same, we advise our men to stay at the ready, and they should not go out foraging with fewer than thirty thousand men-at-arms with them, lest they meet someone who might harm them. But, as you well know, this land is not so big and wide that they have even a fourth of our strength.” In the end, they agreed that it behooved them to meet their enemy if they had to, so they parted company, and the nineteen kings went back to their lands to get ready. They ordered everyone under their sway, wherever they might be, to be armed and on the lookout at all times. And they sent word of this to the siege of Vambieres, which they made their men lift, and they all came back to the siege of Clarence. Their gathering was huge and fearsome, and their army stretched out from where the siege of the city was being mounted for five full leagues, and the encampments were spread out on all sides. But now the story falls silent here from speaking about the Saxons and goes back to speaking about how the princes came to the Plain of Salisbury, one after the other. 380 47. Eliezer Knighted by Gawain; Further Battles Against the Saxons.’ Here the story says that, after the talks, the princes hurried to come to the Plain of Salisbury by the day that had been set, and they were equipped as befitted the wealthy, powerful men they were. The very first man and prince who came there was Duke Escant of Cambenic, and he had with him seven thousand men-at-arms who were lavishly equipped with all kinds of armor; they encamped in rich tents and pavilions squeezed tightly against one another. After him came King Tradelmant of North Wales with twelve thousand men wearing white hauberks with finelylinked mail, green helmets studded with gems, and strong, sturdy shields, and they encamped next to the Duke of Cambenic. [384] After him came the King of the Hundred Knights with ten thousand men in good armor and riding good horses, and they set up their encampment. Afterwards came King Clarion of Northumberland, who was a most handsome knight, worthy and smart, and he had eight thousand well-equipped men with him, and he led them beneath a banner white as snow with a red cross—such a banner everyone who came there had. After him came King Belinant, who was King Tradelmant’s brother, with ten thousand men wearing iron armor, and he was most eager to see Dodinel the Wildman, his son whom he loved as much as any man’s heart could love another, and he encamped behind King Clarion. After him came King Caradoc of Estrangorre, who was a companion of the Round Table from the time it was founded, but he never wanted to sit at the Round Table after the strife had broken out between the princes and King Arthur; he brought ten thousand men, and when he had come to the Plain of Salisbury, he encamped next to King Belinant, who was a most worthy gentleman. And King Arthur had not yet come, but there was no more room left to encamp. After King Caradoc came King Brandegorre, whose holdings bordered on the land of Estrangorre, and he had with him ten thousand men wearing iron armor, and he encamped beside King Caradoc; he longed to see one of his wife’s nephews who was in King Arthur’s household, because he had heard much praise of his handsome looks and his worthiness, and his name was Sagremor of Constantinople. After King Brandegorre came Minoras, the seneschal of King Lac of Great India (whom King Lac had sent solely for love of Our Lord in order to have the pardon the bishop had granted), and he brought seven thousand mean wearing armor and riding good, worthy horses. After him came the seneschal of King Pellinor of the Land Laid Waste; he brought seven thousand men-at-arms whom King Pellinor sent for love of Jesus Christ. Afterwards came the seneschal of King Alan of the Land Beyond, who was King Pellinor’s brother. Afterwards came Galehaut, son of the Fair Giantess, who was lord of the Distant Isles, and he brought with him ten thousand worthy and brave men-atarms, and he came purely for love of Jesus Christ. After him came Anguingeron, a wonderful knight, and he was seneschal of King Clamadeus of the Isles; he brought with 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 383-393. The Story of Merlin him six thousand knights, and he encamped next to Galehaut. Afterwards came King Cleolas, who was later called the King First Conquered, with seven thousand men riding very costly horses; he encamped next to Anguingeron, but he did not stay long, for he fell ill and returned home, and he entrusted his men to Guionce the Seneschal, who was a most worthy man and a good knight. Afterwards came Duke Belias of Doves, who came there for love of God; he brought seven thousand men and encamped next to Guionce. Afterwards came the seneschal of Sorelois, solely for love of God, with six thousand men wearing armor, and his name was [385] Margondes; the king of Sorelois sent him there, and he encamped next to Duke Belias. And then came King Arthur, who encamped among the others. And Merlin came to him and said to him in private, “Sir, now see what Our Lord has done to safeguard you and your people! You ought to praise God to the heavens for this and heartily thank Him for bringing you such help in your time of need.” “Merlin,” said the king, “you should know in truth that Our Lord does not forget His sinner, nor has He shown me up to now that He meant to forget me. And in His mercy He will yet do greater things for me than He has done, for I have great trust in Him, and I have such faith in Him and believe in Him so completely that I put myself utterly in His mercy and under His command, and I pray Him to watch over me in His holy pity and in His endless mercy.” “The trusting belief you have in Our Lord,” said Merlin, strengthens you, has strengthened you, and will yet strengthen you—have no fears about that. And I advise you never to slacken in that resolve. For as long as you are steadfast in Our Lord and believe in Him, you will have victory over the enemies of Our Lord.” “Merlin,” said the king, “may God never let me stray from His trust, but keep it so that at the end I may yield my soul to Him.” “May it be, sir, as you would have it,” said Merlin. “But now you must look to what you can do to bring to bear the great nobility gathered here in defending Holy Church and driving the wicked people out of your land.” “Merlin,” said King Arthur, “I will strive to do what you advise in everything, for without you I could undertake nothing. So I put myself in God’s hands and in yours.” “Sir,” said Merlin, “if you would like joyfully to greet the nobility gathered here to defend Holy Church and to do them honor, please go to their tents to see each one by himself, and thank them for the help that they have brought you, even those who hold no land from you and are not your liegemen. For the king has not yet been born who ever brought together such a fair company with so many worthy gentlemen and good knights, nor will there ever be such in this place until the day when the son slays the father and the father the son—that will be in this same place, and on that day the land of Great Britain will be left without its lords and without an heir.” When King Arthur heard Merlin’s words, he begged him and entreated him most kindly to tell him more plainly 24 reference, obviously, to the deaths of Arthur and Mordred at each other’s hand; see the end of the Death of Arthur. The Story of Merlin a part of these things. But Merlin said to him that it was not up to him to tell him, “but I will tell you this much: that after this day will come the uncrowned lion, and he will bring with him three lions, of whom two will be crowned. And these three will devour the wicked lineage of Logres. Don’t ask any more of me,” Merlin went on, “but let us go to the barons just as I told you.” “Very gladly,” said the king. With that, King Arthur got on his horse and took with him King Ban of Benoic, King Bors his brother, Sagremor of Constantinople, Kay the Seneschal, Wain the Tall, son of King Urien, Guerrehet, Gaheriet, and Merlin; and these nine went straight to the barons in their tents. And when they learned that the king was coming, they went outside their tents to meet him. And King Arthur and his companions got down from their horses and the king greeted them all, for he was very well spoken, [386] and he thanked them for having come to help him in his need against the Saxons, “who through their pride and wickedness have stripped my land and despoiled it, and they mean to destroy Holy Christendom.” “Sir,” said the barons, “God willing, they’ll not have the forces or the strength, for we have gathered here to defend Holy Church and to help you, and we are willing to put our very lives in jeopardy to uphold our holy religion, and, before we leave you, we will strive, if it please God, until Holy Church has the victory and the Saxons are shamed and hurt. And we want you to know that we are not your liegemen and we have never held anything from you, but we have come solely for love of Jesus Christ and to defend Holy Church and defeat the Saxons.” “May God show you His thanks,” said King Arthur, “in whose honor you do it, and may He grant that you go back to your lands safe and sound, which He truly has the might to do.” “May it be as you say,” said the barons, “and as you would have it.” “In very truth,” said Merlin. So the story falls silent right here about King Arthur, Merlin, and the barons from far away who came to lend help, and we will tell you about the twelve princes who had come together to King Lot’s tent. In this part the story says that when the twelve princes had all come to the Plains of Salisbury, all twelve of them went to thank the foreign princes who had come to defend the land from the unbelievers for love of Jesus. And after they had done that, they gathered at King Lot’s tent and sat down on a bed that was covered with a green silk cloth, and they talked for a long time about many things. And while they were sitting thus, Merlin came inside, and when they saw him coming, they jumped up to greet him, and they told him that he was most welcome. And he answered with the wish that God might grant them a happy outcome to their ventures and have them do what they needed for their souls’ salvation and their bodies’ well being, so that through them Holy Christendom might be upheld and safeguarded from the hands of their enemies who by force had overrun her. “It would never be we who failed,” said the barons, “for we have come here to defend Holy Church.” 381 “By my faith,” said Merlin, “the harm they have done is very great, but it so happens that, friends and strangers, you have gathered here for a single quarrel, and it is right and reasonable that you might bring a great war to an end, but only if you are of one mind and one will, for otherwise you could not succeed. And it would be a good thing if you made peace with my lord King Arthur, who ought to be your overlord, and you would be all the more feared for it.” At those words King Lot of Orkney sprang up and said, “My lords, in truth Merlin has spoken very well, for it would turn out to be for the greater honor of God and the world at this time, and I have never believed that any one of you could achieve such honor as this would be if you did not reconcile with King Arthur straightway.” King Urien was greatly upset by this speech, and he sprang to his feet filled with dreadful wrath, and he said to the king, sweating with spitefulness, “What the devil is this? Didn’t you have us come here under a truce [387] until we have destroyed the Saxons and driven them out of the land? And only then, if it was our pleasure and an honorable thing for us, would we do what our hearts might incline us to do. And now you want to talk about something else and put us on other paths! Now I ask you and beg you not to speak about it any more. As for me, I will do nothing about it. I don’t know what the others will do, but if they did otherwise, I would say that they had forsworn themselves against me.” “In God’s name,” said King Neutres, “I would take a false oath, for I would never make peace unless you ordered me to.” And the others said the same thing. Then King Lot grew very angry, but it was best for him to take it in silence, so he kept his mouth shut and did not talk any more about it at that time. And Merlin began to smile and said to them, “Dear lords, do not get upset, for anger would not be a good thing right now.” While they were listening to these words, King Arthur, King Ban, King Bors, and the foreign princes with them came in and found the twelve princes in King Lot’s tent. And as soon as King Lot saw them, he sprang to his feet and said, “Look! here comes my lord the king!” And when the princes heard that, they stood up to greet him with honor and reverence, because he was a king. And King Arthur, who was most courtly and quite clever, knew very well what to do, and he greeted them before they had all risen and said that such companions were very welcome indeed. And they answered all together with the wish that God might grant him and all who were with him a good outcome to their ventures. Then they took hold of him on every side and had him sit down on King Lot’s bed, and he had them all sit down, for he was the most courtly man in the world and the best bred. Then he said to them, “Dear lords, you have come here, and I am most grateful to you for it, just as I have asked you, for the benefit of Holy Church and to defend the people and safeguard our lands against the wicked Saxons, who have already set a great part of those lands ablaze and killed and wounded our men. And because you have come here at my bidding, I thank you all together. And it would be good if we got ourselves ready, so that the 382 Saxons could not say among themselves that they found us to be childish or cowardly.” “Sir,” said King Lot, “getting us equipped and ready should be left to Merlin. He’ll give the orders and we’ll do what he says, for he knows better than we what we must do.” And the princes said that they would indeed agree to that, so they put the whole thing on Merlin’s shoulders; with that they had no more to say about it, and King Arthur went back to his tent. The princes, friends and strangers alike, went with him, and then each one went back to his own pavilion. And King Ban, King Bors, Merlin, and Sir Gawainet went straight to King Arthur’s room in his pavilion, and then Merlin said to them in private, “Dear lords, these men who have come here are tired and wom out from traveling, for some of them have come a very long way, and they need to rest and sleep; that is why I want them to rest for the rest of today and tomorrow. And Monday morning, with God’s blessing, we’ll take to the road straight to Clarence, where the Saxons are laying siege. And I'll let all the princes know that they are to get ready to ride out on that day to fall [388] upon their enemies.” The three kings, and Sir Gawainet along with them, agTeed to that plan, and they said that it should be done for the honor of Jesus Christ and His sweet Mother. With that, they left the council and went at once to the chief pavilion. Then Eliezer, Sir Gawainet’s squire and the son of King Pelles, came straight before Sir Gawainet, knelt down, and said, “Sir, I left Listenois and my father, King Pelles, to look for you, and I found you by the grace of Our Lord in a place where, if God had not sent you, I would have had to die. But your great prowess rescued me from the Saxons, who were running me down to slay me. And indeed I know that your great renown that runs throughout the world is truly deserved. It is clear to me, and I know it is true, that no worthier man than you could bestow arms on me, and so I beg you in the name of your nobility to make me a knight by your hand, so that I might test my new knight hood against that faithless people bent on destroying Holy Christendom; I will never be a knight for as long as I live unless I am made a knight by your hand. And you swore an oath to me the first day I ever saw you that you would give me arms when I asked you, and I ask you now before my lord the king, who is here, and before these gentlemen.” When Sir Gawainet saw his squire Eliezer on his knees before him, he raised him up in his arms and said to him most kindly, “Dear friend, I grant you what you ask, for you are indeed worthy of receiving the order of knighthood, and I'll do it just as you wish.” “Many thanks, sir,” said the youth. Then Sir Gawainet looked about and saw his brother Gaheriet behind him, and he said to him, “Dear brother, have armor fitted out for me that befits a king’s son and one as worthy as this one is.” “Who is he, then, dear nephew?” asked King Arthur. “Sir, he is the son of King Pelles of Listenois and nephew of King Pellinor and King Alan. And you can be certain that if he lives long, he will be one of the good knights of the world.” Then he told King Arthur about the great slaughter and the wonders he saw him do against the Saxons. And The Story of Merlin when the king heard this, he was amazed at how a man of his age could bear up under such heavy fighting, and the two kings wondered, too. And King Arthur ordered Gaheriet to have the most handsome armor he could find in his armory trunks brought in “and the best sword there is after my own.” “Sir,” said Eliezer, “I have armor and a horse and everything else I need, for my father, King Pelles, gave me such as he knew would be useful to me.” Then he called Lidonas, his squire, and ordered him to bring his armor, which his father had entrusted to him, and Lidonas did as he was ordered, and was most happy to do so. And he brought it to him before the king and the other barons, who looked at it in wonder, for it was white except for a single diagonal stripe of fine gold on the shield, and the hauberk was of double mail sturdier and stronger than any other, yet so light that a child ten years old could wear it for a whole day without hurting himself; and King Arthur praised it highly, as did the other barons who saw it. And Sir Gawainet armed Eliezer with Gaheriet’s help, and after [389] they had put on his leg armor, they dressed him in his white hauberk, which was so well made that none in the whole army was its equal, then they fastened on his visor, which was white as snow. And when he was thus dressed, Sir Gawainet put on his spurs and fastened his sword at his side. And after he was fully arrayed, Sir Gawainet embraced him,? and he said to him most kindly, as he was the most courtly knight in the world, “Here, dear friend, receive the order of knighthood in the name of Jesus Christ our Savior, and may He grant that you uphold it so as to honor Holy Church and yourself.” “Sir,” said Eliezer, “may Our Lord grant this by His grace and His mercy.” After Sir Gawainet had dubbed Eliezer, son of King Pelles of Listenois, Gaheriet and Guerrehet took him by the hand and led him to King Arthur’s chapel to keep his vigil, and they stayed with him all night until the next morning, when Mass was sung. Then they went back to the tent of King Arthur, who did him a very great honor, for he ate that day at King Arthur’s table with King Ban and King Bors, and they were very well served with great festiveness. And after the meal, they set up a target dummy in a meadowland that was below the Plain of Salisbury, and those nimble young men went out to test themselves, along with the knights-of the Round Table and others, and there many a fair blow was struck that day, and they said that never in their lives had they seen such fair jousting with the lance. The knights of the Round Table would have liked very much to tourney with the foreign knights who had come into the army, but King Arthur was unwilling to allow it, for he was very much afraid that they would wound one another, so they put off the tournament and went back to their tents happy and joyful. Then Merlin came to King Arthur and said to him, “Sir, now we must get ready, for you must ride out in the morning. Be careful to tell no one what part of the army you'll be riding in, but follow me wherever I go. And Ill tell all the other princes to be ready to set out at daybreak.” 5That is, douna.. . la colee (389, |. 5). See ch. 32, n. 38, The Story of Merlin “Merlin,” said King Arthur, “do what you will, for all my hope is in God and in you.” Then Merlin went straight to the princes’ pavilions and told every one of them privately, one after the other, to be ready and equipped to ride out early the next morning. And they had their tents, pavilions, and other equipment stowed away in wagons and carts and packed on horses, and, wearing their full armor, they got on their warhorses, ready to defend themselves and fall upon their enemies, except for their shields, lances, and helmets, which their squires were carrying ahead for them. And they had their white ensigns borne before them, and on each one there was a red cross in the middle, and this Merlin had ordered all the princes to do when they first set out. And Merlin was riding a dapple-gray charger, and he bore King Arthur’s banner out ahead of the king and the whole army. This is how they left the Plain of Salisbury, and with Merlin in the lead they went straight toward the city of Clarence, which King Hargadabran [390] and twenty other kings had besieged. They had surrounded the whole city and sent their foragers out into the land for twenty leagues on all sides, and they were laying waste the countryside and stripping it bare. A part of the foragers came back by the city of Garlot, which was the chief stronghold of King Neutres, and four mighty kings were among them. They had with them a great horde of Saxons who had taken plunder by force, and they had wreaked havoc on the men from the city who rode out to fight them to recover their plunder. There had been a great slaughter on both sides, but in the end those from the city could not hold out against them, because there were so very many Saxons, and they had lost their belongings, their horses, and a great many of their knights. And the four kings had besieged the city and would not leave until they had taken it. When the queen, who was within the city, saw that they were under siege, she was very much afraid that the Saxons would take her by force, so she took counsel with her seneschal as to what she should do. It was the seneschal’s advice that the two of them alone should steal out of the city at night through a hidden gate that opened toward the river, and they would go to one of their nearby strongholds, which was six leagues away; it was called The Rescue,? because Vortigern had been rescued there when Hengist the Saxon was run down and killed in the same place. The seneschal and the queen did just as they had planned, for they left about midnight and took only two squires with them. But the Saxons, who were very cunning, had put their spies everywhere, and so the seneschal and the queen were taken prisoner and the seneschal killed; the two squires were dreadfully wounded, for one was struck in his body with a lance and the other dealt a blow with a sword on his head. And they came, as adventure took them, straight to the army Merlin was leading, which had strenuously made its way to within four leagues of Garlot. And when the squires saw the army coming, they caught sight of the white banners with the red crosses, and they knew at once that they were Christians, so they headed their way in the greatest agony in the world. And when 4 La rescouse (390, 1. 17), not in West. 383 Merlin, who was ahead of everyone else, heard them moaning, he asked them what was wrong with them, and they told him everything just as it had happened to them and said that the Saxons had taken the queen. “And which way are they going?” asked Merlin. “Sir,” they said, “she is still with the army, but the plunder is being taken away on the causeway.” And Merlin shouted in a loud voice, “Follow me, for, God willing, they won’t take the queen away!” Then he kicked his charger with his spurs, and Sir Gawainet and Eliezer spurred after him, along with King Ban and King Bors, and each one had a good, strong, stout lance in his hand. And Leonce of Payerne led the men of Benoic, Dyonas those of Gaunes, Gratian those of Orkney, and Dorilas®> King Neutres’s men, and the other battalions came along all in order. And Merlin rode until he was about to go down a hill, and he saw the plunder being taken across a little bridge by four thousand Saxons. And when Sir Gawainet saw them, he said, “Let’s not stay too far behind!” And he kicked Gringalet with his spurs, and Eliezer said to him, “Sir, allow me [391] a favor and a service. Let me have the first blow of the battle, for I have not been in a fight since I’ve been a knight.” “And I grant it to you,” said Sir Gawainet smiling, “for you are indeed worthy of it.” With that, Eliezer let his horse run, and he shouted to the Saxons, “Leave the plunder, for you will not take it with you any farther.” Then came Dyoglis, who was King Maglory’s seneschal, and he turned his horse’s head toward Eliezer, and they struck each other on their shields with their lances so hard that they cut beneath the bosses, and Dyoglis broke his lance. Eliezer hit him so hard that he drove his lance through his chest and hurled him dead to the ground, and his lance flew into splinters. Then he drew his sword out of its scabbard and rushed in among the others, who were in a great hurry to get the plunder across the bridge. He struck Antidolus, who was King Brandon’s seneschal, and split him down to his teeth. Then Merlin said to Sir Gawainet that the new knight had started out well. “In truth,” said Sir Gawainet, “and he will fight even better.” With that, Merlin yelled King Arthur’s battlecry, and Sir Gawainet and his companions let loose and charged headlong into the pillagers, and there were many dead and wounded, so that the Saxons had to give up the place and turned in flight toward Garlot, where King Maglory, King Brandon,°® King Pincenar, and King Pignoras were. The kings were keeping up a vigorous assault in order to take the city, and they were quite upset to see the runaways coming, and they stopped their assault and ran toward them in disarray. And when the Saxons saw the Christians coming, they were quite amazed that there could be so many of them, but they rushed in among them, because the Saxons were numerous and very strong. The Christians welcomed them most fiercely, but the Saxons pushed them back more than a lance’s length in 5Here the form is doulas (390, 1. 38). ®The text reads orandons (391, 1. 18). 384 their first attack. And when the four Saxon kings saw Sir Gawainet and Eliezer and King Ban and King Bors fighting so boldly, they shouted to their men and struck out among them, and they began to slaughter knights and horses as if they were in an army gone mad, and it was indeed the strongest army in the world. And they drove King Ban’s men and those of King Bors against King Neutre’s men and the battalion of Duke Escant of Cambenic, and Sir Gawainet, King Ban, King Bors, and Eliezer received many a hard blow, and they were very badly hurt. But when these two battalions joined the fray, then could be seen wonders of fighting, and the Saxons were badly hurt in this surge, for many were killed or struck down. But King Brandon and King Pincenar did great wonders by themselves and with the knights of their households, who were most worthy and bold, for after they had struck, no one stayed in his saddle. And the men of Great Britain were stricken with fright, and they would have been put to rout if it had not been for the prowess of Sir Gawainet and Eliezer, King Ban and King Bors, King Neutres of Garlot, and Duke Escant of Cambenic; and nevertheless Pharian, Gratian, Leonce of Payerne, and Dorilas fought so boldly that no one could rebuke them. And Merlin, who flew from rank to rank without stopping, kept shouting, “Now forward!” While they were in such great distress, King Pignoras called forty of his worthiest and boldest Saxons and ordered them to get the queen of Garlot and [392] take her away to the siege of Clarence and give her to King Hargadabran, and they answered that they would do as he wished. They left at once and set out for Clarence by the shortest way they could take, and they took away with them the queen, who bewailed the fateful things that were happening to her. So King Pignoras charged once again into the fray, his sword in his hand, and he began fighting all over again, so boldly and so wondrously that no one could withstand his blows, for he did not meet a knight who could hurt him, and his skill was so great that the boldest made way for him. At last Sir Gawainet, who was ready at all times of need, caught sight of him and saw the great harm he was doing to their men; and he said to himself, “If that one lives long enough, we could lose a great deal.” : Eliezer, who very gladly kept close to Sir Gawainet, heard what he said, and he spurred his horse to where he had seen Pignoras, whose arm and sword were filthy with the blood and brains of the Christians he had slain. And when Eliezer saw him, he said, “He would truly be a great harm to our cause if he lived any longer, and it’s a misfortune that he’s lived as long as he has.” With that, Eliezer drew nearer to him, and he left his horse’s reins on the saddlebow in front, threw his shield behind his back, and fixed his feet in the stirrups. He lifted his sword in both hands and hit King Pignoras on his helmet with all his might, so hard that neither helmet nor iron coif could keep him from thrusting his sword into his brain; then with a twisting stroke he sent him sprawling dead to the ground. And when Merlin saw that, he said to Sir Gawainet, “He has given us time.” “Indeed,” said Sir Gawainet. “May Jesus Christ save for our sakes such a worthy companion as he!” The Story of Merlin Then they rushed in among the Saxons, who were very angry and upset over Pignoras’s death, and they began to strike right and left. But more than any of the others, Sir Gawainet and Eliezer, King Ban and King Bors, Leonce of Payerne, Gratian of Trebe, and Pharian fought boldly. Only five of their battalions had gathered as yet, but the ones who were there did true wonders, for neither iron nor steel held up under their blows. And when King Pincenar, who was most worthy and bold, saw his men flagging and beaten, he was most upset, and he said that it would be better to die than fail to avenge Pignoras. He held his drawn sword in his right hand, and he flew into the crowd where he saw it was thickest, and he began hitting from side to side and striking down at once as many as he met. And right before King Ban, he killed a knight who was of his household and had fought hard that day, and King Ban went out of his mind and, filled with anger, went straight to where he saw the man who had slain his knight; he struck him so hard, in the great wrath he felt, that he split him open down to the teeth—and that was what brought him the most comfort all day. And then the Christians closed in around the Saxons, and the fighting was heavy and most fearsome, for the Britons were all good knights. And when Merlin saw that the battalions had gathered [393] all about, he drew Sir Gawainet, Eliezer, King Ban, and King Bors aside and told them that forty Saxons were taking the queen of Garlot to the siege of Clarence, “and I think we should go after them.” “Ride ahead,” said Sir Gawainet, “and we'll follow you.” So they took to the road, and there were a good one hundred companions. And here the story falls silent about them and goes back to the knights who were taking away the queen of Garlot. 48. A Great Victory Over the Saxons.’ Now the story says that when the forty Saxons were two leagues away from the battle, they went into a wood where there was the most beautiful meadow with quite a lovely spring. And they turned that way to cool off and to drink from the spring, which was very clear. They helped the queen dismount beside the spring; she was filled with the greatest sorrow in the world, and nothing they said or did could comfort her. Instead she moaned aloud, “Ah, King Neutres! Today they will sever the love I have for you from the love you have for me, for I don’t believe I'll ever see you again.” Then she fainted in the arms of the Saxons who were holding her. And when she came out of her faint, she clawed herself and showed such sorrow that the Saxons felt deep pity for her, and some of them would have been very glad if she were where she longed to be, and they tried to comfort her most kindly. But she did not want their comfort, but began to scream so loudly that Sir Gawainet and his companions heard her clearly. They tured to where they heard the screaming, and they rode until they 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 393401. The Story of Merlin saw the knights and the queen, who was calling in a loud voice, “Holy Lady Mary, please help this wretched, grieving woman!” When Sir Gawainet saw his aunt, he spurred to where she was and said to the Saxons, “Dear lords, please leave the queen and go away, for I would be most grateful to you if you took pity on her. And I thank you very much for the courtliness you have shown her.” When Margon, King Pignoras’s wine steward, heard what Sir Gawainet said, he asked his companions what they would advise him to do. And they said that they would rather die than let the queen go. “You have brought this on yourselves!” said Sir Gawainet. Then he ran upon them, his sword drawn, and he struck the first one and sent his head flying to the feet of the queen. And the Saxons sprang up at once, and they suffered great harm as they got to their feet. Even so, they killed knights and horses, because they possessed great prowess. But in the end their defense did not keep them all from dying, and not one of them got away except Margon the Wine Steward, who stole away and hid in the woods. And Sir Gawainet and his companions came to the queen and comforted her most kindly, and she asked them who they were. “Lady,” said Sir Gawainet, “I am Gawainet, your nephew, the son of King Lot of Orkney. And this lord is King Ban of Benoic, and these other knights are our companions.” And when the lady heard this, she was filled with great gladness, and she thanked them over and over for the service they had done her. Then they put her on a palfrey and went back toward the army where King Arthur and the other princes were fighting. And the Saxons lost a great many of their men, for King Arthur had killed Maglory, their king who was the mainstay of the Saxons, and [394] King Lot had chopped off the hand of Sinarus. And they had all turned in flight, when Sir Gawainet and his companions came back bringing the queen, whom they had rescued. They met King Brandon, who was fleeing and had to go through them; the Saxons were four thousand strong, and the whole army was close behind them and spurring ever faster. But Brandon turned back to face them many times, and his men did not hit any knight with a sound blow without killing him. And when Sir Gawainet saw what he was doing, and the great slaughter of his people, he was certain that he was a highborn man of mighty stock, and he showed by the way he fought that he was a king or a prince; Sir Gawainet highly esteemed him, and he would have been very glad if he had been a Christian. And Sir Gawainet drew near him and said with great courtliness, “Knight, you are worthy and very bold. Are you a king or a duke that you should have such strength and such heart?” “By my faith,” he answered, “my name is Brandon, and I am king of a part of Saxony. I am the nephew of the richest king in the world, that is, King Hargadabran, who has all of Saxony under his sway.” “Indeed,” said Sir Gawainet, “that is quite plain to see, for you are a most worthy and skilled knight, and it is a 385 great shame that you are not a Christian, and I wish very much that you were, so that I might give you a reprieve from death.” “Now you’re telling me tales of wonders! Don’t say any more to me about it, for I would rather die than be a Christian.” “You will come to that soon enough, and I am deeply sorry about it, for I would like very much to be your companion, if you’re willing.” “I would never want that,” said Brandon. And when Sir Gawainet heard that, he ran upon him very fast and very angrily, and he struck him so hard with Excalibur that he sent his head flying. And when the runaways saw their lord dead, they were so bewildered that they could no longer defend themselves, and the Christians fell upon them from all sides and killed them and cut them to shreds. And when they had done that, they thanked Our Lord profusely for the honor He had given them that day. Then Sir Gawainet and King Ban came before King Arthur and all the nobility, and they gave his wife back to King Neutres, and they told, so that everyone could hear them, how they had rescued her. And the king very gladly and joyfully thanked them all, and the barons were all quite happy about it. Then they withdrew a little above the field where the battle had been, and King Arthur had his tent set up in the meadow, and all the others did the same; and they went to rest. And the next morning, when it was daylight, they set out on the road to Clarence. But with that the story falls silent from speaking about King Arthur and his nobles and goes back to speaking about Margon, King Pignoras’s wine steward. Here the story says that Margon hid in the woods until Sir Gawainet, King Ban, and their companions had taken the queen away. Then Margon went back to the spring and found his horse, which he had tied to an olive tree, and got on. He rode until he came to the army before Clarence, and he told King Hargadabran that all the foragers he had sent out were dead or routed. And when King Hargadabran [395] heard him, he was quite sorry and upset. Then King Gundeflé jumped up and said to King Hargadabran, “Sir, if you please, I would like to go find out what has happened. And I would take with me Salebrun, Sorbares, Meliaduc, and King Bramangue; and we will have with us forty thousand men, for I could not believe that four such powerful men as your cousin King Brandon, King Pincenar, King Pignoras, and King Maglory could be brought to defeat by a force of no account.” And while they were saying these things, behold there came Sinarus, who had his hand cut off, and he told them the truth about what had happened to his arm. When King Hargadabran saw Sinarus in such a state, his sorrow was wondrous, for he loved him greatly. And when he learned of the deaths of the four kings, it was as if he had gone out of his mind, for King Maglory and King Brandon were his nephews. Then he told King Gundeflé that he wanted to avenge his nephews, and he answered that he would very gladly do so. And so he set out on the way, and he took fifty thousand Saxons with him. And they broke their men up into five battalions, and each one had ten thousand Saxons. King Salebrun led the first one, Duke 386 Lanor of Betingues the second, King Sorbares the third, King Brangor and Malakin? the Castellan the fourth, and King Gundeflé and his brother Transmaduk the fifth. They left the siege of Clarence, one battalion? after the other, and they took to the road toward the castle of Garlot, and they made their way all night and all day until they met Merlin in a most fair meadow that was a good league and a half long. There Merlin had set up seven battalions with the first men to come. King Neutres, King Tradelmant, and Duke Escant led the first battalion with twenty thousand men. King Ban, King Bors, and the King of the Hundred Knights led the second with twenty thousand men. King Clarion of Northumberland, the king of South Wales, and Nabunal, the seneschal of Gosengos, led the third with thirty thousand men. Cleodalis, the seneschal of Carmelide, King Caradoc, and King Lot of Orkney led the fourth. Anguingeron, the seneschal of King Clamadeus, Flamus (the seneschal of King Evadain), and the seneschal of King Pelles of Listenois led the fifth with thirty thousand men. King Brandegorre led the sixth with thirty thousand men. And Sir Gawainet, his brothers, and the companions of the Round Table were with King Arthur in the seventh, where there were so many people that they could scarcely be counted. In such a way did the hosts of the Christians and the hosts of the Saxons meet each other in the meadowlands half a Welsh league from Garlot. And as soon as King Salebrun saw the Christians, he let loose after them, and Margon the Wine Steward did the same. And when Duke Escant saw it, he went out to meet them. But Tromoret, who was castellan of Cambenic, went out ahead and struck Salebrun so hard on his shield that his lance flew into bits, and the Saxon hit him so hard that the tip of his lance4 went through his body, and he sent him [396] sprawling dead to the ground. And when Duke Escant saw that, he grew very angry, and in his great wrath, he struck Salebrun so soundly that he drove his lance through his body. Then he said to him, “Lowborn traitor, now you are dead, but for all that, I won’t have back my friend, who was my liegeman.” With that, the battalions gathered on both sides, and the clanging of swords and snapping of lances were very loud, and great numbers died on both sides. But as soon as King Ban, King Bors, and the King of the Hundred Knights, who were leading the second battalion, came in and saw the second Saxon battalion make its move, they rushed headlong into them, and great wonders of skilled fighting could be seen, with many knights tumbling and thrown down, many hauberks cut through and links undone, many helmets flying from heads and shields from necks; and the killing was fearsome on both sides. And when Merlin saw that the Saxons were so mighty, he shouted to King Ban, “What are you doing? You should already have sent them all on their way a while ago, for you have half again as many men as they!” 2Thus 396, 1. 21; here the text reads machadins (395, |. 18). 3Here the word is eschiele (395, |. 20): “echelon.” 4ttere the word is espiel (395, 1. 41), usually translated as “spear.” The Story of Merlin When King Ban and the other princes heard Merlin shouting, they were deeply ashamed. Then they ran against the Saxons with great might, and the Saxons had to give ground, like it or not, and they were driven back into their third battalion, which King Meliaduc, Duke Frangiles, and Lanor of Betingues were leading, and they came out to meet them. And the fighting was so heavy and wondrous, and the slaughter was so great on both sides, that it was a fearsome thing to behold. But then King Brangor® and Malakin the Castellan rejoined the fourth battalion, along with Galeguinant and King Cleolas, and the fighting was ruthless and wicked, so that in little time the field was covered with the dead and wounded. In that onslaught Margon the Wine Steward was slain; he was deeply mourned by the Saxons, and King Ban killed him with his lance. And when King Sorbares saw that, he was filled with sorrow, and he rode toward King Ban and meant to strike him on his helmet, but King Ban thrust his shield against the blow, and King Sorbares split it down to the boss; but then the blow glanced down to the neck of the warhorse, whose head went flying, and both the king and his horse fell in a heap. And King Sorbares stood over him with his sword drawn to strike him, but Pharian, who was very angry to see his lord on the ground, came over to meet him, and he struck King Sorbares so hard on the helmet that he split him open down to his teeth, and he fell sprawling dead to the ground. Then Pharian took his horse by the reins, led him to the king, and helped him get on. And when King Ban was back on a horse, he flew into the fray filled with wrath, and he began to do wonders with his fighting. And Pharian, Gratian, Anselm, Dionas, King Bors, King Neutres, and all the other princes did wonders all by themselves, and there were so many Saxons dead and wounded that the field was all covered with them, and they could not get to one another except by going over the dead. While this great slaughter was going on, all the battalions joined the fray except King Arthur’s alone, and Merlin took this one around until they came up behind the others, and then they rushed in headlong without mercy. And as soon as Sir Gawainet and Eliezer, Wain and his brothers, [397] and the companions of the Round Table had come in and gathered about the battalion, open displays of knightly prowess could be seen by all. They slaughtered knights and horses, they sent shields flying from necks and helmets from heads, they chopped off feet and hands, and they did such wonders that scarcely could anyone believe the great slaughter of the Saxons they did. And Kay the Seneschal, whom Merlin had entrusted to carry the great ensign, was always out ahead in the first rank, for he was very bold. There, above all, Sir Gawainet fought boldly, and King Arthur did as well, for he met no Saxon with a sound blow whom he did not kill. And the princes, who had come for the love of God, fought boldly too, and they did so well that they were sure to have the pardon. And the Queen’s Knights fought so boldly that no one was left standing after they had hit, for they struck down as many as they met. And thus the fields were strewn 5 Above (395, 1. 17) Lanor led the first Saxon battalion. Here the form is mancors (396, l. 21). See 395, |. 18. The Story of Merlin with the dead and wounded, so that no one could move about without going over them. When the Saxons saw that they were surrounded, they were so stricken with fright that they were put to rout. And without a doubt they were so dreadfully weakened that of five kings, one earl, one duke, and sixty-eight thousand Saxons, not four thousand of them got away, and all the rest were slain or maltreated. Even so, they gave themselves up at a fearsomely high price, for so many Christians were slain that the damage was bewailed for as long as King Arthur lived; many a lady was left a widow, and many a noble maiden was bereft of comfort. When Duke Gundeflé and Duke Lanor of Betingues saw the great slaughter of their people by the Christians, and when they saw that they were shut off so that they could not get back to the army, they were deeply upset, for they saw plainly that they would be killed if they could not decide what was best to do. Then they looked to the side, over to the sea, where the Christians had left a little opening; they took flight that way, down through the meadowland, straight to the sea, which was nearby. And when King Arthur saw them heading there, he shouted, “Now, after them!” Then the Christians spurred after them all together, and many a blow was struck in the chase, for the Saxons were large and strong, skilled and bold, and full of great prowess, and many times they would turn about to face the ones who were following them. Many a Saxon was slain and many a Christian killed or wounded, and the chase went on, with the Saxons fleeing and then turning about until they came to the sea, where they found three of their galleys, which were led by Landalis, a Saxon who had stopped there to wait for foodstuffs from those who had gone to forage at the castle of Garlot. And when the runaways saw the galleys, they were greatly gladdened, and all those who could rushed aboard them, but they could not prevent more than two thousand on both sides from drowning, while those who had boarded the ships cut the anchor lines, hoisted the sails, and took to the sea as quickly as they could; and they went wherever they were taken by the wind, which had turned its wheel unfavorably. And when King Arthur and his nobles saw that they had thus lost the Saxons, they turned back to their tents in the meadowlands of Garlot. And after they had [398] taken off their armor, they rested and took their ease as best they could; they were in great need of it, for they were tired and worn out from giving and taking blows in the fighting, which had been very heavy. And then they went to eat, and after the meal, they looked to their sick and had them taken to the castle of Garlot. There were thirty-five knights wounded, five of them knights of the Round Table, about whom King Arthur was quite sad and upset; one of them was Hervi of Rivel, the second Malés the Dark, the third Clamadeus, the fourth Aristobokis, and the fifth Landens of Carmelike. And the king entreated the physicians to take good care of them, and they answered that he should not be worried, for they would have them hale and hardy in a short time, with the help of God. And so they stayed there that night. The next morning Merlin ordered the tents and pavilions to be taken down, and he said that everyone should come after him ready to fall on their foes and hurt 387 them, and it was done just as he had ordered. And when they were ready, they took to the road straight to Clarence. And when they came near enough to King Hargadabran’s army that they could clearly see their tents and pavilions, Merlin pointed them out to King Arthur and said to him, “Sir, look, there are the ones at whose orders your barons’ lands have been laid waste and stripped. Now we’ll see how they take their vengeance today. For now we have come to the point of winning or losing everything. Today we'll see who has prowess in him. Today we’ll see who can fight boldly with sword and lance. Today the great and worthy knighthood of the Kingdom of Logres will be displayed. Today will be our time of great need and trial, for in this day the Kingdom of Logres will be destroyed or brought to honor. And I tell you and your barons together,” he went on, “that you sorely need to pray to Our Lord to defend the Kingdom of Logres from shame and misfortune.” And they all answered, “So be it!” And then they said, friends and foreigners alike, that they would do anything he wanted, and he advised them that, if they were willing to exert great effort, they need not worry, for victory would be theirs that day. And they answered that they were ready to do so. “I want you to swear to me,” said Merlin, “that you will do everything as I wish it.” And they answered that they would do so gladly. “Even so,” said Merlin to King Arthur, “you must swear it to me first.” And the king said that he could be sure that he was ready to do all his bidding, and he swore it straightway, and the others did as well. Then Merlin said to them, “Dear lords, today has dawned the day of the destruction of Great Britain, if God does not help us. In no way can the destruction be avoided, nor can these people ever live in safety, until you have all made peace with King Arthur. And this is what you have sworn to me.” When the barons heard that, there were some of them who did not like it, but it could not be otherwise, so they agreed to everything Merlin wished, and they all swore fealty to King Arthur one after the other; and all who were not already his liegemen’ received their lands and fiefs back from him. And there was great rejoicing throughout the army. And then they set up their battalions and went out against the Saxons, who were at the siege before the wealthy city of Clarence, which they attacked every day. But it was so strong that they could not take any part of it, [399] for it was very well stocked inside with good men and food. All who could bear arms from ten leagues all around were in the city, knights and burghers, one and all; there were a good fifty-five thousand,’ who were all skilled, bold, and good defensive fighters, and they strongly defended the city against the Saxons. They threw at them many a dart and many a big, sharp spike, with which they brought down many a Saxon, who would never get up again. 7Sommer’s text is less specific, qui le durent faire (398, 1. 41): “who ought to have done so/needed to do so.” 8The text reads .Ix. & .xv. Mile (399, ll. 3-4), that is, two score (thousand) and fifteen thousand. 388 The city was quite large, and they were ruthlessly attacking it when Merlin and his companions came there. And when they were near the tents, Merlin sent in his men in four battalions against the four sides of the Saxon host, and they flew in among the tents and pavilions and began to cut the ropes and supports and overturn them. And the Saxons, who were not on the lookout for such an onslaught, heard the uproar and saw the pavilions falling down everywhere, and they were greatly frightened. They broke off their attack and ran to the encampment as fast as they could, and there was such an uproar and loud shouting of battlecries that they could be heard half a league away. Then bloodthirsty and wondrous fighting began, and they struck one another with swords and lances, and the slaughter was dreadful on both sides. But for every Christian who died, five Saxons were killed, although they were stronger and better armed, but the Christians were wonderfully swift and nimble and skilled at hard fighting and heavy warfare. When the Christians had driven into the horde of Saxons, you could have seen the beginning of wondrous fighting. In the first assault many a Christian was struck down and many a Saxon put to death, and about this King Hargadabran was very sad and upset. He held a great shaft of oak with a big, sharp iron tip, and he rode as fast as he could make his horse run toward King Cleolas, who had come to the war for love of Our Lord with seven thousand men who were fighting quite well in the battle. And when King Cleolas saw him coming, he did not deign to move aside, for he was of great boldness, but he turned his horse’s head toward him, his lance on its felt holder and his shield in front of his chest, and at full speed they struck each other on their shields so hard that they drove through them and cut their hauberks open, and the iron tips went right by their sides but did not break the skin. And they hit each other with their shields, for their horses had come in at great speed, and crashed into each other, chest to chest, so hard that they both spilled to the ground, taking their horses down on top of them, and their lances flew into pieces; and they lay on the ground in such a daze that neither of them could move. Their horses were lying on top of them as they had been killed, and the two kings lay beneath them in a faint. And the fight to get the two princes back on horseback was hard, for all the battalions of the Saxons had run to that side, as had those of the Christians, and many a blow was given and taken. At last the Saxons got King Hargadabran back on his horse, but before that, more than two thousand had been killed on both sides. At the same time, the Christians put King Cleolas on his horse, but they found that he had broken his left arm in falling, and his men were sorry and upset about it, and they had him carried at once to the baggage wagons. [400] And when they had laid him down and made him comfortable, he called his men together very kindly and entreated them to go straight back to the battle. He gave them his seneschal, Guionce, to lead them, and they granted him everything he wanted. Then they charged back into the battle in great anger, burning to avenge their lord, and in the onslaught they killed two Saxon kings, one of whom was named King Brangor and the other King Margondes, the first cousin of The Story of Merlin Hengist the Saxon. And they began to fight so skillfully that they were praised, esteemed, and watched in great wonder by Saxons and the Christians. On the other side of the battlefield, King Ban, King Bors, King Neutres, and King Urien were doing their share of fighting. Elsewhere were King Tradelmant of North Wales, the King of the Hundred Knights, King Clarion of Northumberland, and Duke Escant of Cambenic. On yet another side, King Belinant, the king of Estrangorre, King Aguisant, King Yder, Minoras (King Lac’s seneschal), and Claalant of Listenois were fighting in their turn. Somewhere else, Anguingeron, the seneschal of King Clamadeus; Flamus, King Evadain’s seneschal; Galeguinant, the seneschal of Galehaut, son of the Fair Giantess; and Margondes, the seneschal of Sorelois, were doing their share, and they had all come there for love of Our Lord. Somewhere else still Gosengos, the son of King Amant, his seneschal, Nabunal, and Cleodalis, the seneschal of King Leodagan of Carmelide, were also fighting. And somewhere else yet again were King Arthur, King Lot of Orkney, Sir Gawainet, Agravain, Guerrehet, Gaheriet, Sir Wain son of King Urien, Sagremor, and Kay the Seneschal, who bore the ensign. And the battle began in earnest on all sides, and it was a wonder to behold. And Merlin went from one battalion to another, riding a huge charger, and he shouted in a loud voice, “Now we'll see, sir knights! The day has come when your prowess will be displayed!” When the kings and princes heard him shouting these things, they sought, heedless of the danger, to show the utmost strength they could. And when those in the city saw that the fighting had grown so deadly, and they saw Christians and Saxons spill to the ground so thick that they were falling on top of one another, they were convinced that this was the help that Our Lord had sent them. So they had their gates opened and rode out all in armor, and they drove headlong into the battle with all their might and began to do wonders of fighting. But however boldly anyone may have fought that day, King Arthur outstripped them all, along with Sir Gawainet, his brothers, and King Bors, for no one could withstand their blows, and they fought so hard that the Saxons were routed. Of all the kings whom King Hargadabran had called together and brought there, he was one of six to get away, the others being King Orient, Sorbares, Cornicans, the fleet commander Napins, and Murgalant of Trebeham. These five got away with King Hargadabran; they had with them thirty thousand Saxons, and they all left, downcast and routed, [401] as fast as their horses could go, and they rushed straight to their fleet. And those who were unwilling to let them go ran after them with all their might as far as the sea. They were on their heels as the Saxons boarded the ships they had, and a good half of them were slain or drowned. And the ones who did get aboard went away upset and bewailing the great loss they had suffered. And they had not gone far before they met the ship of King Gundeflé and King Lanor, who were fleeing from their rout, and they recognized one another straightway. And thus they sailed out to sea. But now the story falls silent about them and goes back to speaking about King Arthur and his companions. The Story of Merlin 49. The Castle of the Fens.! Now the story says that after King Arthur had routed the Saxons and they had boarded their ships, he and his nobles went back happy and gladdened. And they went out to the battlefield and thanked God most tenderly for the honor and the victory He had given them and for the lavish winnings they had in gold, silver, lush silk cloth, pavilions, warhorses, and good armor. With the permission of the princes, King Arthur had it divided among one and all according to their estate, and he kept none of it for himself, not a penny’s worth. And then the ptinces went into the city happy and joyful. And they had the dead buried, and they stayed there five days. And the news ran about the countryside that the Saxons had been driven away from the city of Clarence and killed or wounded. And even the Saxons who had not been in the rout left the country and went back to Saxony, sorrowing and upset about the friends they had lost. And after King Arthur had stayed five days joyfully celebrating in the city, the princes left him and went back to their countries. They left in great love of Arthur, and they held their lands from him. And the foreign princes, who had come there out of love for Our Lord, also went back to their countries. And King Arthur, King Ban, King Bors, King Lot of Orkney, Sir Gawainet, and their companions came straight back to the city of Camelot. They were lavishly welcomed by Queen Guenevere and all the people. And then Merlin came to Arthur and said to him, “Sir, thanks be to God, this time you have freed the land from those wicked people, and you and all Christendom should have great gladness, for you are now in peace. Now King Ban and King Bors can go back to their countries, for it has been a long time since they have seen their wives and their lands; and in their countries they have a wicked neighbor who would willingly do them harm if he had the power, and that is King Claudas of the Land Laid Waste. So they'll cross the sea and take care of their lands and their business.” And when King Arthur heard this, he answered him most courteously and said, “Merlin, dear friend,” said King Arthur, “the princes will do as they will, and you as you will, but I would rather that they and you should stay and not go away, for it should bother no prince to keep company with such worthy gentlemen as they and you are. Even so, since that is your pleasure and your will, I must accept it.” “Sir,” said Merlin, “it must be so. Indeed, you do not need [402] thern to stay behind.” So the two kings left and took to the road toward the sea amid great rejoicing. And Merlin, who loved them very much, went along with them because of that love. As it happened, the first night after they had left Camelot, they came upon a castle that sat in a marshland, and it was so well placed and so sturdy that it did not fear any attack. That castle was enclosed all around by two pairs of thick, high walls topped with battlements with narrow openings for easy defense. And within the bailey were five high, straight towers, all of them round, rising to the clouds; four 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 401-407. 389 of them were somewhat slender,* but the fifth was large, wondrous, and well fortified all about, and outside it was defended by a double moat full of water. And the tower in the middle was so high that one could hardly shoot to the top with a hand-held bow. And all around, beyond the outside walls, were marshes spreading out a good two leagues that were so full of mire? and water that no one could go in there without drowning. There was only one way into this castle, and it was so narrow that two horses could not pass if they met, and at the other end of the causeway was a quite lovely pine tree beside the water in a meadow a quarter acre in size, where the grass grew tall and fair; and the pine was full and beautiful. On one of the high limbs a horn of ivory whiter than snow hung on a silver chain, and those who sought shelter within or wanted to pass through blew it to ask for a joust. The horn that hung there served for the two things I have explained. When King Ban, King Bors, and their companions came to the pine tree and saw the horn hanging there, they said to one another that it did not hang there for no reason, and they thought it must be for crossing the ford or asking for a joust, but they saw that the castle was so far away that they did not believe the sound of the horn could reach that far. Meanwhile, they found that the castle was handsome and rich and well placed, and they could not have had a better look at its great size than from where they were, and they also saw that the causeway and entry way were so strong and so narrow that they were struck with amazement. And the two kings asked Merlin if he knew the name of the castle that was so handsome and well placed that they would be happy to own it. And Merlin told them that it was the Castle of the Fens, and it belonged to a knight who was of great prowess and great renown, worthy and bold in fighting, and his name was Agravadain the Black. “By my faith,” said King Ban, “many times I’ve heard about Agravadain the Black. God help me, he must be a most worthy gentleman to have such a good dwelling, for this is the fairest of all the castles I’ve ever seen. I would be very glad to lie there tonight, if the lord who lives there is willing.” “That will indeed happen to you,” said Merlin, “but no unknown knight may go to the castle, and no one dares (403] drink any of the water, without a fight, unless he has blown the horn.” “T will blow the horn,” said King Ban, “if you allow me.” “By my faith,” said Merlin, “there is no danger in blowing it, since you wish to ask for a joust or for leave to drink.” “By my faith,” said King Ban, “it would be dangerous if I blew it and you had forbidden me to.” “I indeed advise you to do it,” said Merlin, “for, God willing, no harm will come to you from it.” At once King Ban went to the pine tree where the horn was hanging; he put the horn to his lips and blew it loud 2The word here is moienes (402, |. 9): “medium.” 3The word is rai (402, 1. 13), which Sommer did not understand. He suggests that it may be a scribal error for tat (“mud, mire”) (402, n. 2). In addition to a kind of fish, also suggested by Sommer (n. 2), rai can mean a stream of water. 390 and clear, for he was strong and had enough wind, and the marshland resounded with it. And the sounds of the water and the marsh bore the sound of the horn into the castle, so that the lord who was the castellan heard it plainly. And he shouted, as was their custom, “Now to arms!” And the king started to blow another time, and he blew it three times very fast, for the castle was so far away that King Ban did not believe they could hear it there. When the lord who was the castellan heard the horn being blown so hard and so many times, he took it as a great insult, so he mounted a big dapple-gray warhorse, his shield about his neck and his lance in his hand. The gate was opened, and he rode out at great speed and came straight to the ford. And when he saw the people on the other side, he shouted to them, “What people are you?” And King Ban answered, “Sir, we are knights who ask you for shelter tonight in your castle. And, if you please, we would like to water our horses in this ford.” “Whose men are you?” asked Agravadain. “Dear sir,” answered Merlin, who was closest to the causeway, “they are from another land that is a part of Gaul.” “What part?” “Sir, they hold their lands from King Arthur.” “In God’s name, they have a good overlord. They cannot be dishonored by King Arthur, for he is a worthy man and a good knight, and he is my overlord. And for his sake you will have lodging to your liking.” “Thank you very much,” said Merlin. Agravadain turned about at once and told the knights to follow him, for they were most welcome. And they took off right away after the knight, one after the other, on the causeway. They rode as far as the castle gate and then went in behind the knight who was lord there, and they did not have room to turn their horses until they had gone through the gate. And then the lord himself led them up to the castle. Then serving boys and squires ran out to help them down. And the lord himself took the two kings by the hand, for they seemed to him to be worthy gentlemen and landed princes, and he led them into a room which was at the bottom of the tower, where he had their armor taken off, as was most fitting, and his own as well. And while he was being disarmed, three maidens endowed with great beauty came in; they brought in dark red cloaks lined with black ermine and put them over the shoulders of the two kings and their lord. And King Ban, who was light-hearted and under love’s sway, was glad to look at the maidens. He liked their company and the way they looked, for they were wondrously lovely and delightful to watch, and they were at a good age, for the eldest was not yet twenty-four years old. But the daughter of the castle was by far the most beautiful. Merlin looked at her [404] in great distress, and he thought to himself that anyone would be very lucky if he could sleep with such a maiden. “And if it weren’t for the great love I have for Viviane, my lady love,” he said, “I would be holding her in my arms tonight. But since I cannot have her for myself, I'll see that King Ban will have her.” Then he cast a spell with little ado, and as soon as he had done it, King Ban and Agravadain’s daughter fell deeply in love with each other. The Story of Merlin When the two kings had been dressed in the two cloaks that two of the maidens had put over their shoulders, Agravadain showed them how glad he was to welcome them. And when it was time to eat, the tables were set up in the middle of the hall, which was quite large and wide. And he had the two brother kings sit next to each other at the head of the high table, and Agravadain sat between them and his wife, who was most lovely and youthful, for she was not yet thirty years old; and the knights sat at tables throughout the hall. And the three maidens who were so appealing stood before the two kings and Agravadain—and before Merlin. And Merlin had taken on the likeness of a youth fifteen years of age. He was wearing a somewhat short red and white tunic. About his waist was a silk belt two inches wide with gold rings here and there, and from this hung a purse of beaten gold. His hair was blond* and curly, and his eyes were wide-set and speckled gray. And he was on his knees carving before King Ban. People kept looking at him, for no one there knew who he was except the two brother kings, although the others with them thought that he belonged to the household of the lord of the castle. And because of the great worth and beauty they saw in him, the maidens gazed at him from time to time. But Agravadain’s daughter still had eyes to look at King Ban more than anything else because of Merlin’s spell, and her color kept changing. She could hardly wait for the tablecloths to be taken away, for she very much would have liked to lie naked in his arms, yet she did not know where this yearning came from. The maiden was brooding and suffering a great deal because of the spell Merlin had cast. At the same time, King Ban was in such distress that he shunned the laughter and games at table, and he did not know how that had happened to him. And he was in such great distress that his mind turned to brooding about it, for he had a young lady for a wife, and she was of very great beauty, and he did not wish to wrong her; moreover, he thought that it might be treasonous, because the people of the castle had done them great honor there and had given them shelter, and it seemed to him that they could bring them no greater shame than to dishonor their host’s daughter in such a way. He was so distraught that he did not know what to do, and all the time he said in his heart that he would not ask anything of her. And Merlin, who well knew what was happening to them, said to himself that it would not be as King Ban said, for it would be a very great shame if they did not get together, “for a fruit will be born of them, and the land of Britain will be honored by him because of his great prowess.” Thus spoke Merlin to himself. And after the tablecloths had been taken away and they had washed their hands, they went to stand at the windows and look up and down the marshes, and all around they could see the countryside that was so fair that [405] it was no wonder they forgot themselves until it was time to go to bed. Then they went into a room next to the great hall where the maidens had prepared two beds that befitted such princes as they, ‘The text reads si ot le chief blanc (404, 1. 18): “his head was white.” The Story of Merlin and they went to bed with great rejoicing. And when the two kings had lain down, Merlin began to cast another spell, and all who were there went to sleep except King Ban and the young lady. They were so overwhelmed by each other that they could not rest or sleep. And Merlin, who meant to bring to an end what he had begun, came into the room where the maiden lay, took her gently by the hand, and said to her, “Get up, fair one, and come to him who yearns so for you.” And she, who was so bewitched that she could hardly say no to what he wanted, at once jumped out of bed all naked but for her shift and underclothing, and Merlin led her by the hand past her father’s bed and the beds of the other knights from there, but they were sleeping so soundly that they would not have awakened if the castle had been torn down on top of them. So Merlin and the maiden made their way until they came into the room where the two kings were lying, and they found King Ban and King Bors sleeping very deeply, because they were under Merlin’s power. They went directly to King Ban, who was very ill at ease, and Merlin said to him, “Sir, look, here is the good and lovely maiden who will bear the good and handsome son whose renown will be great throughout the kingdom of Logres.” When the king saw the maiden and heard what Merlin said to him, he stretched out his hands and, happy and joyful, took her to him, for he yearned deeply for her, and he did not have the strength to withstand temptation, because of the spell that had been cast; and if he had not been bewitched, he would not have done what he did for the whole kingdom of Logres, for he mightily feared Our Lord. But he sat up and welcomed the maiden into his arms, and she took off her underclothing and her shift and lay down beside him. And they were as merry and as loving as if they nad been together for twenty years, for neither one was afraid or ashamed of the other, and this is the way that Merlin had ordained it. And this is how King Ban and the maiden were all night until daybreak. And then Merlin came in—he knew very well what time it was—and he made the young lady get up; and she put her shift and underclothing back on. And the king took a little ring off his finger and said to her, “Dear, you will keep this ring and my love.” And the young lady took it and put it on her finger; then she left straightway and commended him to God. And Merlin took her back to her own bed and made her lie down all naked. And she went to sleep at once, for she had conceived a son in whom Lancelot afterwards took great joy and great pride, because of the great good there was in him. After Merlin had put the young lady back in the bed from which he had taken her, he went back to his own bed and lay down. Then he undid his spell and everyone in the castle awoke, and it was already quite late. So the squires and the serving men got up, put on their armor, saddled their horses, and packed up [406] chests and trunks. And Merlin came straight to King Ban, who was still asleep. The spell that made him fall in love with the young lady had been broken; he was well aware that he had lain with her, but he did not know how it had happened, although he did 39] believe that it had been brought about by Merlin. And Merlin came to him and told him that it was time to ride. And when the two kings had got out of bed and dressed along with all the others, the lord of the castle and the three maidens came to the two kings and greeted them, and they returned their greetings. And when King Ban saw the young lady who had lain with him all that night, he looked at her very thoughtfully and she at him, lowering her face because she was deeply ashamed that she had been so intimate with him and had yielded herself to him. Yet, from that time forth there was not one hour when she did not love him more than any other man, and it was plain to see, for after that she never touched a man, but said to herself that a woman who had given herself to a king should not yield to a man of lower birth, nor did she ever want to take a husband. And King Ban took her by the hand and said to her very kindly, “Lady, I must leave, but wherever I am, I am your knight and your friend. And I beg you to mind what you do and take care of yourself, for you are pregnant with a son who will bring you great gladness and joy, you can be sure of it.” Merlin had made him aware of this, and thanks to Merlin he knew some of the things that were to come. And the young lady answered in a low voice, smiling, “Sir, if I am, then may God, by His holy will, grant me greater joy than I have in your behavior, for never have people in love been parted so quickly. But since it behooves you to go, I will be comforted as best I can, because I am left with child. And if I live long enough to see him, he will be for me a mirror and a reminder of you.” Hearing these words, King Ban put his arms about her neck and, smiling, commended her to God, and she went back into her room with her maidens. And the two kings and Merlin said farewell to the lady of the castle and the lord too, and thanked them most kindly for the courtesy they had shown them. Then they got on their horses and rode out of the castle across the causeway, one after the other. And Agravadain was a fourth member of their group and went along with his guests as far as the pine tree and then turned back. And the two kings rode until they came to the sea, and they boarded boats and crossed over with great rejoicing and festivity. And when they had reached the shore in the port, they got out of the boats, got on their horses, and made their way until they came to the city of Benoic, where they were greeted with very great joy. But more than anyone else, the two queens were glad to see their husbands. The two kings stayed with their wives in the city of Benoic, and Merlin stayed there with them for a full eight days. And on the ninth, he took leave of the two kings and the two queens and the other barons and went straight to his lady love. She was very glad to see him, for she loved him with a deep love, because of the great nobility she had found in him, and he loved nothing so much as her, for he taught her what he was unwilling to show anyone else. And he stayed a week with her and then left and came straight to Blaise, his master, who longed very much to see him. And Merlin [407] told him about the gathering on the Plain of Salisbury and how the queen of Garlot had been rescued, B92 and he told him about all the things that had happened since he left him. But with that, the story now falls silent about Blaise and Merlin and goes back to speaking about King Arthur and his companions. 50. Arthur’s Mid-August Court; King Rion’s Challenge.! Now the story says that when King Ban, King Bors, and Merlin had left King Arthur to go back to their countries, King Arthur stayed in Camelot, happy and joyful with Queen Guenevere, his wife, who loved him with great love and he her; and they spent a long time in love and pleasure until it was close to mid-August. And then King Arthur told Sir Gawainet that on that festival he wanted to hold a lavish court where all who held land from him would be. ‘For at no celebration I have ever held,” he went on, “have they been gathered all together.” And he wanted word to be sent to all of them near and far, friends and foreigners. “And I wish each one to bring his wife or his lady love with him,” he went on, “to honor my celebration all the more.” And Sir Gawainet told him that he had spoken very well and that such a proposal had come from a noble heart. “So I beg you,” he went on, “do your utmost, since you have talked so much about it, to bring honor to yourself then.” And the king said, “Of course, dear nephew, I long to hold such a court that it will be talked about forever.” Then King Arthur had charters and letters written, and he sent them to the barons and the knights, and he sent them word, if they held his love dear, to come to the city of Camelot on the eve of Our Lady’s Day in mid-August, for then he wanted to hold a lavish high court, and everyone should bring along his wife or lady love. And the messengers went out to the princes and the barons, they showed them the letters and spread the message throughout the countryside. And the barons and princes adorned themselves the most handsomely and becomingly they knew how, and they came to court just as the king had ordered. And everyone who had a wife brought her with him, and the others, who were unwed, brought their lady loves. And so many came that it was a wonder to behold, for not a tenth of them could be lodged in the city of Camelot, and the others found shelter in the meadowland, which was wide and beautiful, in tents and pavilions. The king joyfully welcomed them with great honor. And Queen Guenevere, who was the best-taught lady in the world, gladly welcomed the queens, the ladies, and the maidens, for she was more clever than any lady known in the world. She gave them lavish gifts of gold, silver, and costly silk cloth according to who each one was, and she did it so well that everyone said that there was no lady as worthy as she. Meanwhile, King Arthur gave out clothing, armor, and horses, and he did the gentlemen such honor and courtesy that they loved him for it for as long as they lived, and they showed it afterwards in many a battle and many a 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 407-413. The Story of Merlin time of need, just as the story will reveal it to you later. {408} King Arthur held a very great celebration the eve of mid-August for the wealthy nobility that had come. After the king and the barons had heard vespers in the High Church of St. Stephen, tables were set up everywhere, in tents and pavilions on the grass, which was green, for the king and all the barons ate in the meadows, because not all of them could do so in the city. Elsewhere were Queen Guenevere, the ladies wed and unwed, King Arthur’s sisters, the wife of King Lot of Orkney, King Urien’s wife, the queen of Garlot, the queens of Benoic and Gaunes, and the other countesses, queens, and ladies. And there was such joyful celebration that it was a wonder to behold, for in all the land of the king of Britain, everywhere King Arthur held sway, there was not a singer or musician who had not come to that festival. And everyone was served at that meal as befitted the court of such a powerful man as King Arthur was, and they all had a good time that evening until it was the hour to go to bed, when all who needed it rested untl the next morning. In the morning the king, the wealthy barons, and the queens got up and went to hear Mass at St. Stephen’s, the high church of Camelot, and the service was celebrated in honor of the sweet Lady of Paradise, whose feast day it was, and the offerings were generous and lavish. King Arthur and the other kings wore crowns that day, as did all the queens, in honor of the high feast day, and there were twenty-six crowned heads, as many kings as queens, for King Arthur was the thirteenth among the kings and Queen Guenevere the thirteenth among the queens. And when Mass had been said and the service ended, King Arthur went up to his great hall with all the other kings behind him, all wearing crowns, and Queen Guenevere did the same, with all the queens behind her, each one with a golden crown on her head. King Arthur sat at the high table and had the twelve other kings sit at his table from head to foot by rank, and in honor of the high Lady whose feast day it was, he had Queen Guenevere sit beside him wearing her crown, and all the other kings did likewise with their queens. At the other tables sat the dukes, the earls, and the other princes all in order, and the other knights were seated most richly in the meadowland in tents and pavilions, and they celebrated with great dignity and joy, and the knights and minstrels did so much singing that never had there been such rejoicing at any court. While they were celebrating with such festivity, and as Kay the Seneschal brought the first dish before the king and queen, the most handsome form of a man they had ever seen came in. He wore a tunic of samite and was girded with a belt of silk with golden rings and precious stones that flashed with such brightness that all of the great hall shone with it. He had blond, curly hair and had a crown on his head like a king. He had on bright-colored stockings and shoes of white leather edged in golden embroidery, buckled with gold clasps. And he had about his neck a harp that was all of richly-worked silver with strings of fine gold, and it was studded with precious stones. And the man was so handsome of body, [409] of face, and of limb that a more beautiful creature had never been seen. But one thing was dreadfully wrong with him, for he could The Story of Merlin not see at all; even so, his eyes were clear and fair. A chain was hanging from his belt, and at the other end was tied a little dog whiter than snow; he wore about his neck a litle collar of silk with gold rings. And this dog led him straight before King Arthur. He was playing a Breton lay so sweetly on his harp that it was good music to hear. And after the refrain of his lay, he greeted King Arthur and Queen Guenevere and all those gathered there. And Kay the Seneschal, who was carrying the first dish, lingered awhile before putting it down to listen to the harp, so keen was he to hear its sound. But with that, the story falls silent here about all of them, and we will tell you about King Rion of the Isles. In this part the story says that, when King Rion was routed by King Arthur and King Leodagan of Carmelide, he left the battle sad and upset and went back to his country gloomy and downcast, and he swore an oath that never in his life would he have joy and rest until he had King Leodagan stripped of everything that belonged to him and driven out of the land. And he sent out letters and called his men together from throughout his whole kingdom far and wide, and from the kingdoms of all the kings he had conquered, of whom there were nine by count, and so many came that it was a wonder to see. The first king who came at King Rion’s summons was King Paladem, with fifteen thousand bold, skilled men. Next came King Safur with twelve thousand men dressed in iron. And King Sarmedon brought fourteen thousand, King Argant? eleven thousand, and King Taurus thirteen thousand who were stouthearted and burning to avenge King Rion’s shame. Afterward came King Aride of Galore, who brought fifteen thousand with him. And King Solinas brought twenty thousand all riding good horses. And King Kahanin brought ten thousand, and they were all knights. And King Alipansin® of the Grazing Fields brought twenty thousand. After they had come and joined together on the orders of King Rion, and he saw them before him, he lodged his complaint and made his plea for all to hear. And he told them quite frankly, “Sirs, you are all my men, and you hold your lands and fiefs from me, and by your oath you owe faith to me against all other men. And because I know your hearts to be noble and true, and you would not wish to wrong me in any way, I therefore beseech you to help me avenge my shame—not mine, but yours! For anyone who does a shameful or wrongful deed does it not to me alone, but to you all together. And so, on the oaths that you have sworn to me, I ask you to come two months from today before the city of Carhaix and move against King Leodagan of Carmelide, who by his might beat me and drove me from the field, and I ask that vengeance be taken.” And they answered all of a voice that they did not fee to be asked, for they would do it very willingly. With that, they went their own ways, and each one came back to his country. And they got themselves ready and [410] came 2Here the form is agans (409, 1. 23); the form ergant is found at 411,1. 13. 3Here the form is alipantis (409, 1. 27), but G.D. West (13a) identifies this Alipantis des pastures with another Saxon king, Abpansis, mentioned earlier (237, 1. 11). EE) back on the appointed day to the castle of Carhaix. At the same time King Rion came back with all his men. And they laid siege to the city all around and took in their plunder and whatever else came their way. But Cleodalis, the seneschal of Carmelide who was a most valiant man and faithful to his lord, fiercely challenged them, for he was very worthy. He rode out with twenty thousand knights whom he had engaged there to guard the borderland, and he fought them very fiercely because they were pillaging what belonged to him. He won it back and brought it back into the castle and had the gates shut. And King Rion and his men encamped around the castle and had tents and pavilions set up, and they rested all that night. The next morning they began an assault with shooting and hurling. And King Leodagan and Cleodalis left the town by a hidden gate that opened upon the river right at the tent of Solinas, who had gone to fight near a litle gate. And King Leodagan and Cleodalis charged headlong in among the tents, and they threw to the ground as many as they came to, and they took gold, silver, dishes, and bolts of silk cloth, and they forced their way back to the castle with it. Then those in the horde were most distraught and upset, but King Rion said that it would be worthless to them, for he would not leave the castle without taking it and having King Leodagan at his mercy. So they pulled back and stopped their assault, and they went on thus for five days, without shooting arrows or throwing spears. While King Rion was in this lull, a messenger came to him and told him that King Arthur had routed the Saxons and driven them from his land, and that on the day of midAugust he was to hold high court in the city of Camelot. And when King Rion heard this, he said, “Let’s let him feast now, for as soon as I have King Leodagan in my power, I'll go see him with so many men that he can’t hold out against them. Even so, if King Arthur came to me for mercy while I am still here, and before I go against him with my army, I would take pity on him, and I would let him rule if he held his land from me.” “Sir,” said his men, “send him your messengers and let him know that, for he would be better off to become your man than to be stripped of his belongings and driven from his land.” “‘T'll do it,” said King Rion. Then he had a letter written and sealed with his seal, and he had all his barons put their seals on it. And when it had been sealed with ten royal seals, he called one of his knights whom he trusted very much and made him swear on holy relics that he would deliver the letter into the hands of King Arthur, and he swore that he would. Then King Rion gave him the letter, and he left him and set out on the road to Camelot with only one squire. And King Rion stayed behind at the castle of Carhaix and ordered his men to arm themselves to assault Carhaix, for it was quite bitter for him that this castle, which had so few people, meant to hold out against him as long as it could. He had, he thought,4 more knights in his horde than there were 4Sommer’s text misprints anis for auis/avis (410, 1. 40): “opinion.” 394 men, women, and children all together in the castle, “and it is a great shame and a blow to our power that we ever laid siege here, for we ought to have taken the castle in one stroke when we came here. But now we will be less esteemed in all countries, and we’ll be rebuked for weakness and cowardice, and [411] everyone else we'll want to overrun will say that we are so cowardly and so weakhearted that we are worthless.” When the barons and princes heard King Rion saying these things, they were deeply shamed, for they were afraid that he would take them for cowards and weaklings. So they quickly ran to their weapons and began to assault the castle, shooting and hurling spears. And those within, who were most worthy men, threw great sharp stones down on them, and many of them were knocked down into the moats. And King Leodagan, Cleodalis, Guiomar, who was King Leodagan’s cousin, Hervi de Rivel, and Malés the Dark rode out in full armor on their prize horses covered with iron, and they flew headlong into the army of King Rion. He had just stormed a gatehouse and was taking away fifteen foot soldiers, who were very worthy and bold, and they risked being very badly hurt and maltreated, when Cleodalis, holding his lance straight out, let his horse run against King Rion’s men, and he struck King Argant so hard that neither shield nor hauberk could have kept him from harm or Cleodalis from driving the iron tip of his lance through his chest, and he killed him and sent him down sprawling. When his men saw him on the ground, they left the ones they were taking away and ran to where he was. And when they found him dead, the wailing and the uproar about him grew so loud that the whole assault stopped, and Cleodalis and those with him rescued the fifteen companions, who were so worthy and bold, and took them to safety back in the castle, and they shut the gates. And those in the horde stayed outside and carried their king to the tent of King Rion, who was saddened and upset. And so the story falls silent about them and goes back to speaking of King Rion’s messenger, who was going to King Arthur. Here the story says that, after the messenger had left his lord, he and his squire rode until they came to Camelot on the day of mid-August. They dismounted under an olive tree and went into the hall after Kay had put the first dish before King Arthur. He saw the kings and queens sitting about the high table, wearing crowns because of the day’s great meaning, and he saw the harper playing, wearing a gold crown, and he was utterly amazed by the dog that led him throughout the hall. He asked Kay the Seneschal, who was serving at table, which one was King Arthur, and Kay pointed him out straightway. And the knight, who was very mindful and quite wellspoken, came straight before the king and said to him loudly enough for all the men and women to hear, “King Arthur, I do not greet you, because I am not ordered to do so by the one who sends me to you; even so, I'll tell you what he means you to know. And when you have heard his message, you will do what your heart bids; if you do his will you'll have honor, but if you do not, you will have to leave your land in flight, poor and dispossessed.” The Story of Merlin When King Arthur heard him, he began to smile and said to him very kindly, “Friend, tell what your message is, for you can safely say what you will with no hindrance from me or anyone else.” And he said to him, [412] “King Arthur, the one who sends me here to you is the lord and master of all the Christians, that is, King Rion of the Isles, who is besieging the castle of Carhaix with nine other kings who are all his liegemen and hold lands, fiefs, and honors from him, for by his prowess he has made them all bow to him and by his boldness has beaten them all with his sword, and he has taken off the beards, along with the hide, of all the kings he has defeated, of whom there are nine by count. Now my lord bids you to come to him and become his liegeman, and this would be a great honor coming from such a mighty king as my lord is, for he is the lord of the West and of the whole earth.” When the knight had thus spoken, he drew out King Rion’s letter, which was sealed with ten seals, and he said to King Arthur, “Sir, have this letter read that my lord sends you, and you will hear his will and his heart.” Then he handed it to him, and the king took it and handed it to the archbishop of Brice, who had come there to hear what the knight had to say. He quickly unfolded it and began to read it for all who were there to hear. And he read it just as you will hear: “I, King Rion, who am lord and governor of all of the land of the West, make it known to all who will see and hear this letter, that I am laying siege to the castle of Carhaix in Carmelide, and I have nine kings with me and all the men belonging to them, as many as are fit to bear arms. And I have won all the swords of all these kings by my mighty prowess, and I have taken their beards along with the hide. And in remembrance of my victory, I have had a cloak of red samite made, and I have lined it with the kings’ beards. This cloak is ready, and itis trimmed with clasps and all else that befits it but the fringe. But because the fringe is lacking, and I have heard stories” about the great goodness and worthiness of King Arthur, whose renown is so widespread through the whole world, I want him to be more highly honored than any of the other kings. So I bid you to send me your beard with the hide, and I'll put it on the edge of my cloak for love of you. Until my cloak has its fringe, it will never hang from my shoulders, and I want no other fringe than your beard, for at his hands and neck every prince should wear the noblest and most lordly things. And because you are lordly and a mightier king than all the others, as Renown bears witness, I order you to send me your beard by one or two of your best friends and then to come to me, and you will become my liegeman and hold your land from me. And if you will not do this, leave your land and go into exile, for as soon as I have defeated King Leodagan, I will put my whole army against you, and I will have your beard torn out against the grain, you can be sure of it!” When the archbishop of Brice had read the letter before King Arthur and all the princes, he handed it back to King Arthur, who was very sorry and upset by the order. 5The text bears the synonyms noueles & mention (412, 1. 24): “news and reference.” The Story of Merlin And the messenger said, “King Arthur, do what my lord bids you and I'll go back.” And the king told him that he could go back whenever he wanted, but he would not have his beard [413] as long as he lived, and he could be sure of that. So the knight left at once and came straight to his horse, mounted, and took to the road with his squire, and they made their way until they came to Carhaix in Carmelide, where they found King Rion, who was assaulting the castle with all his might, while those within defended themselves very forcefully, so that those outside were scattered time after time, and King Rion was quite distraught. And when the messenger came before King Rion and told him King Arthur’s answer, and he said that right after he had taken King Leodagan, he would fall upon Arthur with such a great number of men that he would not hold up against them. So the story falls silent right here about King Rion and goes back to speaking about King Arthur and his barons. 51. The Battle Before Carhaix.! Now the story says that when King Rion’s messenger left King Arthur, King Arthur stayed seated at his meal and took solace in festivity and rejoicing. And the harper went from one row to the next and played soothingly to everyone, and they all looked at him in wonder because they had never heard such harp-playing. And they found greater delight in the harper’s playing than in anything the other minstrels did. And King Arthur himself wondered where such a man could have come from. Yet he ought to have known him well, for he had seen him many times in another shape or another likeness. And after they had eaten and the tables had been taken down, the harper came to King Arthur and said to him, “Sir, if you please, I would like to have my reward for my service.” “Indeed, you will have your reward,” answered the king, “and it is very right. Now say what you wish from me, and you won’t lack for it if it’s anything I can give short of my honor and my kingdom.” “Sir,” said the harper, “you will have nothing but honor, God willing.” “Then say what you wish from me, for you can trust me.” “Sir,” said the harper, “I ask to bear your ensign in the first battle you go to.” “Dear friend, would that be to my honor and my kingdom’s honor? Our Lord has put you in His prison by making you blind. How would you see to bear the banner and lead us into battle? For my ensign must be the refuge and the safeguard of all other banners in the battle.” “Ah, sir,” answered the harper, “God, who is the true Leader, will lead me, as He has led me through many a dangerous place; and it will be to your good.” And when the barons heard this, they were astonished. Then King Ban looked about and was reminded of Merlin, Corresponds to Sommer, 413-419. 32) who, at the Castle of the Marshlands, served him in the likeness of a youth of fifteen years, and he thought that it might be he. So he said at once to King Arthur, “Sir, grant him his request, for he does not look to me like a man I'd refuse to give my warhorse to.” “What?” said King Arthur. “Do you believe that it would be to our good and honor to allow a minstrel who cannot lead himself to carry my banner into battle? And if I refused him, I do not see that it would be held against me, for this is not something that should be granted lightly if you don’t fully trust the person you put into the battle to lead.” And as soon as he had said these words, the harper vanished from among them, and no one ever knew what became of him. Then King Arthur began brooding about Merlin, and he was most distressed [414] and upset that he had not granted him his wish. And all who were there were amazed that they had lost him so suddenly. And King Ban of Benoic, who saw clearly and knew that it had been Merlin, said to King Arthur, “Indeed you ought to have recognized him.” “You speak the truth,” said King Arthur, “but I did not know who he was because he had a dog leading him.” “Who is he then?” asked Sir Gawainet. “Dear nephew,” answered King Arthur, “it is Merlin, our master.” “Indeed!” said Sir Gawainet. “God help me, I do believe you when you say that it is he, for many times he has disguised himself and changed likenesses before your nobles, and it is all to give us solace and to cheer us up.” While they were talking of these things, a little child eight years old came into the hall. All over his head his hair grew in patches, and he wore no breeches, but he carried a cudgel in his hand. He made straight for King Arthur and told him to get ready to move against King Rion in battle, and he bade him give him his standard to bear. And when those within the great hall saw him in such a state, they all burst out laughing. And King Arthur answered him laughing, for he believed that it was Merlin. “God help me,” said King Arthur, “you are indeed the one to carry it, and I heartily grant this to you.” “You have my thanks,” said the lad, “for I'll put it to very good use indeed.” With that, he commended them all to God and left the great hall. Then he took on the likeness he bore most often and said to himself that it was time to call the king’s armies together. So he made for the sea and crossed over, and he came straight to Gaunes, where Pharian and Leonce of Payerne were, and told them to gather their forces and any others they could muster in that land and come to the city of Camelot, and they said they would do as he ordered. Then Merlin went back toward the sea and crossed back into Great Britain, and he went throughout the lands of King Urien and King Lot and told the barons there to go to the city of Camelot two weeks after the feast of Our Lady in September, and they said that they would be there. Then he left them and came back to King Arthur’s court, and 2The text is periphrastic: ce quil se faisoit mener a .j. chien mauott tolue la connaissance (414, ll. 4-5): literally, “that he had himself led by a dog took away my recognition.” 396 Vespers had not yet been said in the church of my lord Saint Stephen on that very same feast day. Then King Arthur asked him why he had disguised himself so many times, but he answered that he must surely have recognized him. “You are right,” said King Arthur, “to say that I might have known!” And so they spent the rest of that day in joyful merrymaking. The next morning King Arthur gathered all his princes together in his great hall, and Merlin was there too. And King Arthur told them that they had to call up as many men as they could in their lands, for they needed to help King Leodagan, Queen Guenevere’s father. But Merlin told him that forces had already been summoned at Gaunes, at Benoic, and throughout the barons’ and the princes’ lands. King Arthur asked him when that had been done. “Sir,” answered Merlin, “I have been everywhere since the evening meal yesterday.” When King Arthur and the princes heard this, they were amazed, and so they feasted and made merry until their armies came to gather at Camelot. Then King Arthur and his barons rode out toward the kingdom of Carmelide, and Merlin bore the standard just as King Arthur had said he could. And they rode in stages until [415] they came to within a league of Carhaix, where King Rion had besieged King Leodagan. And when they had drawn near the army, Merlin said to Sir Gawainet, Sir Yvain, and Sagremor, “Stay close to me.” And they answered that they would do whatever he liked. “Then follow me right now, you and everyone in the army,” Merlin said softly, “until we come to the battleground. Then you will strike out helter-skelter into the fighting, but always remember to come to my banner wherever you may see me go.” They answered that they would do so, and he said the same thing to King Arthur and the other princes. Then they set out and made their way until they rode into Rion’s horde. And Merlin rushed out ahead of the others as fast as he could make his horse run, with the dragon raised on the tip of his lance and the banner’s tails beating against his wrist. The dragon shot fire and flames from its throat and such great flares that everyone in King Rion’s army was aghast. And Sir Gawainet, who followed it closely, holding his lance, crossed paths with King Pharaoh, who had started moving against them with his standard when he saw them coming nearer. And Sir Gawainet struck him so hard that neither shield nor hauberk could keep him from driving the tip of his lance through his body, and he brought him sprawling down dead to the ground. And he said in mockery, “This man has sworn peace, for King Arthur will never be bothered by him or lose one inch of his land!” At once the two armies came together, one against the other, and great was the uproar and mighty the blows struck by King Rion’s and King Arthur’s men. And my lord Gawainet, my lord Yvain, Sagremor, Agravain, Guerrehet, Gaheriet, and the knights of the Round Table did wonders with their fighting. The Story of Merlin When the two armies clashed, anyone could have seen a great slaughter of men and horses, for they were skilled and bold knights on both sides. And Merlin, who bore the dragon, drove headlong into the crowd, and Sir Gawainet and his companions came after him, holding their lances straight out, and they struck those they came against so hard that they bore them to the ground, and the splinters from their lances flew up into the sky. This was something that filled King Rion with dread, for his men all thought that devils had fallen upon their army, but they were so worthy and knightly that they were not disheartened for all that. Rather, they kept fighting wondrously hard against King Arthur’s men; indeed, they drove them back after their first strike, so that Sir Gawainet and his companions were greatly distraught. And Merlin shouted to them, “What can this be? My lords, have you stopped? Follow me, if you seek to grow in worthiness!” Then the companions charged in headlong among the men of Ireland, who welcomed them most warmly with their swords. But Sir Gawainet and his companions fought so skillfully and so well that they drove nght through King Rion’s army, and by that time many a blow had been dealt and taken and many a knight struck down dead. And King Arthur, King Lot of Orkney, King Ban, and King Bors had ridden hard into the army elsewhere, and they did wonders, for no armor could withstand their blows. But King Rion’s men struck back so hard that they brought down King Lot and King Bors in the middle of the field with their horses on top of them, and they might have been badly hurt, [416] had it not been for their great worth and skill, for they nimbly sprang to their feet, wielding their swords, and began striking down knights and horses with such strength that everyone who saw it took it for a great wonder. King Arthur and King Ban spurred to where they were in the worst of the fighting to help them back on their horses. Merlin came there with the banner with the dragon that spewed fire and flame from its throat, and he had driven through where the press was heaviest. And when King Rion’s men saw the fire and the great wonder of the dragon, they grew frightened and yielded their ground. The two kings whom they had run down stood quietly where they were, and Merlin came to them and gave each one a good, strong, and fast horse, for there were many strays in the thick of battle; they were eager to be mounted at once. And when they were on horseback again, they flew into the battle and began to do wonders with their arms, as did all their companions. But the strength of King Rion’s men was so great that those from the kingdom of Logres could not withstand them, and they would have been utterly routed if it had not been for Sir Gawainet, his brothers, and the other companions of the Round Table. They did wonders: they brought down knights and horses, and they struck to the ground as many as they stood against. It seemed to those who saw it that they were not men of flesh and blood, but devils from hell. Elsewhere on the battlefield were King Neutres, King Tradelmant, King Urien, and the King of the Hundred Knights. They were fighting with great fierceness against the men of the Isles, who wonderfully held their ground The Story of Merlin against them, for in the Isles were great knighthood and great skill at arms; they had brought down the king of North Wales and were holding him by his helmet’s nasal. And Merlin came to Sir Gawainet and said to him, “Now we'll see how well you can fight, for we have lost King Tradelmant unless someone helps him right away. So I beg you, follow me!” Then Sir Gawainet and his companions started after him, and they fought their way through to King Tradelmant, who was in great danger of being killed. Then they fell upon the ones who were holding him and began to hit them so hard that all who saw it thought it a wonder, so that the ones holding King Tradelmant, who were most worthy and bold in battle, were overwhelmed and could scarcely hold onto him. The companions of the Round Table had a hard time rescuing him, but in the end they succeeded in getting him back on his horse, and the men of the Isles were filled with sorrow and heartache. Then the fighting and the hitting began again and grew hard and dreadful to see, for men fell down dead one on top of the other, and they lay in great heaps amid the ranks where the fighting was, for Sir Gawainet struck down so many with his sword that his arm and sword were all stained with blood and brains up to his shoulder. When King Leodagan of Carmelide saw, from up above where he was leaning from a window, that the fighting was so hard and deadly, and he caught sight of the dragon that Merlin carried, spewing fire and flame from its throat so that the air was all red, he knew at once that it was the standard of King Arthur, for he had seen it many times before. And then King Leodagan shouted, [417] “Sir knights, now to arms. For my son King Arthur is fighting against our foes, and he has come to rescue us, for which I thank him!” And when they heard him, they ran as one through the castle to put on their armor, and they rode out of the gate fully armed. There were a good ten thousand of them, all knights worthy and bold, and with great strength they charged in headlong among the men of Ireland and those of the Isles, who welcomed them heartily like men of great boldness. And Cleodalis the Seneschal, Hervi of Rivel, and their other companions began to do wonders of arms, and the fighting was so great throughout King Rion’s army that it was a sheer wonder how many died on both sides. When King Rion saw the dreadful killing and the great slaughter of his men, his heart softened and he took great pity on his people, and he said to himself that it was a great wrong and he could bear it no more. And then he took a sycamore bough and carried it in his hands before the armies to break up the fighting, and he rode until he found King Arthur. And when he had found him, he spoke loudly enough for all to hear and understand him, and this is what he said: “King Arthur, why do you allow your men and mine to be slaughtered? Do what is right, if you are as worthy as the world has borne witness. Free your men from death and I'll free mine. Let us withdraw our armies; then let us fight each other, you and me, man to man, and this will be our pledge: if you can beat me, I'll go back into my country with my men who are left alive, and if I can win out over you, you will hold your land from me and become my underling, 397 as all the kings are whom I have beaten, and I'll have your beard with your hide to make the fringe for my cloak.” “In God’s name,” said King Arthur, “you would have the better part of the wager, for you would go back to your country safe and sound if I defeated you, and you would not become my liegeman! But Ill fight you just as you have said if you will be my liegeman should I beat you, and I grant you the same if you defeat me.” “Sir,” said King Rion, who was so strong and full of such prowess that he feared to fight no one man to man, and he had defeated nine kings who were all his liegemen, “I grant it just as you have said.” Then they swore between the two of them to hold to their oaths, and they broke up the fighting, which was so dreadful and dangerous that it was a wonder to behold, and they withdrew their barons, who were angry and upset by this agreement. And Sir Gawainet, who was more distressed than any of the others, came straight to King Arthur and said to him, “Sir, please grant this fight to me, for you could well do so.” “Now don’t ask me this again,” said King Arthur, “for no one but I will put his hand to it, God willing.” Soon the armies were gathered on each side, and the two kings put on costly armor, whatever they needed, and each one took a strong, stout lance. They rode more than a furlong away from each other; then they struck their horses with their spurs and flew against each other like a storm, for their horses ran wonderfully fast. And the two [418] kings were of great strength, and, with their horses running as fast as they could, they dealt each other such hard blows on their shields, just above the bosses, with their lances, which were short and thick with sharp tips, that they drove through them, but their hauberks were so strong that not a link broke; and their horses were so powerful and the knights so skilled, and they had struck each other so hard, that their lances flew into pieces. Then they took hold of their swords, which were very well made, and struck wondrous, heavy blows on each other’s helmet, so that they broke the jewels’ settings and knocked off the gems and stones, of which there were some that had great powers, and they cut through their shields and hauberks and struck so deeply into the flesh that the blood spurted out. Thus they had worked upon each other so thoroughly that they both needed a physician. And they had so sliced through their shields that neither had a piece big enough to cover his hand, so they threw what was left to the ground and took their swords in both hands, and they dealt each other such strong and heavy? blows that they cut open helmets and hauberks, so that their naked flesh showed through,4 and they were both tired and worn out from the blows they had given and taken. This is what kept them going for such a long time, for if they had been fresh and rested after they had been left without shields, their hauberks had come unlinked, and their helmets had been split open and crushed, they could not have lasted without 3Sommer’s text continues with a descoue[rt] [sic] (418, I. 14): “visible,” “in full view,” etc. 4Sommer’s text continues with a redundant des cops quil sentredounent (418, |. 15): “from the blows they gave each other.” The phrase recurs in the next line. 398 one or the other being killed; nevertheless, they were both very badly wounded. When King Rion, who was most worthy and bold and a good knight above all others in his land, saw King Arthur holding his own against him with such liveliness, he was amazed, for he did not believe that he could outlast him. So he said to himself that never before had he found such a good knight. He grew deathly afraid of him and said to him, “King Arthur, it is indeed too bad for you, for you are the best knight I’ve ever fought. Yet I can see clearly, and I know in truth, that the great heart you have will be the death of you, for it will not let you come to me for mercy. And I know for a fact that you would rather die than be defeated, and that is a great shame! So I would beseech you, for the great knightly spirit you have in you, to have mercy on yourself. Acknowledge that you are bested so that you may save your life, according to the pledges we have made between us, so that my cloak may be finished while I am still alive. If you do not do this, you must know that you have come to your end.” When King Arthur heard the words King Rion spoke to him, he was deeply ashamed, because so many highborn men had heard him as well. Then he ran King Rion down, wielding his sword with both hands, for he was filled with wrath, and he meant to strike him over the head. But King Rion stepped aside, for he had seen the stroke coming at full speed; even so, King Arthur hit him on the helmet and cut him down across the nose, and, as the sword went downward, he struck his warhorse in front of the saddlebow and sliced all the way through its neck, and King Rion fell to the ground. And just as he thought he could get back up, King Arthur struck him on his right shoulder so hard that he sank the blade two finger-widths into his flesh. King Rion lurched and then went sprawling to the ground. And when King Arthur saw him on the ground [419] again, he got down from his horse at once and ran upon him very fast. He grabbed him by his helmet and pulled him toward him with such great strength that he broke off the strings, tore his helmet from his head, and hurled it more than eight yards away. Then he raised his sword and told him that he was dead if he did not acknowledge that he had been beaten. But King Rion answered that he would never admit that he had been defeated by him, ‘for he would rather die than live as a faithless coward. And when King Arthur saw that he could not succeed in making him acknowledge that he was beaten, he cut off his head in plain sight of all who were in the meadow. Then the princes ran forward from every side and greeted him with great rejoicing, and they put him on his horse and led him into the castle of Carhaix. They took off his armor and looked after his wounds. And King Rion’s men came to him at once and took their lands and fiefdoms from him; then they went back to their country and took King Rion’s body back with them, and they buried him with weeping and sobbing. And King Arthur stayed in Carhaix with his barons, glad and joyful because of the victory that God had sent them, and they stayed in the castle until King Arthur recovered from the wounds he had received in the battle. And when he was back in good health, he left Carhaix amid feasting and great rejoicing, and King Leodagan went with The Story of Merlin him a long way and then turned back after they had commended each other to God. And King Arthur and his companions made their way until they came to the city of Camelot, where Queen Guenevere and the other queens were—they were very glad to see them when they got there. The princes lingered there for four days, and on the fifth they took their leave; each one went back into his own country, and those who had wives and friends there took them away with them. And King Arthur came back to the city of Logres and lived there for a long time with the queen, and Sir Gawainet and the companions of the Round Table were with them and Merlin, who had given them all great comfort as their companion. Merlin came to King Arthur and told him that, from then on, he could get along without him, for he had brought a measure of peacefulness to his land, so now he could go seek pleasure elsewhere for a while. When King Arthur understood that he wanted to go away, he was quite upset, for he loved him deeply, and he would have liked very much for him to stay. But when he saw that he could not keep him there, he begged him most kindly to come back. And Merlin told him that he would come back at once when he needed him. “Indeed,” said King Arthur, “I need you every day, for I can do nothing without your help. That is why I would like you never to leave me or my court at any time.” And Merlin answered, “Pll surely come back at once when you need me.” And the king fell silent for quite a while, and then he started to brood deeply, and after he had been lost in thought for a long time, he sighed and said, “Ah! Merlin, dear friend, please tell me in what time of need you are to help me!” “Sir,” said Merlin, “T’ll tell you and then I'll take to the road. The lion, who is the son of the she-bear and was fathered by the leopard, will overrun the kingdom of Logres. That is the time of need.” With that, Merlin left. So the story falls silent about the king and goes back to speaking about Merlin. [420] 52. King Flualis’s Dream and Roman Claims Against Britain.! In this part the story says that, as soon as Merlin had left King Arthur, just as you have heard, he went out of the city of Logres and set out on the road so fast that no warhorse in the world could have kept up with him, so that those who saw him believed that he was truly out of his mind. And at once he rushed headlong into the forest, which was wide and deep, and made straight for the sea. He went across, as he did not wish to stop, and he made his way until he came to the region of Jerusalem, where there was a most 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 420-427, The Story of Merlin powerful king whose name was Flualis. He was a worthy man of great renown in Islam,” for he was a Saracen. He had brought together all the learned men of his land and others’ lands, as many as there could be. And when they had all gathered before him in his great hall, he spoke to them, loudly enough for all to hear and understand him. “My lords,” he said, “I have sent word to you, and you have come at my behest, for which I thank you. And I'll tell you why I have sent for you. It is the truth that I was sleeping in my palace? the other night, and I was holding the queen, who is right here, in my arms, or so it seemed to me. And while I was doing that, two flying serpents came to me. Each of them had two heads, and they were wondrously huge and ugly, and they were spewing fire and flames from their throats, so that they were setting fire to my whole palace. And one of the serpents grabbed me by the sides with its feet, and the other one took hold of the queen, who was lying in my arms, and they bore us up onto the highest roof of my palace, which is very tall. After they had carried us there, they tore our arms and legs from our bodies and hurled them down here and there, one by one. And when they had thus torn off our limbs, eight little serpents came straightway and each one took one limb and flew away high to the top of the temple of Diane, where my men had fled for safety, and there they ripped our limbs into little pieces. And the two serpents that had taken our limbs from our bodies left us up on top of the palace, stirred up the fire inside the palace, burned our bodies, and reduced them to ash. And the wind picked up the ash and bore it throughout the land on this side of the sea. And there was not one good town left where a bit of it, or a little more, did not fall and lie. Such was the dream I had while I was asleep, and it weighs heavily on me. “And this is why I have summoned you here. I beg you, I beseech you, mindful of all service and duty we owe one another,” if there is anyone among you who can interpret the dream for me, let him do it, and I swear faithfully to you that to the one who tells me the truth about it will I give my daughter as his wife and my whole kingdom after my death; or if he is wed, he will be lord over me and my land all the days of his life.” When the learned men heard King Flualis’s promise after they had heard about the dream, they wondered greatly about what it might mean. One man said one thing, another something else, each one according to what seemed best to him. And after they had all spoken, Merlin, who had taken on such a shape that no one could recognize him or even see him, spoke loudly enough that 2Sommer’s text reads de sa loy (420, Il. 8-9): “with respect to his law, religion.” The idea is to evoke a Saracen spiritual space opposed to Christendom. 3Exceptionally, in this passage the word palais (420, 1. 14) is frequently translated as palace rather than great hall (cf. 420, 1. 11). Doubtless the text means to evoke a building of Oriental splendor rather than the more utilitarian Western castle. 4This clause is not in Sommer’s text here (420, |. 25), but is mentioned by Merlin in his summary (421, ll. 12-13). 5Sommer’s text reads en tous seruices & en tous guerredons (420, ll. 31-32): “in [the name] of all services and all rewards.” 399 everyone there could hear him plainly, and he said, “Listen to me, King Flualis. I’ll tell you the meaning of your [421] dream.” When the king heard his words, he looked about him to see who had said this to him, and everyone in the hall did likewise, but they could not see him. But they heard the voice that was in the midst of them and said, “Listen, King Flualis, to the meaning of your dream. The two serpents you saw while asleep that had four heads and spat fire and flames stand for four Christian kings who border on your lands, and they are setting your country ablaze. And that the serpents carried you and the queen atop the highest roof of your palace means that they will have your whole land under their sway up to the gates of your stronghold. And that the serpents tore off your four limbs and your wife’s means that you will forswear the evil religion you hold to in order to believe in Jesus Christ. And that the eight little serpents picked up the limbs from your body and the queen’s and bore them atop the temple of Diane, where your men had fled for safety, means that your children, who are your flesh and blood,® will be slain and cut up by weapons inside the temple of Diane. And that the serpents left you, and the queen with you, up atop the highest part of your palace means that you and she will be raised up in Christendom. And that the serpents burned the palace beneath you means that you will have nothing left worth a single penny of whatever you have under this evil religion. And that you and the queen were both burned and reduced to ash means that you’ will be washed and cleansed of your sins by the water of holy baptism. That the ash from you flew through all the countries on this side of the sea means that you will have children under your good religion who will be knights worthy and bold, and they will be uplifted and honored throughout all the lands of the world. Now you have heard about the dream you had while you were asleep, and everything will happen to you just as I have told you.” With that Merlin went away and left the king bewildered by the voice he had heard and yet saw nothing. He made his way swiftly and did not stop until he came to the kingdom of Benoic. He went straight to Viviane, his lady friend, who was most eager to see him, for she as yet knew nothing that she wished to know of his art. And she greeted him the most joyfully she knew how, and they ate and drank and lay together in the same bed. She knew enough about his doings so that, when she understood that he wished to lie with her, she knew how to cast a spell and bring forth a pillow, which she put in his arms, and then Merlin went to sleep. This is not said to make the story relate that Merlin ever knew a woman carnally; but there was no woman in the world he loved so much as she, and this was shown to be true, for he gave himself so utterly to her, and from time to time he taught her so much of what he knew, that in the end he could count himself a fool. 6The text reads ti membre & ta char (421, 1. 13): “your members and your flesh.” The word membre(s) has been translated as “limb(s)” throughout the passage. 7From here to the end of Merlin’s interpretation (421, Il. 1924) the pronoun continues to be singular, and there is no further reference to the queen. 400 He tarried with her for a long time, and she kept asking him about his knowledge and craft, so that he taught her a great deal. And she put down in writing everything he said to her, for she was well steeped in clerkly learning, so she remembered all the more easily what Merlin told her. And after he had been with her for quite a long while, he took leave of her and told her that he would be back at the end of the year. And each most sweetly commended the other to God. And then Merlin went away to Blaise, his master, [422] who was most happy when he came. Blaise longed to see Merlin as Merlin longed to see him. And Merlin told him all the adventures that had happened to him after he left him, and he told him how he had been with Viviane and had taught her some of his spells. And Blaise put it all down in writing, and this is how we still know it. After Merlin had told his master all these things, just as they had happened one after the other, he took leave of him and went straight to the city of Logres, where King Arthur and his wife, the queen, were. And they welcomed Merlin most gladly. As soon as Merlin had arrived, a maiden went down before the hall riding a tawny mule, and she carried in front of her, on the other side of her saddlebow, the ugliest and most misshapen dwarf that had ever been seen. His nose was flat, he was skin and bones, his eyebrows were bushy and curly, his beard was red and grew so long that it hit his feet, his hair was coarse and black and unbecomingly disheveled, his shoulders were raised and twisted, he had one great hump in the middle of his back and another on his chest, his hands were fat and his fingers stubby, his legs were short, and his long backbone stuck out sharply. Yet the maiden was of very great beauty. And everyone stared at them. And as soon as she had dismounted from her mule, she took the dwarf in her arms and helped him down quite gently, and she led him into the hall before the king, who was sitting at his meal. And when she saw the king, she greeted him most kindly, for she was filled with courtliness, and the king returned her greeting most courteously. Then the maiden said, “Sir, I have come to you from very far away because of your great renown that runs through the world, and I would ask you a favor, for no maiden—so Renown bears witness of you—fails to have whatever she asks of you. So, inasmuch as everyone takes -you for the worthiest man in the world, I have tried hard to come to your court to ask you just one favor. And be careful not to grant me anything you would not wish to give me or have done to me.” “Lady,” said the king, “ask what you will, for it will not be in vain, so long as it is something that I can grant to my honor and my kingdom’s honor.” “In what I wish to ask you,” she answered, “you can have only honor.” “Lady,” said the king, “say what you wish to say, for I am ready to do what you ask and more.” “Sir, I have come to entreat you to make a knight of this noble young lord whom I hold by the hand and who is my love. He indeed deserves to be a knight, and he ought 8The word here and later throughout the passage is Damoisele (422, 1. 28): “Young lady.” The Story of Merlin to be one, for he is worthy and bold and of highborn stock. He should have become a knight quite some time ago, and he would have been made one, had he wanted, by the hand of King Pelles of Listenois, who is a most worthy and faithful man. But my love did not wish it so; rather, he swore an oath not to become a knight unless it is by your hand. This is why I ask you to make him a knight.” Then everyone in the hall burst out laughing, and Kay the Seneschal, who was most evil-tongued and full of bitter words, said to her, sneering, “Watch out for him and keep him close to you so that the queen’s maidens will not take him from you! Soon they might steal him or snatch him away from you, for he is so handsome!” [423] “Sir,” she answered, “the king is such a worthy gentleman that, if it is God’s pleasure and his, he would not allow any of them to wrong me.” “Indeed not, lady,” said the king, “you can be sure of that, and I swear it to you.” “Sir,” said the young lady, “I thank you. Now do what I ask of you.” “Lady,” said the king, “I will do as you please.” Upon these words, two squires rode into the courtyard on two strong, swift draft horses. One of them wore a shield about his neck with three golden leopards with azure crowns, and the field was as black as a mulberry; the handle was the work of a goldsmith, its parts of gold with inlay of little crosses. He had a sword hanging from his saddlebow. And with his right hand, the other one was leading a small warhorse handsomely shaped, with a golden bridle and a halter of silk. And the two squires had loaded? a pack horse with two lovely, well-made chests. They dismounted at once beneath the pine tree and tethered their horses to it. Then they opened the chests and took out of one of them a double-mailed hauberk as white as snow, for it was of refined silver, and leg-armor made the same way, and then a helmet of gilded silver. Then they went into the hall where the king and his barons sat at their meal, and they went straight to the young lady. And when she saw them coming, she said to the king, “Sir, I beg you to do what I ask, for I have tarried here too long. Here I have all the gear a knight needs, for you see the armor with which my love will be dubbed.” “Dear, fair friend,” said the king, “I'll very gladly do what you wish, but come here and eat.” But she answered that she would never eat until he had become a knight. Thus the lady stood in the hall before the king, and she kept holding her friend by the right hand. And after the king had eaten and the tablecloths were taken away, the lady drew from her purse golden spurs wrapped in silk. And she said to the king, “Sir, grant me what I ask, for I have stayed here too long.” With that, Kay the Seneschal jumped up and started to put the right spur on the dwarf’s foot, but the lady grabbed his hand and said, “What is this, sir knight? What do you mean to do?” “I wish to put the right spur on your friend, and so I'll make him a knight with my hand.” *The verb is cachotent (423, 1. 11): “were chasing, following, driving (out)” (chacier) or “were hiding” ( cachier). The Story of Merlin “That will never come about by your hand, God willing,” she said, “for no one will put his hand to it but King Arthur, as he has sworn to me. I do not believe he will go back on his word if he can help it; otherwise he’ll have betrayed me and hurt me to death! No one but a king should lay his hand on one so highborn as my friend.” “God help me,” said the king. “Lady, you are in the night, and I’ll do everything you wish.” Then the king took the spur from the young lady and fastened it to her friend’s right foot, and the lady put the other one on him. And the king girded the sword about him after he had dressed him in the hauberk, for the lady wanted no one but the king to lay his hand on him. And when he was handsomely outfitted with everything a knight might need, the king hugged him about the neck!® and said to him that he prayed God to make him a worthy knight, which it behoved him to say when he made a knight. Then the young lady asked him if he would do anything more. “Lady,” answered the king, “I have done all I must do.” [424] “Sir,” she said, “please ask him to be my knight.” So the king entreated him, and he answered that he would grant this, since it was the king’s will. Then they left the hall at once and came straight to the pine tree. And the young lady had her new knight get on the warhorse, which was more handsome than any other, all adorned in armor, and she herself hung about his neck the shield, which was just as the story has set forth. Then she climbed on her mule. She had the squires get on their horses and sent them back to her country. But she went the other way with her knight, and they rode into a deep and wonderful forest. And King Arthur stayed behind in his great hall with Merlin and their companions, and they laughed a great deal about the young lady who had given her love to the dwarf. “Indeed,” said Queen Guenevere, “I wonder how such a thought could have come to her, for I never in my life saw such an ugly or hateful thing. Yet the young lady is full of such great beauty that no one could find the likes of her in four kingdoms! From what I can tell, I believe that devils or evil spirits have blinded or bewitched her.” “Lady,” said Merlin, “she has not been blinded to anything but the dwarf’s great ugliness. In all your life you have not seen such a wretched piece of flesh as the dwarf is; yet, he is the son of a king and queen.” “Dear sir,” said the queen, “the young lady looks as if she comes from highborm stock, for she is beautiful beyond all others; yet, her friend is so dreadfully ugly.” “Lady,” answered Merlin, “the great good there is in him and his daring will do away with a great deal of the ugliness of which there’s so very much in him, as you have seen. And you will learn of this quite soon.” “Dear friend,” said King Arthur to Merlin, “who is the young lady? Do you know her?” 10That is, gave him the colee (423, 1. 40), a ceremonial embrace; see ch. 32, n. 38. 401 “Sir,” he answered, “I'll tell you the truth. I never saw her before, but indeed I do know who she is and what her name is. But she will tell you herself in a very short while, and she will be better believed than I might be. And in the dwarf’s own words you will find out who he is sooner than you think, and you will be both sorry and glad about it.” “How can I be sorry and glad?” asked King Arthur. “Sir,” answered Merlin, “I won’t tell you now, for you have many things elsewhere to worry about. For Lucius, the emperor of Rome, has sent his messengers, and they have already dismounted in your courtyard beneath the pine tree before this hall.” While Merlin was saying these things to King Arthur, behold twelve princes very richly arrayed, dressed in costly silk cloth, and they came in two by two, holding hands, and each one carried in his hand a little olive bough, which meant that they were messengers. And they came thus before King Arthur, who was seated at the head of the high table in the great hall along with his barons. And they came before him, but did not greet him. One, who was their leader and spokesman, said, “King Arthur, we are twelve princes from Rome who have been sent to you by Lucius, the emperor.” He then drew out a written document wrapped in silk cloth, handed it to King Arthur, and told him to have it read. And the king took the letter and gave it to the archbishop of Brice, who was beside him, and ordered him to read. The archbishop opened it and began in this way: [425] “I, Lucius, emperor of Rome, who have power and lordship over the Romans, send word to my foe, King Arthur, that he has been faithless to me and to the power of Rome. I am amazed, and it comes to me as something most blameworthy, that he seeks, wrongfully and with haughty pride, to scorn Rome. And I wonder how and at what urging you would dare undertake warfare against Rome as long as you knew I was alive. This madness must have come to you from foolhardiness or melancholy, since you dared scorn Rome, which holds power and lordship over the whole world, as you have surely known all along and seen many times. And you will know again, more thoroughly than before, what a weighty thing it is to stir up the wrath of Rome. “You have gone beyond your rights when you hold for yourself dues and lordship that are Rome’s. You take our income and our lands, which you know belong to Rome. Know that if you keep this up any longer, the wolf will flee in fear of the lamb and the lion for the goat, and the rabbit will hunt the greyhound. You have no more power against us than the lamb against the wolf, and you are as much an underling to us as the lamb is to the shepherd, for Julius Caesar, our forebear, strongly and boldly undertook warfare in Britain. Lordship was granted him over it and all the islands round about, but, for the madness, pride, and great evil that are within you, you mean to snatch it from us! “And so I summon you to come set it right, and, by the day of the Holy Nativity, you must be in Rome before me, ready to make amends for the wrong you have done. If you do not do this, I will take away from you Britain and all your lands you have under your sway, and I will come the next 402 summer with such great forces that you won’t dare make a stand against me, nor can you flee so far that I will not follow you and bring you back to Rome in bonds as my prisoner.” After the archbishop had read the letter just as you have heard, a great uproar broke out in the hall among the barons who had listened to it. They swore to bring dishonor to the messengers who had brought the letter, and they would have shamefully and wrongfully harmed them if it had not been for King Arthur, who said to them very kindly, “Dear lords, let them be. They are messengers and have been sent by their lord, and they must do and say everything that has been entrusted to them, and they should not be afraid of anyone.” Then King Arthur called his princes and barons together, and they went into a room to take counsel. Then spoke a most worthy and bold knight, whose name was Cador, and he said that they had wasted a very long time in idleness and games, “but, thank God, now the Romans have come to challenge us for our lands and holdings and have awakened us! And if they do what the letter sets forth, they, who have been at peace for such a long time, will have much bold, skillful fighting to do. I for one have never liked them!” And my lord Gawainet said to him, “Sir, you surely know that peace after warfare is a good thing, for the land is all the better and stronger for it. And the games we play and the jesting we do with the ladies and young women are good things, too, for it is courtship and the love of ladies that make knights strive for boldness and skill in the fighting they do.” Then King Arthur ordered them all to sit down, [426] and they did. But he stayed on his feet and said to them, “My friends and companions, you have upheld my honor and welfare in the battles and wars I have fought since I came to hold this land, and I have led you in times of great trial over land and sea. You have helped me—and I am grateful to you for it—to conquer the lands all around which, thanks to your help, all bow down to me now. And now you have heard the summons the Romans, who have long worried us, have sent us. But, if God cares for you and me, they will take away with them, when they leave, nothing belonging to us that is not dearly sold to them. You'see the emperor’s messengers here. Now counsel me how to answer them as befits honor and reason. You see that the Romans mean to rise against us, and we must be ready for them when they come, so that they cannot harm us in any way. They want to have lordship over Britain and the other islands I hold, and they say that Caesar won them with his might, that the Britons could not stand against him, but granted him lordship and power over them. That is not right, and it comes from boundless pride. One does not rightly hold what one holds by force. And they have reproached us for the shameful things and the wrongs they have done us and our forebears. They boast that they defeated them and that our forebears granted them lordship over them. The more they have to give back to us, the more we should hate them and do them harm. We should hate the ones who hated our forebears and took their lordship from them and now wish to have it back by The Story of Merlin right of inheritance.!! So we’ll go challenge Rome, winner take all. As for me, I can do nothing other than what I have told you.” When the barons and princes heard the king saying these things, they answered all of a voice that he had spoken very well indeed. And they told him to send far and wide for his men and to gather his forces and to set out straight for Rome and move against the emperor who in his pride had so heavy-handedly and so wrongfully called him out: “So put the lordship of Rome under your power. And remember what Queen Sibyl foretold when she said that from three Britons would come those who would take Rome by force. Two of them have already conquered Rome. The first was Belinus, who was king and lord of the Britons. Constantine was the second. And you will be the third to take Rome by force, and in you will the prophesy be fulfilled. Now go forth and take the honor that God has granted you!” Upon these words the king and the barons and knights left his room and came straight into the great hall, where the twelve messengers awaited them. And King Arthur told them to go back to their emperor and tell him on his behalf that his forebears had held Rome before him and had taken tribute from Rome, and that he meant to have it as well by right of succession and inheritance. As the Romans had not given him what they owed, he meant to have Rome as his own, for they had not dealt with him as they ought to have done to their overlord. And they left. And the king gave them [427] lavish gifts as they went away, for he was the most courtly and most open-handed man in the world, and he did not want them to speak ill of him. And they came straight back into their country as quickly as they could, and they told the Emperor Lucius what they had heard from King Arthur. He was dreadfully upset. He sent for and gathered his forces. He crossed the mountains of Montjoie!? and came straight into Burgundy, near the city named Autun, and he seized the land far and wide. But with that the story falls silent for a while from speaking about them and goes back to speaking about King Arthur. The preceding two sentences are supplied largely from additional text that Sommer provides from the Harley manuscript and others (426, n. 2). The additional text continues by attributing to Arthur material drawn from Geoffrey of Monmouth (e.g., Books 3, 5, and esp. 9) that recounts conquests of Rome by the British kings Belinus and his brother Brennius and later by Constantine the Great, thereby advancing a counterclaim that Rome belongs to Arthur by right of inheritance. The material derives from the “Mort Artu” section of the Didot Perceval (Didot manuscript only), where the story is told by King Lot (ed. Roach, pp. 258-61). It is referred to below in the barons’ advice to Arthur (426, Il. 25-30); significantly, they speak as though they introduce the arguments for the first time. 12The text reads les mons de mongieu (427, Il. 5-6), that is, the Little St. Bernard Pass, the favored Alpine route between France and Italy. The Story of Merlin 53. The Expedition to Gaul and the Giant of Mont-Saint-Michel.} Now the story says that after the twelve messengers had gone, King Arthur and his barons were left very badly upset by the summons the Emperor Lucius had sent. And Merlin said to him, “Sir, call your men together, for we mustn’t tarry. The emperor has strongly equipped himself.” “Merlin, dear friend,” said King Arthur, “I'll be upon him sooner than he wants. He’ll be the worse off for attacking us.” “But now I bid you farewell, for I go to take your message to the barons.” At once Merlin vanished, and the king did not know what had become of him. And Merlin went straight to Orkney, first of all, and gave the message to King Lot to be in Logres within two weeks from that day with all his forces; he answered that he would gladly be there, and Merlin bade him farewell and left. Why should I go on telling you? He let all the princes who held land from King Arthur, but not King Ban and his brother King Bors, know that they were to be in Logres within two weeks. Then he went back and found King Arthur in his rooms, and he said to him, “Sir, I have given your message to all your barons, and in fifteen days from today they’ll be here ready to go!” When King Arthur heard him, he was greatly gladdened. And he stayed at Logres until his nobles had come. King Lot of Orkney was the first to come, and he led five thousand men. And King Urien had four thousand, the King of the Hundred Knights four thousand, King Neutres four thousand, King Caradoc four thousand, King Tradelmant four thousand, and Duke Escant of Cambenic two thousand. And Gosengos and Nabunal the Seneschal led four thousand, King Yder four thousand, and King Aguisant four thousand. And after they had all gathered in the meadowlands of Logres, King Arthur was most glad, and he thanked them heartily. He told them about the emperor’s proud and wrongful summons, and they told him to think of nothing but striving until the shame had been avenged. Then the fleet was made ready and they went aboard the ships. And Merlin went out ahead and did not stop until he had come ashore at Gaunes. He found King Ban and King Bors, and he ordered them to get themselves ready, for King Arthur had set out on the sea to move against the Romans. And they said that they would be there for the fight. And Merlin turned about and went straight to the port before King Arthur landed. And when the king saw him, he asked him where he had been, and he answered that he was coming from the city of Gaunes, where he had summoned the two kings “who will be there for the fight with mighty forces.” And King Arthur thanked him heartily. Then the barons left the ships and encamped for a while [428] along the shore in tents and pavilions, so that they could recover from the hard time they had had at sea. And so they went to sleep that night. And as King Arthur slept, he saw in a dream that came to him a great bear atop 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 427-434. 403 a mountain. And it seemed to him that a great dragon was coming toward it out of the eastern skies, and it spewed from its throat fire and flames so thick and awesome that they lit up the shores all about. Then the dragon fell upon the bear with all its might. The bear defended itself well, but the dragon took hold of the bear, sent it hurling to the ground, and killed it, so it seemed to King Arthur. When King Arthur awoke, he was bewildered by the dream. He sent for Merlin, and he entreated him most kindly to tell him the meaning of his dream. Then he told him word for word what he had seen while he slept. And then Merlin said to him, “Sir, I'll tell you the meaning. The bear you saw stands for a great monster, a huge giant that lives near here on a great mountain. He came to this country from the land of Spain, and he has stayed here. Every day he wreaks shame and harm on this land, but no man dares stand up to him for fear of his great strength. The dragon you saw in your dream that spewed fire and flames from its throat, so thick that the whole land was brightened by it, stands for you yourself, who burn with the fire of your bright boldness shining with divine grace. And that the dragon then struck with such might means that you will attack the giant, who will put up a good fight against you. And that the dragon took hold of the bear means that in the end you will kill him; have no fear about Hin” Then they had the tents and pavilions taken down, and they set out on the road. But they had not gone far when news came to King Arthur about the giant, who was laying waste the land and countryside, and no man or woman was left, but they had all fled through the fields like dumb beasts for fear of the giant. And he had taken by force a maiden, Helaine,* a gentleman’s niece, and had carried her off atop a mountain, where his lair was, that was surrounded by the sea. Now this mountain is called MontSaint-Michel, but at that time it had neither minister nor church. There was no man so bold or strong that he dared fight the giant, and when the men of the countryside got together, they could not hold out against him on sea or on land, for he killed them all with rocks and sank their ships. This is why the people of the country gave up their lands and homes to him. When King Arthur heard the news about the giant who was laying waste the land, he called Kay the Seneschal and Bedivere, and he told them to get their armor ready while it was still dark, and they did as he ordered. And the three of them rode out with only two squires, and they rode until they came near the foot of a mountain, and they saw a great fire burning; beyond, they saw another mountain no less high than the first, and they saw a great and wondrous fire burning there as well. And King Arthur did not know which mountain he should climb. So he called to Bedivere and told him to go find out on which mountain the giant was. Bedivere then got into a boat, for the sea was at high tide. When he came to the nearer mountain, he climbed up the rocky cliff, [429] and he heard much weeping and wailing; and when he heard that, he grew fearful, for he 2Her name, not given at this point in Sommer’s text, appears below (429, 1. 14) in a context that seems to assume that the name has occurred previously. 404 believed that the giant was there. But he renewed his boldness within him, drew his sword, and went forth. It was his hope to yield to adventure and fight the giant, as he was not a man who wished, for any fear of death, to behave like a coward; and with this thought, he climbed to the top of the rock. When he was on top, he saw the fire, which burned very brightly, and he saw a grave nearby that had been newly dug. Beside the grave he saw an old woman sitting, her clothing all torn to shreds and her hair askew, and she was weeping and sighing in great sobs. And when she saw the knight, she said to him, “Ah, noble knight! Who are you? What adventure has brought you here? For you life will come to an end most dreadfully if the giant finds you here! Run away from here as fast as you can, for you would be most unlucky to linger here until that devil from hell, ruthless to everyone, sees you. So go away quickly, if you want to stay alive!” When Bedivere saw the woman weeping and mourning Helaine so tenderly, and she had told him to flee if he did not wish to die, he drew closer to her at once and said to her, “Good woman, stop weeping and tell me who you are and why you are mourning so beside this tomb.” “I am,” she answered, “a sorrowful, wretched woman, and I weep and mourn for a maiden, a noble woman who was the niece of Lionel of Nanteuil. I nursed her and gave her the milk from my breasts. She lies here in this grave, and she was entrusted to me to nurse and keep safe! Now a devil has taken her away from me, a devil from hell that brought us here. He wanted to lie with the child, so young and tender, and she could not bear it, he is so ugly, so ghastly. And so he took her soul from her body, and he tore her away from me through his faithlessness. I have buried her here, and I weep over her and mourn her day and night.” “And why do you not go away?” asked Bedivere. “Why do you stay on here alone? You have lost her and cannot have her back.” “Sir,” she answered, “I know very well that I cannot have her back, but, since I see that you are so noble and courtly, I do not want to hide anything from you. When my dear daughter was slain, for whom I thought I would die of sorrow, the giant made me stay here to satisfy his lust with me. He has defiled me by force, and I must submit to his will whether I want to or not. As Our Lord is my witness, it has been against my will, and the giant has very nearly killed me. And if he comes here to satisfy his lust with me, you are as good as dead. And he’ll come soon, for he is on that mountain where you see the great fire. So I beg you, go away from here and leave me to mourn and weep over my daughter!” Bedivere felt deeply sorry for the woman, and he comforted her with great kindness. Then he went back to the king and told him what he had seen and heard, and he told him that the giant was on the hill where he saw the great fire blazing. Then the king had his companions climb that hill. When they were on top, he made them stop. He told them that he would go by himself and fight the giant alone, “but, even so, watch out for me, and come help me if I need it.” And they answered that they would. [430] The Story of Merlin They stopped there, and King Arthur went on toward the giant, who was sitting before the fire and roasting meat on a great spit; he was cutting off and eating the meat that had cooked the most. And the king, sword in hand, went toward him one step at a time, his shield strapped to his arm, for he meant to take him by surprise. But the giant, who was faithless and evil, looked about him and saw the king drawing near him. He sprang up, for the king had his naked sword in his hand, and he ran to get a cudgel that was nearby—it was so huge and so awesome that two men could scarcely carry it, and it was carved from oak wood. So he left his roast in the fire, and he swiftly lifted the cudgel as high as his neck, for he was quite lively and very strong, and he came at the king very fast and told him that it was unwise of him to have come there. He raised the cudgel and meant to hit the king on the head. But the king was very nimble and quick, and he jumped to the side so that the blow missed him. And as he jumped away, he thrust a blow at the giant, meaning to strike him on the head, but the giant, who was quite bold and quick, thrust his cudgel out—for otherwise the king would have killed him—and warded off the blow. Even so, the king followed through with his good sword, which he had won from King Rion, and aimed at his two eyebrows; he broke through his skin and flesh down to the bone, and the giant could see nothing, because of the blood that spilled down into his eyes, and so he could not see where to land his blows. So he began to strike out wildly all about him like a madman. The king began to bear down hard, but he could not reach him, for the giant was striking out so hard and fast that if one of the blows had hit him, it would have crushed him. And so they fought for a long time. And when it dawned on the giant that he would not land a blow on the king, he threw his cudgel to the ground and reached out with his hands wherever he heard the king stepping, for he could not see him. The king was hitting him hard with his sword, and the awesome blows fell thick and fast, but the giant was wearing a leather jerkin made of snake skin, and it was so hard that the sword could not cut through, and the king was angry and upset. The giant kept thrashing out with his hands and jumping here and there, unt at last he caught the king by his arms, and when he got hold of him, he was most happy, for he thought that he could soon kill him—and indeed he would have, had it not been for the great nimbleness of the king, who jumped about so much that the giant could hardly hold on to him, and he freed himself. Then the king ran upon him wielding his sword, and he hit him so very hard on his left shoulder that his whole arm shook from the blow, but the leather jerkin was so strong that he could not cut through to his flesh. The giant still could not see him, as his eyes were too full of the blood that came down from his wound, so that he could not see heaven or earth; but at last he raised his hand to his eyes and wiped away the blood, and he could make out a shadow of the king. He ran to that side, but the king, who knew that the giant had great strength, did not dare let himself get caught in his arms. The giant ran about so much, here and there, that he stumbled against his cudgel. He grabbed it and, burning with hatred, ran upon the king, but the king stepped aside, for he did not dare make a The Story of Merlin stand against him, and that filled the giant’s heart with even greater anger. He then threw his cudgel down and began reaching out again to take hold of the king with his hands. He kept wiping and rubbing his eyes, until he could see light as well as a shadow of the king. Then he leapt out and grabbed him by the hips with both hands, [431] and he squeezed him so hard that he nearly broke his backbone in two, and he began to feel for the king’s arms because he wanted to take the sword out of his hand. But the king, who saw clearly what was in his heart, dropped his sword, which fell to the ground and made such a loud noise that the giant heard it. He then held the king in one of his arms and leaned down to pick up the sword; but as he stooped, the king hit him with one of his knees and sent him to the ground in a faint. He then sprang to his sword, picked it up from the ground, and came back to where the giant lay. He raised up his leather jerkin and thrust the sword into his body. And this is how the giant died. Then Kay the Seneschal and Bedivere came forward and greeted the king joyfully. They looked at the giant, who was wondrously huge, and they heartily praised God for the honor and victory He had given King Arthur, for they had never before seen such a great devil. And King Arthur told Bedivere to cut off the giant’s head and to take it back so that the army could see the wonder of his great size, and he did as he was ordered. Then they climbed down the mountain and got on their horses. The tide had gone out and was already coming back in, and it was coming in very fast indeed, but they got across and rode straight to the army. The barons were quite troubled because the king had been away for such a long time, for they did not know where he had gone, but Merlin told them not to worry, for he would soon come back safe and sound. While the princes and barons were so frightened for King Arthur, he dismounted at his tent, along with Kay the Seneschal and Bedivere, who had hung the giant’s head on his saddlebow by its hair. The barons all came to the king as he was getting down from his horse, and they asked him where he was coming from, for he had given them a great fright. And he told them that he was coming back from fighting the giant who had laid waste the land and countryside all about them and that he had killed him, “thanks be to God.” Then he showed them the head that Bedivere had brought back. And when the barons saw it, they crossed themselves in wonder and said that they had never seen such a huge head, and all who were in the army praised Our Lord. Then they took off King Arthur’s armor with great rejoicing and merrymaking, and they stayed there resting the whole day. And the next morning they took down the tents and pavilions and set out on the road straight for Burgundy, and they rode for as many days as it took until they came to the River Aube. And there news reached them that the Emperor Lucius had invaded that country and was laying it waste, and King Arthur was quite glad that he had found him so close by; however, he was sorry that he had stripped the countryside. So he had his army encamp along the River Aube. And that very day King Ban and King Bors rode into the army with six thousand knights, but neither Pharian nor Gratian 405 nor Leonce of Payerne had yet got there, for they had stayed behind to safeguard the land and defend it against King Claudas of the Land Laid Waste, should there be need to. As soon as the two kings had come into the army, they had their tents set up before the tent of King Lot, who was most glad to see them, for he truly loved them with great love. And they stayed there until King Arthur had a castle raised up there, where they could take refuge if they had to. Then, following his barons’ advice, King Arthur sent his messengers to the Emperor Lucius, and he told him [432] that he had most unwisely ridden over his land, and that, if he did not make amends for it, he would drive him out of Rome. He sent Sir Gawainet, Sir Wain, and Sagremor on the mission, for they were courtly and well-bred, and they were worthy and bold. And the king said to Sir Gawainet, “Dear nephew, you'll go to the emperor and, on my behalf, tell him to turn back and leave this land, which belongs to me. And if he does not mean to turn back, let him come prove in combat which one of us has rights to it, for I'll defend it to the end of my days against the Romans; I’ll win it back in battle, and I'll prove against him man to man which of us will have it.” When King Arthur had spoken these words, the messengers rode out wearing their hauberks, their helmets fastened on, their shields about their necks, their swords girded, and holding their lances. And they talked together with Sir Gawainet, for they were young and light-hearted, and said that before they came back they would do something “that people will talk about forever, and it will be said that the war has begun.” So they rode until they came near the army. And when the Romans saw the messengers, they ran out of their tents everywhere to see them and to hear their news. They asked who they were and where they came from, but they would not stop or listen to anything they had to say until they reached the emperor’s tent. They dismounted before his tent and had their horses tethered outside the doorway; then they came before the emperor and told him the message from King Arthur. “My lord,” said Sir Gawainet, “King Arthur sends you word to leave his land and this countryside, for it belongs to him by rights, and he forbids you ever to be so bold as to set foot in it again. But if you wish to challenge him in combat for any of it, I will defend King Arthur. Romans won it in battle in days gone by, and in battle it will be won back. Now let it be proved which one should have lordship and power over it. Come before dawn if you wish to challenge for lordship of the land—or go back, for you have nothing to do here. We have taken the land and you have lost it, so believe what I say and you will be wise.” When the emperor heard Sir Gawainet speaking in such a way, he answered him straightway, angry and upset, that he would not turn back, for the land and the countryside belonged to him; rather, he would go on ahead. He was very glad to hear such orders, for if he had lost his land, he would have it back when he could, and he truly believed that it would be soon. A knight, whose name was Titilius, was sitting next to the emperor; he was the emperor’s nephew, the son of his sister, and he was most evil and overweening, and he 406 answered very wickedly and said, “Britons who make threats are good with words, but in deeds they are worth little.” And he would have gone on with his mockery, but Sir Gawainet drew his sword from its scabbard, stepped forward, and struck him so hard that he sent his head flying. Then he said to his companions, “Get on your horses.” They did so at once, and Sir Gawainet got on his horse, and they turned about without taking leave of the Romans or the emperor. And then the whole army was in an uproar, for the emperor began shouting very loudly, “Take them! You'll be sorty if they get away!” Then they all shouted, “To arms!” And you would have seen [433] men everywhere putting on armor, climbing on horses, and spurring after the messengers, who were riding away at great speed. They looked over at the Romans, who were coming at them from all sides, over the roads and across the fields, four here, four there, five over here, six over there. But there was one of them who wore costly armor and was on a strong, fast horse, and he flew past all his companions and shouted to the messengers, “You are indeed taking your time, so I'll hand you over to the emperor!” When Sir Gawainet heard him, he took his shield by the arm straps, turned his horse about, and hit him so hard that he sent him down dead to the ground. Then he said, “Sir knight, those are the tidbits I can give you to eat, you and my other foes. Wait for your companions who are following you and tell them that King Arthur’s messengers have ridden by here!” After him came a knight who had been born in Rome of very high stock, and the Romans called him Marcel. His horse was strong and swift, but he had no lance, for he had forgotten it in the haste of riding out. And he went alongside Sir Gawainet, for he had promised to take him back alive to the emperor. And when Sir Gawainet saw that he was riding alongside, he turned his reins, and Marcel rode into him as he was passing by. And Sir Gawainet hit him so hard that he drove his sword into his brain and all the way down to his teeth. Then he said to him in mockery, “You would have better luck if you were still with the emperor!” Then all three messengers turned about and struck three Romans down dead. There was a knight, who was Marcel’s cousin, sitting astride a strong, fast horse, and he was very sorry about his kinsman? whom he saw lying on the ground, so be began to spur his horse across the fields. Sir Yvain caught sight of him, so he ran to where he was and hit him so hard that he could never get back up, for he had cut off his head. Then three* Romans struck him and broke their lances on him, but he cut one’s head off and another’s arm, and he hit the third so hard on the head that he struck him down dead and sent him sprawling from his horse. Then he rode after his companions, and the Romans ran after them until they 3The word is neveu (433, |. 25): “nephew, grandson, progeny”; not the equivalent of cousins (433, 1. 24): “cousin.” 4The text bears the definite article (433, 1. 28). The Story of Merlin came to a wood that was near the castle that King Arthur had had built. But with that the story falls silent for a while about the messengers and those who were riding after them, and goes back to speaking about King Arthur and his barons. Here the story says that at the time when the messengers left King Arthur to go on their mission to Lucius (the emperor of Rome), King Arthur, following Merlin’s advice, sent after them seven thousand very well equipped knights to meet the messengers and rescue them if they needed. And they rode until they came to the woods, and there they waited for the messengers. At last they saw them coming, and after them the whole field was covered with knights who were giving them chase. And when they saw this, they rode out to meet them, and the Romans withdrew just as soon as they [434] saw them coming. But many of the Romans were upset, because they had run after them for so long, for the Britons had fallen upon them all too ruthlessly, and they had taken many and killed many. There was one quite renowned knight who was named Petrinus, and in Rome there was not his match in knightly skill or boldness. He had heard about the ambush the Britons had set up, and he set out at once to where they were with six thousand men in iron armor. And as soon as he got there, he pushed the Britons back by main force, for they could not hold out against him, nor could they stand their ground, so they made their way as far back as the woods, and there they defended themselves. And Petrinus fell upon them with all his might, but he lost very many of his men there, for the Britons slaughtered them, and there were many dead and wounded on both sides. But now the story falls silent about them, and we will tell you about King Arthur and his companions. 54. Battles with the Romans; Arthur’s Victory.! When King Arthur saw that his messengers were long in coming back, he called Yder, son of Nut, to him and entrusted six thousand knights to him and ordered him to ride after the others until he found them. So they took to the road and made their way until they saw the two armies fighting against each other. Sir Gawainet was fighting with such wondrous skill, and Yder and his companions spurred to where he was and, with all their might, charged headlong into the Romans. Then the Britons came out of the woods and won back the field. And Petrinus, who was a very good knight, worthy and bold, rallied his men around him. He knew how to fall back and turn about, and he knew how to storm in among his foes. (If anyone wants to meet a bold knight in battle, let F, him go against him, and the one who does must surely die!) The barons spurred their horses all over the battlefield. They were unwilling to rest and wanted only to joust. They did not care how the fighting went, but only that the war had begun. Corresponds to Sommer, 434441. The Story of Merlin On the other side was Petrinus, very upset, and he kept his knights close by him. Sagremor of Constantinople was riding through the battlefield, striking down knights and horses, and he caught sight of Petrinus, who was turning about and then striking down Britons. He looked and understood from the wonders Petrinus did that there would be heavy losses if he did not kill him or take him alive, for the Romans were rallying, thanks to his skillful deeds alone. He then took the best of his friends aside to talk and said to them, “We have begun this fight without King Arthur’s order. If it happens to turn out well for us, he will be grateful to us, but if we come out badly, then we will have his wrath. This is why we must kill Petrinus or take him alive and hand him over to King Arthur, for otherwise, we cannot get out without losses. So I bid you, do what I do and spur your horses after me!” And they answered that they would do so and follow him wherever he wanted to go. When he heard this, he was very happy. And he had watched closely and seen where Petrinus was. Then he started out at once to where he knew him to be, and his companions followed him all together, and they did not stop before they came to the spot where Petrinus was, where he was leading the knights of his household. And when Sagremor saw him, he spurred over to him and got close enough to him to put his arms about him, and Sagremor let himself fall with him like a man who had faith in his companions. And Petrinus lay on the ground in his arms, [435] for he was holding on to him very tightly. Petrinus was struggling hard to get up, and he began to twist and turn, but Sagremor held him so strongly that he could not move. And when the Romans saw Petrinus on the ground, they ran to his rescue, and there was hard and wicked fighting. But Sir Gawainet rode straight into the press and cleared a way with the blade of his sword, with which he killed and struck down as many as he met right in front of him, and no one was so bold or so strong that he did not give way to him. And Yder, son of Nut, also slaughtered a great many of the Romans. And each one was so mightily strengthened by the other that they lifted Sagremor back astride his horse, and they took Petrinus and held him prisoner—he had been beaten hard and was badly hurt, they brought him out of the press by their sheer strength and handed him over to good guards, and they went back in to start the fray all over again. And those who were left without a leader hardly put up a defense at all after they had lost the one who had led them; so the Britons kept killing them and striking them down in great heaps. They rode over the dead bodies to hold back the runaways, of whom they killed many and took many prisoner and gave them over to King Arthur. They advised Arthur to send them into the land of Benoic and have them held in prison there until the Romans did what he wanted, for if he held them in the army, they could well have been lost. Then the king summoned Borel, Richier, Cador, and Bedivere, who were 2called bretel (435, 1. 36) (see West 46, Bretel) and bertelot (436, 1. 7). 407 good knights, worthy, bold, and highborn, and he ordered them to get up early the next morning and take the prisoners and lead them out of danger. So the story falls silent here about King Arthur, the prisoners, and those who should lead them away, and goes back to speaking about the emperor. Now the story says that when the emperor learned about the harm his men had suffered, he was grief-stricken and heartbroken. Then spies came to him and told him that the prisoners would be led away the next morning into the land of Benoic. When the emperor heard this, he had ten thousand knights take their horses and ride through the night, and he ordered them to ride until they were ahead of the prisoners and to rescue them if they could. Then the emperor called to him Sestor,3 who was lord of Libya; the king of Syria,4 who was called Evander; Calidus of Rome; Matis; and Catenois—those five were well schooled in fighting and they knew a great deal about warfare. And the emperor ordered them to lead the ten thousand? armed knights. And they rode until they came to the road on which the prisoners were to go by, and they stopped® very quietly in a most delightful spot that they found near the road. And early next morning King Arthur’s household arose, just as they had been ordered, and they led the prisoners away. They rode in two clusters for fear of their foes. Borel, Richier, and Cador were leading one company where prisoners’ were, and the prisoners rode with their hands tied behind their backs and their feet tied under their horses. They were going ahead, and they fell upon the Romans’ ambush. The Romans stormed out in front of them with such an uproar that the ground shook and quaked all about them, and they defended themselves like men of great strength. And when Bedivere and his companions, who were coming up from behind, heard the noise and the sound of blows ringing, they had their prisoners taken to a [436] safe place and ordered their squires to watch over them. Then they spurred their horses and were not willing to stop before they got to their companions, who were defending themselves with strength and daring. And the Romans spurred their horses here and there, but they did not mean to defeat the Britons so much as to look for the prisoners. And when the Britons saw them behaving in that way, they split into four battalions: Cador had with him the men of Cornwall, Bedivere and Richier had a great body of men each, and Borel had the men of Galloway. 3The form here is Gestoire (435, 1. 28). The form sestor (440, 1. 31) is preferred by West (279). 4The form is sur (435, 1. 28). West suggests Syria on the basis of readings in Wace (283, see Sur’). 5Here the text reads .x”v. (435, lL. 31), whereas the original number is ten thousand (435, 1. 25). 6sommer’s text adds el chemin (435, ll. 32-33): “on the road”, but this contradicts the later pres del chemin (435, ll. 33-34): “near the road,” more suitable for an ambush. "The text reads la compaignie ou li prison estoient (435, ll. 3637): “the company where the prisoners were”, but the other company also has prisoners (435, 1. 42). 408 When King Evander noted that his men were dwindling and that their strength was flagging, he drew them close to himself. And when they saw that they could not rescue the prisoners, they fell upon the Britons in good order and started a hard and wondrous fight. The Britons indeed had much the worse of it, for they lost a great many knights, and Yder, son of Nut, met King Evander, who struck him so hard that he sent him down dead to the ground. The Britons were greatly disheartened because they lost many of their men in the onslaught, and they would have all been killed or taken prisoner but for Cleodalis, the seneschal of Carmelide, when he came there with five thousand men whom King Arthur had sent on Merlin’s advice. And when Bedivere caught sight of them, he said to his companions, “Hold your ground and do not run away! See the help that is coming to us!” And when they heard them, they shouted King Arthur’s battlecry so loudly that Cleodalis heard them clearly. Then he and his men let their horses run. The Romans had their minds set on taking the Britons, and they took no heed of the men of Carmelide before they charged headlong in among them. In their first pass, they struck down a hundred Romans who never got up again. And when the Romans saw that, they were utterly dumbfounded, for they were sure that it was King Arthur with his whole army. They were so disheartened that they took to their heels and made for their encampment, for they did not believe they would be safe anywhere else. And the Britons followed hard behind them. And in the chase were killed King Evander, Catenois,® and more than two thousand others, and many were also taken and held prisoner. Then they went back to the battlefield, and they picked up Borel and the other dead who lay over the field and buried them. And then they carried the wounded away, and the men to whom King Arthur had entrusted the prisoners led them away and those who had been taken prisoner in that battle; they bound them tightly and took them where they had been ordered to lead them. And Cleodalis and his companions went back to King Arthur and told him how they had fared. But with that the story falls silent for a while about them and goes back to speaking about the Emperor:Lucius. In this part the story says that the emperor was most saddened when he learned about the defeat and the great loss of his men, and he wept tenderly for King Evander and the others who had been killed and taken prisoner. And he saw clearly that it was going badly for him, and he was disheartened and afraid to fight against King Arthur or to wait for a second onslaught that was sure to come after him. So he laid his plans, got his men on horseback, and went straight to Langres with his army, and he encamped in the valleys below the city. And when King Arthur learned this, he was certain that the emperor would not fight until he had gathered more men, but he was unwilling to let them encamp and stay [437] so near him. So he had his men get on their horses stealthily, and they took to the road toward the right-hand side of the castle between the town and the emperor’s 8The form here is catelos (436, 1. 27). The Story of Merlin army. They made their way all through the night until the next morning, when they came into a valley that is called Suize,? which is on the road that goes straight from Autun to Langres. And King Arthur had his companions put on their armor so that, if the Romans fell upon them, he could welcome them quickly. And he had the lesser folk, who would not be needed in battle, stop beside a hill, and they looked like armed men wandering about, such that, if the Romans saw them, they would be disheartened by the great crowd. Then King Arthur hid himself in a wood with six thousand six hundred knights, and he ordered the earl of Gloucester to lead them: he was their head and leader. And the king ordered them not to move out from there for any reason until they could see that they were needed. “And if I need you,” he said, “I will come back for you, for if the Romans are put to rout, you would not spare them.” And they answered that they would do as he ordered. Then the king took another company of knights, who were equipped most nobly, and led them to another spot, and he was their leader. They were from his own household, and he had raised them. And he had his dragon held up in their midst—the dragon that was always borne as his ensign. Then he split his men into eight battalions and put two thousand knights into each one; half were on foot and the other half on horseback. And he told each battalion how it was to behave. Then he put enough other men into each battalion so that there were five thousand five hundred. King Aguisant had the first battalion. Duke Escant of Cambenic led the second. Belcis, king of the Danes,!° led another. And King Tradelmant and Sir Gawainet were with King Lot of Orkney, who led the fourth battalion like a king fit for great deeds. After these first four there were four others, very well equipped. King Urien led the first, and Sir Wain his son was with him, as were Yvain the Bastard, King Belinant, and King Neutres, and they had with them the men of their country. And the King of the Hundred Knights, King Clarion, and King Caradoc led the second battalion, and they had with them the men of their country. King Bors led the third, and he had with him the men of his country along with Cleodalis, the seneschal of Carmelide, and the ones he led from his country. King Ban of Benoic led the fourth battalion, and he had with him all the foot soldiers and crossbowmen and four thousand men on horseback all wearing good armor. And after King Arthur had thus set up his men and worked out his battalions, he said to his barons and other men, “Now we'll see who fights boldly! For whatever deeds you may have done in your lives before now, everything is lost if you do not now fight well against these Romans.” 9The form is cervise (437, 1. 4). West identifies this as the Suize River which flows between Autun and Langres, though other suggestions are not implausible (West, 65-66, Ceroise). 10The text adds here & Hi rois loth dorcanie (437, 1. 24): “and King Lot of Orkney”; however, King Lot is leader of the fourth battalion, not co-leader of the third. The Story of Merlin And the princes answered him forthwith, and with one voice, that they would rather die on the battlefield than not have the honor and the victory. And when King Arthur heard this he was most happy and gladdened. But now the story falls silent for a while about King Arthur and speaks of the emperor. [438] Here the story says that when the emperor, with his barons, who were very good, skilled knights, had encamped in the valley below Langres, he went to bed that night. And the next morning he left Langres and meant to ride to Autun. But then the news came to him that King Arthur had laid an ambush for him, and he saw clearly that he would have to fight or turn back. He said to himself that he would not go back for anything in the world, for he would be held a coward. Then he called all his princes before him, and there were a good two hundred of them who made up his council, and he said to them, “Noble vassals, goodly conquerors, sons of goodly forebears who won great honors and great lands through their knightly prowess and deeds of boldness, Rome is head of the world, and if it weakens and falls in our time, the shame and dishonor will be ours to bear. For our forebears were worthy and noble, and by rights noble sons should spring from a noble father. Your fathers were worthy, and you ought to be worthy so that you can match them: each one of you must strive to be like his father. It would be a great shame if anyone lost his birthright—and whoever through his own cowardice gives it up and leaves behind what his father won through his prowess should be put to shame. I do not say that you are cowardly or that you have grown weak. Your fathers were worthy, and I hold you to be worthy and valorous and bold. And the Britons have closed the road to Autun to us, and we cannot go there or get by them without a fight. Take up your weapons and put on your armor. If they stand up to us, see to it that they are hit hard; and if they turn in flight, run after them with all the strength you have. Let us strive to strike down their pride and cast asunder their might and their arrogance.” Then the Romans set up their battalions and lined up their forces, and many were the kings and dukes of pagandom who crossed swords with the Christians who had come to win the fiefs they held from Rome. There were many of them on foot and on horseback, and some they set on the hills and others in the valleys. Then you would have heard loud blasts from horns and trumpets on every side, and they rode tightly drawn together until they fell upon King Arthur’s men. And then you would have seen arrows shooting and bolts flying so thickly that no one dared lower his shield from his face. After that, they turned to lances striking shields, and the clanging was dreadful. And when they had broken their lances, they turned to axes and swords, and they landed hard blows on helmets and hauberks, and the uproar was loud and awesome. And they fought together for a long time, and they struck and knocked against one another. Yet the men of Rome never fell back the least bit, nor did the Britons win any ground from them, and no one could tell which ones were winning or getting the better of the others, before the echelon that King Urien, King 409 Neutres, and King Belinant were leading drew closer. They charged into the Romans with their men where they saw the thickest fighting, and the three princes fought wondrously. And Kay the Seneschal, who was with them, hit them like a worthy knight, so that the three princes said, “God, what a seneschal!” And they said of Bedivere, “God, what a constable! Here are goodly ministers for a king’s court!” There many a blow was given and taken, and many a knight was killed and struck down. And Kay the Seneschal and Bedivere did wonders, for they trusted mightily in their prowess. [439] They kept together, but went too far forward, and they came upon a battalion that the king of Mede had brought; his name was Boclus, and he was a pagan of very great prowess. And Kay and Bedivere rode in against them and killed many of them. When King Boclus saw the two companions who were doing his men such harm, he was filled with sorrow. He held onto his short, thick sword and rode Bedivere down and hit him so hard that he drove his blade right through his body and out the other side, and if he had struck him a little lower, he would have killed him. Even so, he bore him down senseless from his horse. And when Kay saw him fall, he was very sorrowful, for he thought that he was dead. He rode over to him with as many men as he could get together, and he made the men of Mede leave the field. He came to Bedivere and took him in his arms; he meant to pick him up and carry him away from among the horses, for he loved him very much. And as he was taking him up, the king of Mede rode out of the fray and struck Kay the Seneschal on the helmet with his sword, and he gave him such a great wound on his head that he had to drop Bedivere, and he would have killed him had it not been for the men of Kay’s household, who were showing their worth so well. And one knight flew into the press: his name was Sebart, and he was Bedivere’s nephew. And when he saw his uncle lying on the ground in a faint, he thought that he had been killed. He gathered his friends and kinsmen until there were a good two hundred of them or more, and he said to them, “Follow me, and we'll avenge my uncle’s death!” Then he drew near the Romans and caught sight of the king of Mede, and he turned to that side, shouting King Arthur's battlecry like a madman. He asked for nothing but to avenge his uncle. And his companions rode off after him, holding their lances down, and they slew many pagans there. And they rode until they came among the king of Mede’s men, and when Segart saw King Boclus, who had brought his uncle down, he spurred to him and struck him so hard atop his helmet with his sword that he cut right through it and his iron coif as well, and he split him open down to his teeth and took him to the ground dead. Then he went over to him, pulled him up on his horse in front of him, took him to his uncle’s side, and cut him up into little bits. Then he said to his men, “Let us slay those people who do not put their trust in God!” Then he heard his uncle sigh, and he was filled with great joy. And he had him and Kay taken up and brought to where their equipment was. Then he went back to the fight, which was most dreadful. 410 And King Neutres met King Alipanton, who was king of Spain, and they traded blows as hard as they could. And King Neutres killed King Alipanton, but King Neutres had been wounded with a cut through his body. But the Romans were so strong that the Bretons had to withdraw, and when Sir Gawainet and Hoel of Little Brittany saw them turning about, they were filled with sorrow. Then they rode headlong into the midst of the battle along with the men from Little Brittany, who were following their lord Hoel, so that the crowd of men fighting could not keep them out, and they struck so hard that they made those who had come after them turn tail, and they sent many of them spilling to the ground. They rode hard on their heels until they came to the banner with the golden eagle. There were the emperor and the noblest men in the world, who had come from Rome. [440] Then you would have seen great and wonderful fighting. And Herman, who was count of Triple, was riding with Sir Gawainet and Hoel, but a lowborn lad killed him with a javelin he had thrown. And the emperor’s men struck out so hard against the Britons that they slew a good two thousand of them in that place, and the Britons suffered great harm, because there were many worthy gentlemen and good knights among them. And Sir Gawainet was so grief-stricken when he saw it that he nearly went out of his mind. So he charged into the Romans like a lion running among the beasts to make his catch. He fought with great skill, and he never tired of striking blows. He hit right and left until he came near the emperor. When Sir Gawainet saw the emperor, he marked him well, as the emperor did him. And they let their horses run one against the other and struck each other with great might, but neither fell, for they were both very strong. The emperor was strong and sturdy, and he was very glad that he had withstood Sir Gawainet, for he knew well who he was by the blazons on his arms, which have been described before. And he said to himself that if he could hold out against him, he would boast about it in Rome. Then he raised his shield and lifted his arm, and he began fighting against Sir Gawainet with great fierceness. And Sir Gawainet hit him so hard with his good sword Excalibur that he split him open down to the teeth. When the Romans saw the emperor dead, they ran upon the Britons and struck hard and deep into their midst, and they brought down more than three thousand in the onslaught. When King Arthur saw the Romans recovering and doing his men such harm, he was filled with sorrow. Then he shouted loudly to his men, “What are you doing? Ride after them and don’t let anyone get away, for I am Arthur, who never fled from the battlefield for any man! Follow me and see to it that you do not behave like cowards. Remember all your knightly deeds and all the kingdoms you have won. For I will not leave this field alive if I do not win against the Romans. Today is the day when I'll die or have victory!” With that he rode in among the Romans and began to strike down knights and horses, and everyone he reached was doomed to die. He did not strike one blow with his sword that did not kill the man he hit. Then he fell upon Sestor, king of Libya, in his way, and he sent his head flying, The Story of Merlin after which he said, “Be cursed, since you came here to do us harm.” Next he struck Poliplites, king of Mede, whom he found before him, and he cut off his head. When the barons saw that King Arthur was fighting so well, they rode against the Romans, but the Romans drove against them with such strength that they did the Britons very great harm. And if the emperor had not been killed, the Britons could not have lasted. Even so, they were greatly distressed by this, but they held out so well that no one could tell which side had the upper hand. When the six thousand six hundred knights whom King Arthur was to go back to fetch came down from the mountain, they rode into the crowd in such a way that the Romans saw none of them, and they struck them from behind so fiercely that they split the battle into two parts. They struck them down one atop the other and went about [441] trampling them under their horses’ hooves and killing them with their swords. After they came in, the Romans could never have held out, so they turned in flight, for they were grief-stricken because of their emperor, who was dead. And the Romans and Saracens fled in a rout, and the Britons rode after them and killed as many as they wanted. 55. The Devil Cat of the Lake of Lausanne; King Claudas’s Men Routed.! King Arthur was very happy with the Romans’ defeat and the victory that God had granted him. Then he rode back into the field where the battle had been fought and had the dead buried in the churches and abbeys around the country, and he had the wounded carried away to be cared for. Then he had the emperor’s body taken and sent it to Rome encased in stone, and his message to the Romans was that this was the tribute from Britain he was sending them, and if they demanded tribute from him another time, he would send them as much again. And when he had done that, he took counsel as to whether he should still go on or turn back to Gaul, and the princes told him to seek Merlin’s advice. Then the king called Merlin and said to him, “Dear friend, what do you wish me to do?” “Sir,” answered Merlin, “you won’t go on to Rome, but you won't go back, either. You'll still go on, for there are people who need your help.” “What?” said King Arthur. “Then, is there a war in this land?” “Yes, sir, on the other side of the Lake of Lausanne. For there a devil lives, such a devil that neither man nor woman dares dwell there, for he lays waste the countryside, and he kills and maims everyone he goes after.” “How can that be? Can no one stand against him? Isn’t he a man like anyone else?” “Not at all,” answered Merlin. “It is a cat filled with devils, and it is so huge and frightening that it is a dreadful sight to see.” Corresponds to Sommer, 441-445, The Story of Merlin “God have mercy!” said King Arthur to Merlin. “Where can such a beast come from?” “Sir,” said Merlin, “T’ll tell you in truth. It happened on the feast of the Ascension, four years ago, that a fisherman from that country came to the Lake of Lausanne with his tackle and nets to fish. And when he had got everything ready to cast his nets, he promised Our Lord the first fish he caught. And after he had cast his hook and line, he caught a pike that was worth at least thirty pence, and when he saw how beautiful and big the fish was, he said to himself, mumbling softly, for he was wily, ‘God won’t have this fish, but He’ll have the next one I catch.’ “So he cast his line back into the water and caught a fish that was worth more than the first. And when he saw how big and beautiful it was, he wanted to keep it for himself, and he said that the Lord God would have to get along without that one, but He would indeed have the third. “Then he cast a third time and pulled out a kitten blacker than mulberry. And when the fisherman saw it, he said that he had a good use for it at home to rid his house of rats and mice. And so he raised it until it strangled him and his wife and children. “And then it fled into a mountain that lies on the other side of the lake, as I have told you, and it has been there to this day. It kills and destroys whatever it touches, and it is wondrously large and frightening. And you will go that way, and from there your road goes straight to Rome. And, God willing, you will bring peace to the good people of the land, for they have fled to other countries.” [442] When the barons heard Merlin’s words, they all began to cross themselves for the wonder they felt, and they said it was Our Lord’s vengeance and a sign of the man’s sin, for he did not keep the oath he had made to Our Lord. And they were convinced that Our Lord was angry at him because he had lied when he made his oath. King Arthur ordered his men to turn aside and set out on the road, as they had been ordered, and they started toward the Lake of Lausanne. They found the land stripped and uninhabited, for no man or woman dared dwell there. And they made their way until they came to the hill where that devil lived. They set up camp in a valley that was within a league of the mountain where the beast was. And King Lot and Sir Gawainet took their arms, as did King Ban and Gaheriet, to go with King Arthur and Merlin, for they said they wanted to see the devil that had done such harm in the countryside and throughout the land. They climbed the mountain, following the way Merlin led them, for he knew everything about the place, owing to the great knowledge he had. When they had reached the top, Merlin said to King Arthur, “Sir, the cat lives inside that rock.” And he showed him a great cave in a meadowland that was wide and deep. “And how will it come outside?” asked King Arthur. “You'll soon see it come out,” said Merlin, “and come out very fast. You be ready to defend yourself, for it will throw itself on you as soon as it sees you.” “Now all of you draw back,” said King Arthur, “for I want to test its strength myself.” oe And they did as he ordered. And after they had drawn back a little, Merlin let out a very loud whistle. And as soon as the cat heard it, it sprang out of the cave at once, for it thought that a wild beast was there. It was starving and had gone without food for a long time, and, crazed with hunger, it ran straight for King Arthur. As soon as King Arthur saw it coming, he held out his lance to meet it. He meant to run it right through the beast’s body, but it took the shaft in its teeth and began pulling on it so hard that the king staggered. The twisting and turning the king did with his lance made the shaft break off right at the iron tip, which stayed in the beast’s mouth, and it began to roar as though it were mad. The king threw down the broken shaft and drew his sword from its scabbard and held his shield up in front of his chest. The cat sprang at once, for it thought it could take him by the throat, but the king raised his shield so strongly against it that he sent the cat spilling to the ground. But at once it sprang back at the king very powerfully. King Arthur raised his sword and hit it right on top of the head so that he sliced the scalp, but its skull was too hard to cut through. Even so, he stunned it with his blow, so that it went sprawling to the ground. But before the king could recover from wielding the blow, the cat leapt upon him and grabbed him fully by the shoulders, and it sank its claws right through his hauberk into his flesh. And it jerked him about so hard that it sent more than three hundred links flying from the mail hauberk, and his red blood flowed after the cat had withdrawn its claws, so that the king very nearly fell to the ground. And when King Arthur saw his blood, he was very deeply [443] angered. Then he held his shield in front of his chest, took his sword in his right hand, and swiftly ran upon the cat, which was licking away the blood that had wet its claws. When it saw the king coming, it sprang to meet him. It thought it could take hold of him just as it had done before, but the king thrust out his shield, and the cat leapt on it with two of its feet and sank its claws right through. The cat jerked him about so hard that he bowed towards the ground. But the king held his shield so fast by the handles that the cat could not get away, nor could it pull its claws back out, but stayed hanging from the shield by its two forefeet. And when King Arthur saw that it was hanging so fast from his shield, he raised his sword and hit it so hard between its legs that he cut right through them just below the knees. The cat fell to the ground, and the king threw his shield aside and ran upon the cat with his sword drawn. The cat sat back on its hind legs, bared its teeth, and opened its mouth wide. The king thrust at it and meant to strike it on the head, but the cat crouched on its hind legs and jumped onto his face, took hold of him with its hind claws and teeth, and tore at his flesh so that the blood spurted out from many gashes. When the king felt the cat holding him so fast, he put the tip of his sword against its belly and started to thrust the sword through its body. When the cat felt the sword, it let go with its teeth and turned about to let itself go downward, for it thought it could drop to the ground, but the two feet oie it had fastened into his hauberk held so fast that it was left hanging there, its head down toward the ground. And when the king saw it hanging as it was, he raised his sword and cut off the two feet it had fastened into his hauberk, and its body fell to the ground. As soon as it had fallen, it began to howl so loudly that all in King Arthur's army, which was in the encampment, heard it plainly. And after it had let out this howl, it began to hop about, for it had such great strength in its body, and it made for the cave it had come out of. But the king ran between the cat and its cave and then ran it down. The cat jumped at him, for it thought it could grab onto him with its teeth, but as it leapt, the king hit it with his sword above its forelegs and slit the cat open from end to end. Then Merlin came running, and the others as well, to where he was, and they asked him how he was. “Tam well,” he said, “thanks be to Our Lord, for I have killed the devil that did great harm to this country. You can be sure that I’ve never feared for myself any more than I did when I was entangled with that devil, except when I fought the giant the other day in the mountain that rises from the sea. And I praise Our Lord and thank Him for it.” “Sir,” said the princes, “you are right to do that.” They looked and saw the cat’s feet that were left in his shield and hauberk, and they said that they had never seen such paws. Gaheriet picked the shield up, and they went back to the army, rejoicing and merry. And when the princes there saw the paws and claws that were so long, they were dumbfounded. They led the king to his tent and took off his armor, and they took notice of the scratches and bites the cat had given him, and they washed him and cleaned his wounds most tenderly; and physicians put on him what was needed to draw out the poison. And they took such good care of him that he did not have to stop drinking or eating or riding horseback. They stayed there that day and [444] the next, when they took the road back to Gaul. And the king had his shield brought along—the shield where the cat’s paws hung, and he had the paws from his hauberk put into a box, and he ordered that they should be well looked after. And the king asked Merlin what that hill was called. And Merlin said the people in that country called it the Hill of the Lake? because of the lake that lapped at its feet.’ “By my faith,” said the king, “I want that name to be done away with, and I wish it to be called the Hill of the Cat because that is where the cat lived and where it was slain.” And from the hour the king said this, the mountain has always been called by that name, and so will it be forever. Here the story falls silent from speaking about King Arthur and his companions, and it goes back to telling about those who were taking the prisoners to France Here the story says that when the companions whom King Arthur had entrusted to take the Romans back to France took to the road, they rode from one town to the next and made their way day by day until they came to a castle, which belonged to Claudas of the Land Laid Waste, and there they met sixty-five knights from King Claudas’s land. Through their spies these knights knew that King 2Sommer’s text has le mont du lac (444, |. 5) The Story of Merlin Arthur was sending to prison knights who were Romans, and they believed that if they handed those knights over to King Claudas, he would be grateful to them, for he dearly loved the emperor and his Romans. King Claudas’s knights were astride good horses, and they were well equipped, so they rode straight toward the ones leading the prisoners: they were a good two hundred strong, knights, squires, and men from that country who were riding with them; but of the two hundred no more than forty were knights, while King Claudas’s knights numbered sixty-five ,* and they were near their own castle, where there were many men-at-arms and foot soldiers whom they could rely on. So they hid themselves in a woods a little way from the road. And when they saw King Arthur's knights coming nearer, they let their horses run against them and fell upon them, and they almost took them by surprise. But when King Arthur’s knights saw them coming, they spurred their horses against them. They struck one another so hard on their shields that they went through them and tore open one another’s hauberks; some were driven through with lances so that the tips stuck out the other side, and there were dead and wounded on both sides. When those who were leading the prisoners saw their knights spilling to the ground, they rode to where they were to help them and keep the others away. There was a mighty din and clanging of blows, and King Claudas’s men suffered great harm, and they would have been worse off if the men from their castle, a good hundred and fifty strong, all on horseback, had not come out in strength to save them. Then the battle grew very hard and fierce. The Britons were strong and stalwart; King Claudas’s men were strong and fierce, and they were in their own land—the way they defended themselves was a wonder. Then fifty men-at-arms came out from the castle, each one with a bow in his hand and a quiver full of arrows, and they began to shoot at the Britons. They killed many of them in that onslaught, and the Britons were in great distress; they were forced to fall back as far as the prisoners, whom the foot soldiers were guarding. And the Britons would [445] have lost everything if something good had not happened them by God's will, for Pharian of Trebe and Leonce of Payerne were coming there in order to take the castle, and they had with them eight hundred knights, all on horseback and heavily armed. They happened upon the fighting and the rout of the Britons. When those from the castle caught sight of them and recognized their flags, they were greatly distraught. They left the Britons and took flight toward their stronghold; they flew helter-skelter into the castle, every man looking out for himself. But they could not ride so fast that Leonce, Pharian, and their companions did not slay more than thirty of them while their mates were rushing to safety inside the castle. And those who were standing on the walls let the gates down after them, but a falling gate killed two of their horses. Pharian, Leonce, and their men rode back toward the Britons who were guarding the prisoners. Pharian asked them who they were, and they answered that they belonged 3Here Sommer’s text reads .Ixvi, (444, 1. 13). The Story of Merlin to King Arthur, who was sending the prisoners to France. And when they heard that, they said that they were well met. Then they took to the road all together and rode until they came to Benoic. There they got the prisoners down from their horses and locked them away, just as King Arthur had ordered. Then they all took off their armor and stayed there in joyful celebration. Here the story falls silent from speaking about them and goes back to telling about the Lord of the Fens and his daughter. 56. The Birth of Hector; Merlin’s Imprisonment.! Now the story says that on the fifth day after King Ban, King Bors, and Merlin had left the marshes where they had lodged so happily, a powerful man from the country came to the castle at night. And the lord of the castle, who was a most worthy gentleman and wise, was very glad to have him as his guest, and in his honor he had his daughter serve him his cup, for she was most courteous, well-bred, and dutiful. And the knight who had sought lodging there watched the young lady, and she pleased him so much that he asked her father for her hand and said that he would take her as his wife if he was willing. And when the father heard this, he thanked him most kindly, because he did him an honor in asking for her, and he was most happy, for this was the most powerful man in the whole country. And he said that he would speak to the young lady about it and then give him his answer. After they had taken their meal, they went to bed. The next morning they rose early, and the gentleman spoke with his daughter about what the knight had asked him: he was such a powerful and highborn man that through him all their friends would be raised up and honored. And when the young lady heard this, she answered her father meekly and said to him, “Sir, it is not yet time for me to wed, for I am quite young. And so, I beg you, please say no more about it.” “My dear daughter, I see no use in refusing to talk about it. You ought to be glad in your heart that such a powerful and noble man stoops to ask for you as his wedded companion and friend, for you are a lowborn woman beside him, and you are scarcely worthy to take off his boots. So I beg you and command you to do what I wish.” “Sir,” she said, “surely you can allow that, by the faith I owe you who are my father, [446] I am not of an age to wed.” “What is this, fair daughter?” the father answered. “Do you mean to go against my will?” “Sir,” said the maiden, “your will is not such that you wish to see me lost!” “Lost? Dear daughter, rather I would win you!” “No, lose me,” she said. “For I would never have joy in my heart if I did not have as a husband the man to whom I 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 445~449. NS) have given and pledged myself. I know very well that I’ll never have the one you wish me to wed; no, I'll keep myself for the man who has left me. He is a nobler, more handsome man, and a better knight than this man, and I know IJ would find greater happiness with him.” “My dear,” said her father, “whom are you talking to me about? Tell me plainly what is in your mind, so that I can hear from you something that will let me put this matter to rest.” “Sir,” said the young lady, “T’ll tell you, since you wish to know it, and not one word of what I'll say will be a lie.” Then she told him, in order, everything that had happened between her and King Ban of Benoic, that she was carrying his child, and that he had told her she would have a son through whom all her kindred would be honored and exalted, “so I beg you not to speak to me about marriage unless it is to the king, for by the faith I owe you, Il] have no husband but the king.” When the father heard his daughter, he was filled with sorrow and heartache, but he did not dare show it, so he answered her most meekly: “My dear daughter, since this is the way it is, I must abide it. Now don’t worry about anything. I'll go speak to my lord, and I'll answer him according to your will, not mine.” He then went straight to the knight, who was already putting on his spurs, and he greeted him with great courtesy and said to him, “Sir, if you would wait two years, I would do what you wish.” And he said this because he was convinced that he would not grant him the delay. When the knight heard him, he answered not a word, but got on his horse—and his men did as well—and rode away without taking his leave. But he swore that, since he could not have the lady by love, he would take her by force; and after him, all others who wanted her could have her. So this is how he left, and he went into his country and called his men together until there were a good eight hundred knights, his own men and hirelings, and they rode as a body straight to the Castle of the Fens. There he had his tent pitched beneath a pine near the causeway, and he swore an oath that he would never leave before he had starved them all out. And when the Lord of the Fens saw himself besieged, he was filled with sorrow—not because he was afraid of being taken by force or starved out, for all the men in the kingdom could not take him by force, and he would not be easily starved out, for he had food enough within for five whole years without having to go out through the gate, and there were sixty-two knights there, worthy and bold. For the Lord of the Fens was a most noble man. And they stayed before the castle a full week, and nothing was shot or hurled. But it so happened that on the ninth day, about the hour of prime, a knight from the army whose name was Maduras went to the horn that hung there, put it to his mouth, and blew it three times with very great strength, so that the lord of the castle heard it plainly. Then he asked for his arms, put them on most nobly, and climbed on his strong, quick warhorse, his shield about his neck and his lance in his hand. [447] The gate was opened for him, and he rode out at great speed and rode the whole length of the causeway toward the army. And he shouted in a very loud voice that the man who blew his horn without 414 his leave was very bold, and he would be sorry he thought of doing it if he were so foolhardy as to dare fight him. When Maduras heard him, he said that he had blown the horn for no other reason, and he said he would joust with him if they swore an oath that the man who fell would hand himself over as a prisoner without further ado. “And I agree to that,” said Agravadain, “if Our Lord grants that I should worry about or be bothered by no one but you.” “In faith,” answered Maduras, “you need fear no one, since you have come to that!” Then Agravadain came down from the causeway, and they rode away from each other. The knights had gathered in rows all about to watch the joust. And the two knights rode toward each other as fast as they could make their horses run, their shields on their arms and their lances in their holders, and they struck each other on their shields so hard that they drove through them. Maduras broke his lance; and Agravadain broke his, but he had thrust his with such great strength that he knocked Maduras from his horse to the ground, and he struck so soundly that he broke his left arm between the wrist and the elbow. Then he reached out his hand, took his horse by the bridle, and led it to the causeway; and he told Maduras to follow him and keep his oath. So he took to the causeway and rode off toward the castle, driving Maduras’s horse before him. And he went through the gate and was greeted with great rejoicing. And Leriador and his knights came to Maduras and found him in a faint, so that they thought he was dead. But after a while he opened his eyes and gave the order to be carried to the castle, so that he might fulfill his oath. Then Leriador had a horse-drawn litter made of boughs and leaves. They laid Maduras inside and covered him with a rich silk cloth, and they raised him between two palfreys and took him inside the castle. And Agravadain took him in and had him put in a most lavish room, and they called for physicians to set his arm. And the ones who had brought him went back to their army and found Leriador full of sorrow and heartache, as were all the others. The next morning yet another knight came to blow the horn, and Agravadain came out and jousted with him. He brought him down and made him swear himself a prisoner, and this one went away into the castle. And so Agravadain fought so boldly that he struck down eleven of them in all, and their lord was filled with sorrow. And he himself blew the horn on the twelfth day. And when Agravadain came out, just as he always did, Leriador told him that with this joust the war would be over and the siege lifted. For if Agravadain could beat him, he would go back to his own country with his army, and never would he or his kin threaten anything that belonged to him. “But if I defeat you,” he said, “you will give me your daughter for my wife, for I ask no more of you.” So they swore on both sides. Then the two knights came together as fast as their horses could run, and they struck blows on each other’s shields. They drove their lances through the bosses and ripped their hauberks open, and each one grazed the other’s side with his lance, so that The Story of Merlin the blood spurted out from both of them. Then they bumped each other so hard with their shields and bodies that their horses stumbled and fell to the ground on top of them. Both of them [448] were knocked senseless, and they lay on the ground for a long time. But in time they both sprang back up, drew their swords, and ran each other down with great fierceness, and they traded hard blows on their hauberks, which had been ripped open, and they gave each other great and wonderful wounds. Both grew weary from the blood they had lost, but in the end it was Leriador who had to beg for mercy. So the siege was lifted, and Leriador went back into his own country. And Agravadain went into his castle and had his wounds cared for. Then he sent the prisoners back to their countries, and he dwelt there happy and joyful until his daughter gave birth to a child who was afterwards of very great renown in the kingdom of Logres and in other lands. His right name was Hector,* and Agravadain was most happy with him and rejoiced in him, and he had him brought up in his own room. He gave him three nurses, and his mother® herself nursed him with her own milk, for there was nothing on earth she loved more than him. And he looked like King Ban, just as if he had been drawn from his likeness. Right here the story falls silent from speaking about him, his mother, and Agravadain, who loved him very much, and it goes back to talking about King Flualis, about whom it has kept silent for a very long time. Now the story says that when Merlin went away from King Flualis, whose dream he had interpreted,’ the king was left deeply distraught with what Merlin had said to him. And it was not long before everything Merlin had told him came true, for he saw his children at the temple of Diane, the temple torn down and violated, his land laid waste and impoverished, and his palace burned, and he himself was taken prisoner along with his wife. But those who took them did not kill them; rather, they showed them the tenets of the Christian religion, and so much did they give them to understand day by day that they received the unction of holy baptism and were washed and cleansed from the filth of misbelief. They called the king by his own name, which was Flualis, but they changed the lady’s name and called her Remissiane, whereas before she was called Subine. And they were husband and wife together for a long time, and in time they had four daughters who were later wed to four Christian princes, who were good and faithful men, and they had many children. For the eldest had ten sons, who all became knights, and seven daughters; the second had fourteen sons and three daughters; the third, twelve daughters and six sons; and the fourth twenty-five sons and one daughter. All of them were wed, and the sons all became knights in the lifetime of Queen Remissiane; they were filled with great joy and gladness, and they were thankful to Our Lord. When the king and the four princes saw that they had fifty- 2The form of the name in Sommer’s text is hestor (448, 1. 9). 3The word in Sommer’s text is meschine (448, 1. 11): “girl’— not what we would expect this noble lady to be called. 4Ch. 52. The Story of Merlin five> sons and grandsons, all of whom were knights and brothers and first cousins to one another, they were much gladdened, and they said that Our Lord had given them to them to exalt Christendom; they also said that they would not die before they had put all of pagandom under Christianity and the law of God. Then they summoned and gathered all the men under their sway, and they overran pagandom from every side and took towns and castles, and they killed many a pagan. They won lands and foreign countries, and they went over into Spain to Galicia and Compostela, and nothing could withstand against them. [449] At last King Flualis passed from this world in Spain, and the four princes and all his grandsons were filled with sorrow. He was buried in a city they called Nadres at the time. Then they went back to the region about Jerusalem and took those lands into their hands; then they all scattered throughout various lands and conquered them and took all the honors. Some of them held Constantinople, others Greece, where there were four kingdoms, others Barbary and others Cyprus. Still others came into the kingdom of Logres to serve King Arthur, because of his great renown that ran throughout the world. With these came three knights who were most worthy and bold in fighting, but they lived for only a short time, and that was harmful to Christendom, for they were worthy and faithful gentlemen. Two of them died in a battle that Lancelot fought against King Claudas, and the other died in a battle that King Arthur fought against Mordred, just as the story will recount it later. But with that the story falls silent about them all and goes back to speaking about King Arthur. 57. Merlin’s Imprisonment.! In this part the story says that when King Arthur and his barons had defeated the Romans and the king had killed the cat, they began to make their way back. And they rode until they came to the castle that King Arthur had had built on the River Aube.” They spent one day there and then left and rode until they came to Benoic, where they were told that the prisoners were there. And Pharian and Leonce greeted them with very great rejoicing. Then they told them how they had rescued their men along with their prisoners, just as it had happened, for those from the castle had wanted to take them by force. “By my head,” said the king, “they'll be sorry they did that, for they will pay dearly for it.” Then he called Sir Gawainet and told him to go to the castle, which was called the Borderland, and to do what it took to tear it down to the ground so that those from other, nearby countries would not use it to attack his men or hinder him in any way, and they would understand how mistaken they had been to wrong him. And Sir Gawainet 5The text reads . Hii. (448, 1. 35). 1Corresponds to Sommer, 449-453. 2Ch. 52. 40 ordered ten thousand knights to mount, and they took to the road. They rode until they came there after nightfall, and they hid themselves in a wood five arrow-shots away from the castle. There they waited until the next moming, when those from the castle sent out men escorting the spoils from the battle. And as soon as the booty escort was all outside the castle, Sir Gawainet sent fourteen knights out and ordered them to ride past the escort and go toward the gate; he also sent with them five crossbowmen to shoot up toward the barbicans and crenels if they saw it was needed. They had to hold the gate until he could get there. It was still so early that they could scarcely see the gate. But as soon as the escort was outside, they started out toward the gate just as they had been ordered. When Sir Gawainet saw the escort drawing nearer, he knew that the others were already beyond them. So he sent as many as twenty knights [450] against those who were taking the spoils. When those in the escort saw them coming, they left the spoils and started to ride as fast as they could back to the gates. But the knights and crossbowmen whom Sir Gawainet had sent there kept them from getting inside. Soon Sir Gawainet was there, and he and as many as five hundred knights struck out helter-skelter through the gates, and great were the shouts and the din. Those who were in the courtyard let down a portcullis that struck two horses on their rumps, and the knights fell to each side, but they were not hurt. Then the din and the yelling grew louder throughout the castle, and they ran to the barbicans and began throwing stones. But the five crossbowmen shot upward, while others began to cut down the gates and those who were outside rode in. And then those in the castle yielded to Sir Gawainet’s will, and he took them prisoner and had them brought back to Benoic. Then he had the town’s walls and gate torn down. And he went back to King Arthur, who was glad and happy about it. And the king made the prisoners swear that they would never stand against King Ban or King Bors. Similarly, he made the Romans swear never to stand against the kingdom of Logres. And after the oaths were taken, he sent them all back to their countries. Then he stayed that day with King Ban, and he and his men left the next morning with great rejoicing and celebration. Then a messenger brought news to King Arthur that King Leodagan of Carmelide had passed from this world— this is why he left King Ban. The next morning King Arthur left the two brother kings and never saw them afterwards, nor they him. It was a great shame that they left this life so soon, just as the story will recount it to you later in this history. When King Arthur and his companions had left the two brother kings who had given him such honors, he made his way for as many days as it took to reach the sea. And he and his companions boarded their ships and went across to the port of Dover. Then they got on their horses and rode until they came to Logres. There the king found Queen Guenevere, who greeted him most joyfully, and he told her that her father had died. And the king comforted her as well as he knew how. Then he sent his men away and thanked them heartily, and they went into their own countries. King Arthur stayed in Logres with Sir Gawainet 416 his nephew and the knights of the Round Table. And Merlin tarried with them a good long time. Then Merlin wished to go see his master Blaise, and he would tell him what had happened, although he had not seen it all, and from there he would go see his lady Viviane, for the time he had set with her® was drawing near. So he came to King Arthur and told him that he had to leave. And the king and queen asked him most sweetly to come back soon, for he would be a great comfort to them and most welcome company, for the king loved him very much indeed, because he had helped him in times of great need, and thanks to him and his counsel Arthur had become a king. So the king said to him very affectionately, “Dear friend Merlin, you are going away. I will not keep you here against your will, but I'll be most unhappy until I see you again. For God’s sake, hurry [451] back!” “Sir,” said Merlin, “this is for the last time. Farewell, I commend you to God.” When the king heard him say that it was for the last time, he was dumbfounded. And Merlin left without another word, weeping, and he made his way until he came to Blaise, his master, who was very glad at his coming. He asked him what he had done since leaving him, and Merlin told him everything. Then he recounted word for word, all in order, all the things that had happened to King Arthur: about the giant he had killed, his battle with the Romans, and how he had killed the cat. And he told him about the little dwarf the young lady had brought to court and how the king had made him a knight. “But I'll tell you this much about the dwarf,” said Merlin. “He is a most noble man. And he is not a dwarf by birth; rather, a young lady made him so when he was twelve years old, because he did not wish to grant her his love. He was then the most beautiful creature in all the world, but from the sorrow the young lady felt because of him, she turned him into a dwarf, so that nothing on earth would be so ugly or loathsome. But nine weeks from today the spell the lady cast will come to an end, and he will again be the age he ought to be, for from that day twelve years will have passed, but now he appears to be sixty years old or more.” And when Merlin had told all these things and made an account of them, Blaise set them down in writing one after the other, all in order, and this is how we still know them. After Merlin had tarried there a week, he left and told Blaise that it was for the last time, for he was going to stay with his lady, and he would never have the power to leave her or to come and go as he wished. When Blaise heard Merlin, he was filled with sorrow and heartache, and he said, “Since you cannot ever leave her, don’t go!” “I must go,” said Merlin, “for I have sworn an oath to her. And I am so overwhelmed by love for her that I could not leave her. And I have shown her and taught her all the knowledge she has, and she will yet know more, for I cannot leave her.” Then Merlin went away from Blaise, and he made his way a short while until he came to his lady, who was very glad to see him, as he was to see her. And they tarried together for a long time. 3That he would return to her ina year. The Story of Merlin And right away she asked him about a great many things he knew how to do, and he taught her so much that he was later taken for a fool—and he still is. And she remembered everything and put it down in writing, for she was good at clerkly learning and knew the seven arts. When Merlin had taught his lady everything she could ask, she began wondering how she could keep him forever. And she began to wheedle Merlin more than she had ever done before, and she said to him, “Sir, there is still something I don’t know that I would be very happy to know. And so I beseech you to teach me how I might keep a man imprisoned without a tower or walls or irons, but through wizardry, so that he could never get away but through me.” And when Merlin heard her, he shook his head and began to sigh. And when she saw that, she asked him why he was sighing. “My lady,” he said, “I'll tell you. I know full well what you are thinking, and [452] I know that you want to keep me. And I am so overcome by love of you that I must do your will.” And when the young lady heard him, she put her arms about his neck and said that he had to belong to her, for she was his. “You know very well,” she went on, “that the great love I feel for you has even made me leave my father and mother to hold you in my arms day and night. All my thoughts, all my longing are for you. Without you I have no joy or happiness; all my hopes are in you, and I can find happiness only in you. And since I love you and you love me, isn’t it right that you should do my will and I yours?” “Indeed, lady,” said Merlin, “yes! Now tell me what you want.” “Sir,” she said, “I want you to teach me how to make a very beautiful, proper place that I can make so strong with magic that it cannot be undone. And we'll stay there, you and I, in joy and delight whenever we wish.” “Lady,” answered Merlin, “T’ll gladly do this for you.” “Sir,” she said, “I don’t want you to do it, but you will teach me how to do it and Ill do it,” she went on, “more to my liking.” “I grant you this,” said Merlin. Then he began to explain it, and the lady wrote down everything he said. And when he had told her everything, she was very happy and loved him more and was more cheerful to him than she usually was. Then they tarried together for a long while, until one day came when they were walking hand in hand through the Forest of Broceliande looking for ways to find delight, and they came upon a beautiful bush, green and high, that was a hawthorn loaded with flowers. They sat down in its shade, and Merlin laid his head in the lady’s lap, and she began to rub it until he fell asleep. And when the lady felt that he was sleeping, she got up carefully and with her wimple drew a circle all about Merlin and the bush, and she began to cast her spells. Then she sat down again beside him, took his head in her lap, and held him there until he awoke. And he looked about him, and it seemed to him that he was in the most beautiful tower in the world, and he found himself lying in the most beautiful bed he had ever lain in. Then he asked the young lady, “Lady, you have indeed tricked me if The Story of Merlin you do not stay with me, for no one but you has the power to undo this tower.” And she said to him, “Dear friend, I will come here often, and you will hold me in your arms and I you, and you will do forever whatever you please.” And she kept her oath to him faithfully, for few days or nights went by when she was not with him. Merlin never thereafter left the stronghold where his lady love had put him, but she came and wentas she wished. So the story falls silent right here about Merlin and his lady love, and it speaks about King Arthur. The story says that from the time Merlin left King Arthur and told him that it was the last time he would see him, King Arthur was filled with sorrow and bewilderment, and he dwelt on the words Merlin had said to him. He waited for him in that state of mind for seven weeks or more, and when he saw that Merlin was not coming back, it was a marvel how sad and worried he was. And one day Sir Gawainet asked him what was wrong. “In truth, [453] dear nephew,” answered the king, “I am brooding because I think I’ve lost Merlin, and he’ll never come back to me, for he has stayed away longer than he used to. He said that it was for the last time, and I am afraid that he was telling the truth, for he never lied in anything he told me. God help me, I would rather have lost the city of Logres than him. I would like very much to know whether anyone can find him near or far, so I beg you, look for him, if you love me, until you find out the truth about him.” “My lord,” said Sir Gawainet, “I am ready to do your will, and you will see me leave at once. And I swear to you on the oath I gave you the day you made me a knight that I will look for him a year and a day or until I have truthful news of him. A year from today you will have me back, God willing and if He keeps me from death and prison, unless I have truthful news about him first.” The same oath was sworn by Sir Yvain, Sagremor, Agravain, Guerrehet, Gaheriet, and twenty-fourt knights in their company: they were Doon of Carduel, Caulas the Red, Blois of Casset, Canet of Blay, Amadant of the Hilltop,° Placides the Merry, Laudalis of the Plain, Aiglin of the Vales, Cliacles the Orphan, Guiret of Lambale, Kehedin the Fair, Clarot of the Spur,® Yvain of the White Hands, Wain of Lionel, Gaswain of Estrangort, Alibon of the Spur,’ Segurades of the Perilous Forest, Briamont of Carduel, Ladinel, Ladinas of North Wales, Drian of the Perilous Forest, Satran of the Narrow Borderland, Purades of Carmelide, and Carmaduc the Dark—they all took their oaths after Sir Gawainet. And they rode out of the city of Logres all together as King Arthur willed it, and they undertook their quest for Merlin. And when they were outside the city, they parted ways at a cross they found at the edge of a forest where the road forked into three branches. There they split into three bodies. 4The text reads .xxv. (453, 1. 14), but only twenty-four names follow. Counting Gawain, Yvain, Sagremor, Agravain, Guerrehet, and Gaheriet, thirty knights are named in all. 5Taking the text’s crespe (453, 1. 16): “crepe” (?) for creste 6sommer’s text has la broche (453, |. 18): “skewer, quill,” etc. 7Sommer’s text again has Ia broche (453, 1. 20). 417 But with that the story falls silent from speaking about them and goes back to the lady who led the dwarf knight. 58. Evadeam, the Dwarf Knight.! Now the story says that after King Arthur had knighted the dwarf at the young lady’s behest,? she took him away happily, and they went back to their country. And they made their way the first day until the hour of low vespers. And then they came out of a forest and rode onto a most beautiful heath, which was large and wide. There the lady looked before her and saw an armed knight coming, riding a black and white spotted warhorse, and she pointed him out to her dwarf. And he said, “Lady, don’t worry, but ride on unafraid, for you needn’t bother about him.” “In God’s name,” answered the young lady, “he’ll want to carry me off with him! That’s the only reason he’s coming this way!” And the dwarf said to her, “Ride on unafraid.” The knight shouted to her as soon as he had seen her, loudly enough for her to hear, “Welcome to my lady and my love! Now I have found what I've always been looking for!” And the dwarf, who heard him very clearly, said to him most kindly, “Sir, don’t be in such a hurry, for you might be thwarted before you get started. [454] You do not yet have her in your power, so that you might delight in her.” “Indeed, I ought to take pleasure in her,” answered the knight, “for I love her just as if I held her for my own. And I'll have her soon enough.” And all the while the knight was coming closer? as fast as he could ride. When the dwarf saw him coming closer, he fixed his lance in its holder and crouched behind his shield so that only his eye could be seen, and he struck his horse with his spurs through openings cut through the saddle’s fenders, for his legs were so short that they did not reach below the saddle. And the horse bore him so fast that you would have thought he was flying, and he shouted to the knight to look out for himself. And the knight, who was very proud and haughty, found it shameful to joust with such a loathsome creature. He raised his lance and said that, God willing, he would in no wise joust with him, so he held his lance upright. Nevertheless, he put up his shield against the blow. And the dwarf struck him so hard that he drove through his shield and cut through his hauberk, and the tip of his lance grazed his side. And he jolted him so hard with his body and his shield, and his horse was running so fast, that he knocked man and horse to the ground in a heap. As he fell, the knight dislocated his shoulder, and he swooned from the agony he felt. And when the dwarf saw this, he called the young lady over and asked her to help him down from his horse. She 1Corresponds to Sommer, 453-458. 2Ch, 52. 3Sommer’s text reads saprochoit del cheualier (454, |. 4): “he was approaching the knight.” 418 took him in her arms and set him down. And he drew his sword from its scabbard, ran to the knight, and cut his helmet’s ties and took it from his head. He threatened to cut him if he did not acknowledge that he was beaten. And the knight, who was sorely wounded, saw the sword he was holding above his head and was afraid of dying. He begged for mercy and said that he would entrust himself wholly to him. And the dwarf said, “Then you will go to King Arthur to be held prisoner. And you will tell him on my behalf that the little knight he dubbed sends you to him, and you will throw yourself on his mercy.” And he swore as much to him. Then the dwarf told him to mount his horse, but he answered that he lacked the strength, for his shoulder was dislocated. “Instead I'll have to stay here until I find someone who can carry me. But get on your horse and go to the head of this heath, to a valley where you'll find a dwelling of mine, for it is high time for you to find lodging. You will stay there and send some of my men to me to carry me back there. You have nothing to fear.” And the dwarf agreed to this. He went back to the lady, who was holding his warhorse. She leaned down over her palfrey’s neck, took him by the arms, and lifted him up until, with much straining, she set him in his saddle. Then they turned back to the knight's retreat. Six squires who lived there ran out to meet them and helped them dismount.4 They disarmed the dwarf and dressed him in a rich cloak, and the dwarf told them that their lord was wounded. They took a litter, fastened it onto two palfreys, and went to their lord. They put him on the litter and carried him back to the retreat. They disarmed him, then sent for physicians, and they supplied him with what they could. Then they asked him who had done this to him, and he answered that it was a knight he did not know, nor did he dare say, for the shame of it, that it had been the dwarf. Then he welcomed his guests with as much festivity [455] as a wounded knight could muster, and he had them very lavishly served and given their ease. After the meal, they were given two rich beds to sleep in in a beautiful room, and they slept until early the next morning, when they got up and dressed. And the young lady armed her dwarf, for she loved him dearly and wanted no one to put a hand to it but herself. And when she had armed him and got him ready but for his helmet, she took him by the hand and led him to the room where the wounded knight lay. They both said to him, God grant him a good day, and he returned their greeting most meekly. And they commended him to God and heartily thanked him for the honor he had paid them. Then they went out of the room, and the young lady laced his helmet and helped him get on his horse; then she gave him his shield and lance. Then the squires sprang to life and brought the lady her palfrey and helped her mount. Then they left the knight’s retreat and took to the road toward Estrangorre. 4Sommer’s text appears faulty: & descendirent & la damoisele @ le desarmerent (454, ll. 36-37): “they alighted and the lady and they disarmed him.” The Story of Merlin And the knight who had been wounded began to think that he had to fulfill his oath, so he had a horse-drawn litter fitted out most lavishly, and it had a most fair and suitable bed, and the litter was covered with a costly silk cloth. The knight was laid on the bed, and the litter was fastened onto two good-tempered palfreys. And they left sorrowfully and took to the road straight to Carduel in Wales, where King Arthur and the queen were spending some time, and that day they were with a great many people. And when they got there King Arthur was seated at his meal, and the knight had himself carried into the hall before the king. And he said, “Sir, in faithfulness and to keep my oath, I have come, filled with shame, to throw myself on your mercy at the behest of the most loathsome creature in the world, who has defeated me in combat.” And when he had said this, he ordered his squires to bear him away. But King Arthur said to him, “What is this, sir knight? You say that you have come to be my prisoner and to beg my mercy?” “In truth, sir,” answered the knight. “Then I beg you,” said the king, “to behave like a prisoner and tell me on whose behalf you surrender and how you were defeated.” “Sir,” said the knight, “I am well aware that I must tell about my shame and disgrace, and so I shall, since I have come to that, for I must do your will and fulfill my oath. It is true that I have fallen in love with a young lady who is so beautiful and fair that there is not her like in all the world. She is a noble woman, the daughter of a king, and if you wish to know her name, it is the fair Byanne, daughter of King Clamadon, who is very wealthy and powerful. But never, whether by bidding, loving, or knightly service I did on her behalf, never could I bring her to grant me her love. And I would very gladly have taken her for my wife, and her father was most willing and quite happy about it, for I am of highborn stock, the son of a king and a queen, but the lady would not agree to it because of the most loathsome thing ever a mother gave birth to. “And so the other evening I happened to be riding alone through a heath, wearing my armor, when I met my lady love who was coming back from your court, and [456] that false knight of a dwarf, whose lady she is, was riding with her. And when I saw her coming with such a small escort, I was very glad, and I said that God was to be blessed for bringing her to that place, for I thought I could take her away with me without a fight. But the dwarf who was along with her told me that I was coming too soon, and it would do me no good, for things would go otherwise than I hoped, and it was crazy for me to get so carried away. I thought I could have my way without resistance, so I told him that I was sure to get what I wanted. And so I let my horse run at full speed toward the lady, because I wanted to pick her up and take her away on my horse’s neck to a retreat of mine that was not very far away from there. “But when the dwarf saw that I had started out, he spurred toward me and fastened his lance to its holder, but I was unwilling to joust with him with my own lance, for it seemed a shame and a disgrace to me, so I did not want to strike him. But he hit me so hard that he took me to the ground, and when I fell I dislocated my left shoulder, and I had to faint from the agony. He took off my helmet and The Story of Merlin would have cut off my head if I hadn’t sworn to make myself your prisoner on his behalf, and I am doing all of this.” “In truth, dear friend,” said the king, “the one who has sent you here has put you into a good prison. But now tell me whose son the dwarf knight is.” “Sir,” he answered, “he is the son of King Brandegorre of the land of Estrangorre, who is a most wealthy and powerful man in lands and friends, and he is faithful to God.” “Indeed,” said the king, “he is truly a worthy gentleman, and I wonder that Our Lord could bear it that he should have such offspring.” “Sir,” answered the knight, “Our Lord bears many things. And this is not due to a sin of the father or the mother, nor is it anything he has deserved, for at one time there was not in all the world as beautiful a creature as he was. And on Trinity Sunday it will have been nine years since it happened to him, and on that day he will be only twenty-two years old.” And King Arthur said that he could not be just twentytwo years old, “for by his looks he seems to be more than sixty.” “It is true,” said the knight, “that he’ll be just twentytwo, for King Evadeam, my father, whose name he bears, has told me many times that he is no older than that.” “And how did it happen to hime” asked King Arthur. “Sir,” he answered, “a young lady did this to him because he was unwilling to love her. And there is a time limit to it, so I have been told many times. Now I have told you what I was bound by my oath to say, and so I make myself your prisoner and throw myself on your mercy, for I have been defeated.” “Dear friend,” said the king, “you have put yourself in a good prison, for I acquit you of your pledge. But first you must tell me your name.” “Sir,” he said, “they call me Tradelmant, and I am godson to the king of North Wales, who in great charity gave me his name. So now I'll go away, by your leave and to my shame.” “Go with God,” said the king; “may He guide you.” Then his squires took him up and carried him out of the great hall, and they lifted him up to his litter between two palfreys, and they went back to their own country. And King Arthur and his barons spoke a great deal about the dwarf and maiden, and they said among themselves that it would be a joyful thing for the dwarf to have his beauty back, and they held the young lady in high esteem, because she never [457] hated her lover for his ugliness. But with that the story falls silent now about all of them and goes back to speaking about Sagremor, who had left on the quest for Merlin, and he was one of thirty armed knights,° all of whom were worthy and bold. Now the story says that when Sagremor left Sir Gawainet, he brought with him as many as ten companions of the quest, and they took to the road. And they rode until 5The text reads .xxij. sime de chevaliers (457, |. 3): “a group of twenty-two knights.” The reference is to 453, Il. 14-23, where thirty knights are named. 419 the sun set. And on the way out of a forest, along the slope of a rock, they happened to be looking about and saw a hut where a hermit lived. So they turned that way to seek lodging. They knocked, and the hermit ran at once to open the door to them, and he made them as comfortable as he could. The next morning he sang Mass for them. Then they left there and made their way to the edge of a forest. And there Sagremor said to his companions that they should scatter throughout the forest, and so they did. One rode away here, another there, just as they happened to be led;® indeed, many a fair adventure happened on that quest about which the story makes no mention now, but they went up and down through various countries until they rounded out the year, and they never learned any news about what they had ridden out for. Then at the end of the year they came back and told their adventures to the king. And there were some among them who recounted their shame more than their honor, but they had to tell, because they were sworn to do so by oath. And people were so faithful at that time that they would not perjure themselves to save their lives. And everything was written down. So the story falls silent about them and goes back to speaking about Sir Wain. This the story says, that Sir Yain made his way, after he had left Sir Gawainet, until he and his companions came out of a forest. And just as they were riding out of the forest, they met a young lady on a mule, and she was utterly grief-stricken. She was pulling out her hair by the handfuls, and she was screaming in a loud voice, “How wretched I am! What can become of me? For I have lost the one I loved so much, and he loved me so much that to win my love he lost the great beauty he had!” When Sir Wain heard her, he felt deeply sorry for her, so he went to her and asked why she was grieving so. And she said, “Noble knight, take pity on me and my lover! Five knights are killing him in that valley beneath that hill!” “And who is your friend, lady?” asked Sir Yvain. “Sir,” she answered, “it is Evadeam the Dwarf, son of King Brandegorre.” “Stop sorrowing now, lady,” said Sir Yvain, “for by the faith I owe you, he won’t be harmed if I can help it, provided I get to him in time.” “Sir, God have mercy on you,” said the young lady, “but you'll have to hurry.” Then Sir Yain set out as fast as he could make his horse run on the way to the place the young lady had showed him, and his companions followed behind him. And the lady followed them as best she could, for her mule went very slowly. And Sir Yvain rode until he saw the dwarf, who was fighting lustily with two knights, and he saw three others who were lying in the middle of the field and who did not have the strength to get back up, [458] for one had been wounded through the thigh by a lance, the second had been struck on the shoulder, which was cut off from his body, and the third had been split open down to his teeth by a sword. And the other two were tired out, and both of them were in great fear of dying, for the dwarf kept attacking them with all his might. ©The text reads ainsi comme auenture les menoit (457, 1. 14): ‘just as adventure (happenstance) led them.” 420 And when Sir Yain saw him behaving thus, he pointed him out to his companions and said what a shame it was that the dwarf was built as he was, “for he is worthy and bold, and he has great heart.” “In truth, sir,” said one of his companions, “never has a man with his build fought with such skill. For God's sake, separate them so that nothing bad will happen to him, for it would be a great shame if he happened to be hurt.” “You speak the truth,” answered Sir Wain. Then he spurred his horse to where they were, but before he could get there the dwarf had sent one of the knights to the ground, and he had ridden over him three or four times with his horse, so that he had nearly killed him. And when the fifth one saw that he was all alone, he was deathly afraid for himself, and he had started to veer away, as he meant to turn in flight, for without a doubt he had deep wounds all over his body. But the dwarf, who was on a very costly horse, kept right on his heels, and he was going so fast that he would surely have killed him if Sir Yain had not ridden that way at once. And he said to the dwarf, “Dear sir, don’t do any more. Let him go for courtesy’s sake, for we can see clearly how he is, for you have fought him long and hard.” And when the dwarf heard him asking him that so meekly, he answered like a man who was more courtly and courteous than any other, “Sir, is it your pleasure that I should give up?” “Yes,” answered Sir Yvain, “and with my thanks. For we can see how he is.” “Then I will do what you ask,” said the dwarf, “for you seem to me a most worthy gentleman.” With that the knight who had been fighting with the dwarf’ came to Sir Yain and said to him, “Sir, my thanks to you, for you have saved me from death by coming here. And blessed be God who brought you here!” Then he surrendered his sword to the dwarf, and the dwarf took it, and the others who were alive did likewise. And he sent all four of them to be King Arthur’s prisoners. And they went there and gave themselves over to him on behalf of the dwarf knight. And Sir Yain and his companions left the dwarf and the young lady and scattered throughout various countries. They looked for Merlin up and down, but they never found out anything about him, and they were filled with great sorrow and heartache. Then they went back to court at the end of the year, and each one recounted what had happened to him on that quest. And King Arthur had everything put down in writing. So the story falls silent right here about King Arthur and goes back to speaking about Sir Gawainet. 7Sommer’s text reads li nains qui au cheualier sestoit combatus (458, |. 24): “the dwarf who had been fighting the knight,” which is the opposite of the sense suggested by the subsequent dialogue and action. The Story of Merlin 59. Gawain, Merlin, and the Dwarf Knight.! When Sir Gawainet had left his companions at the fork in the road, he made his way with about ten others until they came out of the forest. And then Sir Gawainet said to his companions that they should scatter, and each one should go his own way, for he wished to go on alone. And so they scattered, as he had said, and each one went his own way. Sir Gawainet rode on alone and made his way through most of the land of Logres until one day he happened to be riding, brooding and sad because he could not hear any news of Merlin; and dwelling on these thoughts, he went into a forest. And after he had ridden about two Welsh leagues, a young lady came [459] toward him. She was riding the fairest palfrey in the world. Her saddle was of ivory, her stirrups of gold, and her saddle blanket was scarlet and had bands that hit the ground, and her reins were of orphrey with gold studs. She was dressed in white samite with linen fastenings, and her head was wrapped in silk against the sun. And all adorned as she was, she passed Sir Gawainet by, but he was so lost in his thoughts that it did not come to his mind to greet her. And after she had gone by, she drew on her reins, turned her palfrey’s head, and said, “Gawainet, Gawainet! It’s not true, all they say about you and your great renown that is spread through the kingdom of Logres. They say, and they bear witness to it, that you are the best knight in the world. This much is true. And then they go on to say that you are the most courteous and the noblest in the world. But in this, your renown clashes with the truth, for you are the most boorish knight in the world I've ever seen in my lifetime. You meet me in this forest all by myself, far from other people, and the great wickedness that is rooted in you was not willing to show such kindness or meekness that it would stoop or deign or bear to greet me or even speak to me! You can be sure that as much ill will befall you as you have done to me, and you would give the city of Logres and half of King Arthur's lands not to have it happen to you.” And when Sir Gawainet heard the young lady, he was deeply ashamed, and he tured his horse’s head toward her and, heavy-hearted, said to her the words you will hear straightway: “Lady,” said Sir Gawainet, “God help me, I was brooding on a thing I am questing for, and I beg you, by your mercy, to forgive me.” “God help me,” said the young woman, “first you will pay dearly for it, and you'll be dreadfully shamed and slandered, and you'll remember next time to greet young ladies when you see them, but I'm not saying that it will last you for the rest of your days! But you’ll find no one in the kingdom of Logres who can tell you anything about what you're seeking; rather, you'll hear some news about it in Little Brittany. Now I'll go about my business, and you go looking for the thing you set out to find. And may you look like the first man you meet until you see me another time.” Then Sir Gawainet left the young lady, and he had not ridden more than a Welsh league through the forest when he met the dwarf knight and the maiden, who had left Sir 1 Corresponds to Sommer, 458-465. The Story of Merlin Wain the evening before and sent the four knights to be King Arthur’s prisoners. And this happened on Trinity Sunday, right at the hour of midday. And as soon as Sir Gawainet saw the young lady, he thought about the lady he had met before, and he stopped brooding and said to the young lady, God grant happiness to her and her companion, and the lady and the dwarf answered, may God give him good fortune.” So they passed by, Sir Gawainet on one side and they on the other. And after they had gone a little way past, the dwarf knight came back into the beauty he had had from the first, and his right age was twenty-two years, and he was once again large, well built, and broad of shoulder, and he had to take off the armor he had been wearing, for it was no longer any use to him. [460] When the young lady saw her lover restored to his beauty, she was happier than anyone could say, and she reached up and put her arms about his neck and kissed him more than a hundred times without stopping. And then they went away, rejoicing and happy, side by side, in great gladness. And they thanked Our Lord for the honor He had given them, and they wished Sir Gawainet every happiness and all good luck, for he had said to them God grant them joy, and so He had. And thus they went their way. But right here the story falls silent about them and will tell about Sir Gawainet. When Sir Gawainet had gone past the dwarf knight and his lady, he rode a good three arrow-shots before he began to feel that the sleeves of his hauberk were clinging to his hands and that the bottom of his hauberk reached lower than his two feet. For his legs had grown so short that they did not stretch below the fenders of his saddle, and he looked and saw that his mail leggings were drooping over his stirrup tops, and his shield hung down close to the ground. He could see very plainly that he had become a dwarf. And he said to himself that this was what the young lady had sworn would happen to him, and he was so outraged that he nearly killed himself. And he rode in this state of grief and agony until he reached the edge of the forest. And there he found a cross with a mounting block where he dismounted. And he began to shorten his stirrups, his mail leggings, the trappings of his sword, his shield’s straps, and the sleeves of his hauberk, and he fastened straps to his shoulders and fitted himself out as best he could. He was so bewildered and so grief-stricken that he would have preferred to die rather than go on living. Then he got back on his horse and set out on his way, and he cursed the day and the hour that he had started out on the quest, for he had been shamed and dishonored by it. And he rede on in this way and did not go by a castle or an out-of-the-way dwelling or a wood or a flatland without seeking news about Merlin from every man and woman he met. And he met men and women who said spiteful and loathsome things to him, but he did many knightly deeds, for although he was a dwarf, he had not lost his powers or his heart or his strength; rather, he was bold and enterprising, and he defeated many knights. 2The word is auenture (459, |. 38): “adventure.” 421 And after he had looked up and down throughout the kingdom of Logres, he saw that he would find nothing there, so he took it into his mind to cross over the sea and go to Little Brittany. And so he did. And he looked near and far, but he could learn nothing about Merlin. And he rode on until he neared the time he had set to go back. And so he said to himself, “Alas, what shall I do? The time is growing nearer when I must go back, when I swore an oath to my uncle I would be back, and so I must, for otherwise I'd be a faithless liar. No, I would not! For the oath supposed that I could act of my own free will, but I’m not free to act as I wish, for I am a loathsome and misshapen thing, and I have no mastery of myself. And that’s why I can’t be bound to go to court. In faith, now I have misspoken! Never in any circumstances, whatever shape I may have, would I perjure myself. And because I’m not locked in a prison, so that I couldn’t go wherever I wanted, I would only forswear myself if I didn’t go to court. Thus, [461] I must go to court so that I may not prove faithless. And so I beseech God to have mercy on me, for the body is treated shamefully in this world.” As Sir Gawainet uttered this complaint, he turned about to go back to court. As it happened, he was riding through the Forest of Broceliande, and he meant to go that way to come to the sea, and all the time he wailed and moaned as before. All at once he heard a voice not very far away from him, and he turned toward the place where he had heard that voice. He looked up and down and saw nothing but a kind of smoke no thicker than a mist,> and he could not go through it. Then he heard a voice that said, “Sir Gawainet, do not despair, for everything will happen as it must happen.” And when Sir Gawainet heard the voice that had thus called him by his right name, he answered and said, “For God’s sake, who is it that speaks to me?” “What?” answered the voice. “Don’t you recognize me? You used to know me well. This is what happens to something left and forgotten, and the proverb is true that the wise man says: if you leave the court, the court leaves you.4 And so it has been with me. While I frequented the court and served King Arthur and his barons, I was known and loved by you and the others. And because I have left the court and no longer know it, I am unknown by you and the others, but I shouldn’t be, if only faith and loyalty reigned through the world!” When Sir Gawainet heard the voice speaking these things to him, the thought came to him that it was Merlin. And so he answered at once, “Indeed, sir, in truth I ought to have recognized you, for I have heard you speak many times. And so I beg you, show yourself to me so that I might see you.” “Sir Gawainet,” said Merlin, “you’ll never see me, and I am very sorry, for I can do no more about it. And after you leave here, I'll never speak to you or to anyone else but my lady, for no one will ever have enough strength to break in here, whatever may happen, and I cannot get out, nor willl 3The text reads une fumee tout autresst comme air (461, 1. 8): “a smoke just like air.” 4The text reads Qui eslonge la cort. & la cort tuj (461, |. 14). Cf. Morawski no. 2139: “Qui s’esloigne de cort et cort de lui.” 422 ever. For there is no tower in the world so strong as the one where I am locked away, and it is not of wood or iron or stone, but it is enclosed by nothing more than air through enchantment so strong that it cannot be undone at any time. I can’t get out, and no one can get in except the lady who has made it and who keeps me company here when it pleases her, and she can come and go at will as she pleases.” “How can this be, dear friend Merlin?” asked Sir Gawainet. “So you are held prisoner in this way and cannot free yourself whatever you may do? And you can’t come out to me? How can such a thing happen to overwhelm you, who are the wisest man in the world?” “But I am the most foolish!” said Merlin. “For I was well aware of what would happen to me. And I was so foolish as to love someone else more than myself! And so I taught my lady how she might imprison me, and no one can ever free me!” “In truth,” said Sir Gawainet, “Merlin, I am bitterly sorry about this, and so will be my uncle King Arthur, who has sent men out through all lands in search of you!” “Then he must bear it,” answered Merlin, “for he’ll never see me nor I him—this is how things have happened to work out—nor will any ever speak to me after you, and it would be useless to try. And even you, if you had not turned this way, [462] would never have heard me speak. Now go back and greet King Arthur and my lady the queen and all the barons, and tell them all about me. And you will find the king at Carduel in Wales, and you'll see him there. And you will find all of your companions with whom you left. You will not be despondent about what has happened to you, for you will find the lady who did this to you in the forest where you met her before; but don’t forget to greet her, for that would be a mad thing to do!” “Sir,” said Sir Gawainet, “I won't, God willing!” “Then farewell, go with God,” said Merlin, “and may He keep King Arthur and the kingdom of Logres and you and all the barons, for you are the best men there are in the whole world.” With that Sir Gawainet went away happy and sad— happy because Merlin had reassured him about what had happened to him, but sad because Merlin was lost to the world. And so he went his way and rode until he came to the sea, and he crossed over in all haste and took to the road to Carduel in Wales. And as he went into the forest he had been riding through when he met the young lady and did not think to greet her, he remembered Merlin, who had told him not to forget to greet her when he met her again. And he was stricken with dread and was sorely afraid that he might go by her without a greeting, so he took off his helmet so that he could see better. He began to look front and back, from side to side, everywhere, until he came to the very spot where he had met the lady and passed her by without greeting her. Then he looked between two clumps of trees, for the forest was thick and deep, and he saw two knights who were fully armed but for their shields and helmets, which they had taken off, and their horses were tied to their lances. And they were holding a young lady between them, and they looked as if they were raping her; yet they did not want to, for the lady was making them do it on purpose to The Story of Merlin test Sir Gawainet’s will and heart, and she thrashed about as if they were indeed trying to rape her. When Sir Gawainet saw the two knights holding the young lady, one by her hands and the other by her legs as though they meant to lie with her by force, he was deeply angered, and he spurred his horse to where they were, his lance in his hand. And he said to the knights that they were already dead, because they were assaulting a lady in King Arthur’s land. “For you know very well,” he went on, “that ladies are guaranteed their safety.” When the young lady saw him, she shouted, “Gawainet, now I'll see if you are worthy enough to save me from this shame!” “Lady,” Sir Gawainet then said, “God help me, you will not be shamed where I am there to defend you. I'll die if I don’t save you.” And when the knights heard him, it came to them as a stinging rebuke. They sprang to their feet and tied on their helmets, for they were already very much afraid of him. Even so, the young lady had assured them that they would not be hurt by him, and with her knowledge of the arts, she had cast a spell on them to keep them from being harmed by anyone at that time, so they felt better about it. And after they had tied on their helmets, they hung their shields about their necks and said to Sir Gawainet, “God help me, you mad dwarf, you look as if you’re dead already. Still, it is a shame to us to attack a loathsome thing like you.” And when Sir Gawainet heard that [463] they were calling him a dwarf and a loathsome thing, he was deeply stricken in his heart. So he said to them, “Loathsome thing that I am, I’ve come here at a bad time for you! Now get on your horses, for it would seem to me a boorish thing to attack you on horseback while you were on foot.” “Then you have such faith in your own strength,” answered the knights, “that you want us to be on our horses?” “My faith is in God,” said Sir Gawainet, “such that when you leave me you will never again do wrong to a lady or a maiden in King Arthur’s land.” Then they jumped on their warhorses, took up their lances, and told Sir Gawainet that he was dead. And they went to the road, where the way was more open and moved far apart from each other. And both of the knights together ran against Sir Gawainet and he against them, and they both struck him on his shield and broke their lances, but they did not stir him from his saddle. Then he hit one of them so hard that he sent him sprawling to the ground, and his lance flew into bits, and he ran down the one who had fallen and crushed him under his horse. Then he drew his sword and made straight for the other one. He was about to strike him on his helmet when the young lady screamed, “Sir Gawainet! Do no more!” “Lady,” he said, “is that what you wish?” “Yes,” she answered. “Then I'll agree to stop at once for love of you, and may God grant you every happiness, to you and all the ladies of the world. You may be sure that, but for your entreaty, I would have killed him, or he would have killed me, for they have shamed you and wronged you. And they dishonored me when they called me a misshapen dwarf, and yet they spoke the truth, for I am the most loathsome The Story of Merlin thing in this world: it happened to me in this forest a good six months ago.” And when the young lady and the knights heard this, they began to smile. Then the lady said, “What would you give to the one who could cure you of this?” “In truth, lady,” he answered, “if I could be saved from this, I would give myself first of all and then as much wealth as I could gather in the whole world.” “You won't have to give so much,” said the young lady, “but you will swear an oath to me such as I tell you.” “Lady,” he said, “I'll do whatever you wish. Just tell me what you will, for I am ready to do it.” “You will swear to me on the oath you gave to King Arthur, your uncle, that you will never fail to help any lady, wed or unwed, and you will never meet a lady without greeting her, if you can, before she greets you.” “Lady,” he said, “I swear this to you as a faithful knight.” “And I accept your oath,” she answered, “but if you break it, you’ll become again what you are now.” “Lady, I agree,” he said, “but only if the lady’s dispute in which she asks me to help her is just, for I'll have nothing to do with faithlessness, even if it means life or death.” “And so I grant you,” answered the lady. And all at once the straps with which he had tied up his mail leggings broke, because his legs were growing back out, and he was soon back in his own likeness. And when he felt himself restored, he dismounted and knelt before the young lady, and he said that he was her knight forevermore. And the lady thanked him and took him by the hand and stood him back up. And it was the very same young lady who had sent him that unhappy scourge. [464] Then the young lady took leave of Sir Gawainet, she left with her two knights, and they commended one another to God. And Sir Gawainet went back to where they had fought, let out his body armor so that it was larger, and carefully repaired his shield and other arms. Then he got back on his horse, his shield about his neck, his sword girded, and his lance in his hand, and took to the road for Carduel. And he made his way day by day until he came to Carduel] at the end of the year as agreed. And on that same day Sir Yvain, Sagremor, and their companions had come back, and each one had told his adventures and what had happened to him on that quest. And when Sir Gawainet got there, the rejoicing and celebrating were complete. And Sir Gawainet told them all the things that had happened to him on the quest, and the barons were amazed. King Arthur was filled with sorrow for Merlin, but he could do no more about him, so he had to bear it. So they put their minds and hearts to feasting in honor of Sir Gawainet as joyfully as they could. While they were celebrating, Evadeam came into the great hall. He was twenty-two years old, and he was so fair and comely that no man in two kingdoms was more handsome. He was holding his young lady by her hand, and they came straight before the king and greeted him most courteously. The king returned his greeting, and the knight said to him, “Sir, you do not know who I am, and it is no wonder, for you have seen me only once before. And then I was 423 wearing clothing that no one would see on me now, and no one would recognize me now who had not seen me when I was a child.” “In truth, dear friend,” said King Arthur, “I don’t remember ever having seen you before, but you are a most handsome knight.” “Sir,” said Evadeam, “do you remember a young lady who brought you a dwarf for you to make a knight?” “Yes, indeed,” answered the king, “and well I should, for he has sent me as prisoners five knights whom he has defeated by his prowess.” “Sir,” said Evadeam then, “I am the dwarf whom you dubbed, and this is the lady who asked you to do it. And I am indeed the one who sent you those knights. And Sir Wain saw everything about the last four, whom he found me fighting the day before Trinity Sunday. And the next day I had the good luck to be riding with my lady through the Forest of Broceliande at the hour of midday, when we met Sir Gawainet, whom I see sitting here. He greeted us and we him, and he said, God grant us happiness. And so He did, for no sooner had the words slid from his mouth than I returned to my own shape and the likeness you see me in now. For then I was a dwarf, ugly and unsightly. And I believe strongly that his words and his prayer availed me that God freed me from my great shame. And for this I thank Our Lord and him!” Then the king asked him who he was and of what stock, and he told him everything in order, just as you have heard it before now. And when the king, Sir Gawainet, and the others heard this, they were filled with gladness and joy. And the king took him as a companion with those of the Round Table, and the young lady happily and willingly stayed with the queen. So the story falls silent about King Arthur and his companions, and it goes back to speaking about King Ban [465] of Benoic and King Bors, his brother, king of Gaunes, who were back in their lands. 60. The Birth of Lancelot and the Loss of Benoic.! The story says that after King Arthur had left King Ban of Benoic and his brother King Bors of Gaunes, the two brothers stayed in Benoic rejoicing with great gladness, and their wives, who were very beautiful and comely, were with them. And so it happened, as it pleased Our Lord, that King Ban and his wife had a son who was named Galahad in baptism, but his surname was Lancelot; he kept the name Lancelot all his life. He brought great joy and happiness to King Ban and his wife, the queen, and the queen loved him so much that she nursed him with her own milk. And King Bors’s wife had a son who was called Lionel, and he was handsome through and through, and twelve months later she had another named Bors. Afterwards these three youths won very great renown in the kingdom of Logres and throughout every land, and they became known for their deeds at arms. Corresponds to Sommer, 465-466. 424 Shortly after the younger of King Bors’s two children was born, King Bors fell gravely ill, and he lay for a long time in the city of Gaunes. And King Ban, his brother, was filled with sorrow and heartache, for he could not be with him as he wished, because of a wicked and ruthless neighbor of his, whose land bordered his own. This was King Claudas of the Land Laid Waste, who was so angry and upset about his castle that King Arthur had had pulled down that he nearly went mad, and he could think of no one on whom to avenge himself but King Ban and King Bors, who bordered on his land, because they were King Arthur’s men. So he made war on them, and he finally won over a prince of Rome, named Pontius Anthony, to help him. This prince came to him very willingly, because he hated King Arthur and all his men because of his love of the Emperor Lucius, whom they had killed. King Hoel of Nantes died in that dispute, and he had long waged war on King Claudas. And, for their part, the Romans fought until they had Gaul under their sway, and they sent the men of Gaul and the Land Laid Waste, along with Pontius Anthony’s men, against King Ban of Benoic, who defended himself with all his might, for he had a great heart and great skill at arms. Many times he gathered against them on the field of battle, and he lost sometimes and won sometimes. And Leonce of Payerne, Gratian of Trebe, Pharian, and Banin, King Ban’s The Story of Merlin godson, fought wonderfully well there, and they brought down and killed many of King Claudas’s men. Gratian died there, but Pharian did not. In the end, King Ban was so weakened from the loss of his men that he could not hold out against the Romans, and they beleaguered him and day by day took his castles and strongholds. And he could not get help from his brother, King Bors, who lay sick in his bed, from which he never got up. What gave him the greatest distress was that Pontius Anthony had brought such a great number of men with him that they took his city of Benoic and all his land from him, and he had not one city or castle left that was his own except the castle of Trebe, where Queen Elaine was with Lancelot, her son, who [466] still lay in his cradle. And King Ban had as many men with him there as he could gather, but there were very few of them to withstand such great forces. Banin his godson was there, in whom he had great confidence, and he was right, for he was a good and faithful knight. And he had a seneschal whom he had raised since boyhood, and he had entrusted his land to him after Gratian’s death: it was he who betrayed him and made him lose the castle of Trebe, just as the story will recount it to you later. Here ends the Imprisonment of Merlin. God lead us all to a good end!